
6-K 1 pbra20160810_6k.htm PBRA20160810_6K pbra20160810_6k.htm - Generated by SEC
Publisher for SEC Filing
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 6-K
Report of Foreign Private Issuer
Pursuant to Rule 13a-16 or 15d-16 of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
For the month of August, 2016
Commission File Number 1-15106
PETRÓLEO BRASILEIRO S.A. - PETROBRAS
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Brazilian Petroleum Corporation - PETROBRAS
(Translation of Registrant's name into English)
Avenida República do Chile, 65 
20031-912 - Rio de Janeiro, RJ
Federative Republic of Brazil
(Address of principal executive office)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant files or will file annual reports under cover Form 20-F or Form 40-F.
Form 20-F ___X___ Form 40-F _______
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant by furnishing the information contained in this Form is also thereby
furnishing the information to the Commission pursuant to Rule 12g3-2(b) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Yes _______ No___X____
Election of Petrobras Chief Strategy, Organization and
Management System Officer
Rio de Janeiro, August 10, 2016 – Petróleo Brasileiro S.A. – Petrobras informas that its Board of Directors, in a
meeting held today, has elected Mr. Nelson Luiz Costa Silva as Petrobras Chief Strategy, Organization and
Management System Officer.
Nelson Luiz Costa Silva has a degree in Naval Engineering by Escola Politécnica da Universidade de São Paulo in
1977 and attended the Specialization Course for Graduates (CEAG) of Fundação Getúlio Vargas in 1980. He has a
career of more than 40 years, with an international experience of 25 years living in Mexico, Belgium, Japan,
Argentina, France and England. For 17 years he occupied several executive positions in Vale, including global
commercial officer of Iron Ore, based in Rio de Janeiro, Brussels and Tokyo. He also occupied the position of CEO of
ALL-América Latina Logística in Buenos Aires and of CEO of Embraer Europe in Paris. In BHP Billiton, he occupied
the position of global president of Aluminum and of commercial officer of Iron Ore, Coal and Manganese, based in
London and later in Singapore. In 2009, Nelson Silva joined the BG Group as responsible for the group's people and
business in South America, including activities of exploration and production of oil and gas in blocks operated and not
operated in Brazil and Bolivia, gas distribution and activities of offshore transshipment in Uruguay. He occupied the
position of chairman of Comgás from October 2009 until its divestment by BG in November 2012. He remained as
BG's CEO in Brazil until the recent sale of the group to Shell.
www.petrobras.com.br/ir
Contacts:
PETRÓLEO BRASILEIRO S.A. – PETROBRAS | Investor Relations Department I e-mail:
petroinvest@petrobras.com.br
Av. República do Chile, 65 – 10th floor, 1002 – B – 20031-912 – Rio de Janeiro, RJ | Phone: 55 (21) 3224-1510 /
3224-9947
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This release includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of
1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, that are subject to
risks and uncertainties. The forward-looking statements, which address the Company’s expected business
and financial performance, among other matters, contain words such as “believe,” “expect,” “estimate,”
“anticipate,” “optimistic,” “intend,” “plan,” “aim,” “will,” “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “likely,” and
similar expressions. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements,
which speak only as of the date on which they are made. There is no assurance that the expected events,
trends or results will actually occur. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-
looking statements, whether as a result of new information or future events or for any other reason.
The Company’s actual results could differ materially from those expressed or forecast in any forward-looking
statements as a result of a variety of assumptions and factors. These factors include, but are not limited to,
the following: (i) failure to comply with laws or regulations, including fraudulent activity, corruption, and
bribery; (ii) the outcome of ongoing corruption investigations and any new facts or information that may arise
in relation to the “Lava Jato Operation”; (iii) the effectiveness of the Company’s risk management policies and
procedures, including operational risk; and (iv) litigation, such as class actions or proceedings brought by
governmental and regulatory agencies.  A description of other factors can be found in the Company’s Annual
Report on Form 20-F for the year ended December 31, 2015, and the Company’s other filings with the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
SIGNATURE
Date: August 10, 2016
PETRÓLEO BRASILEIRO S.A--PETROBRAS
/S/  Ivan de Souza Monteiro
Ivan de Souza Monteiro
Chief Financial Officer and Investor Relations Officer
By:
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This press release may contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (Securities
Act), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (Exchange Act) that are not based on historical facts and are not
assurances of future results.  These forward-looking statements are based on management's current view and estimates of future economic
circumstances, industry conditions, company performance and financial results. The words "anticipates", "believes", "estimates", "expects", "plans"
and similar expressions, as they relate to the company, are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Statements regarding the declaration or
payment of dividends, the implementation of principal operating and financing strategies and capital expenditure plans, the direction of future
operations and the factors or trends affecting financial condition, liquidity or results of operations are examples of forward-looking statements. Such
statements reflect the current views of management and are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties. There is no guarantee that the
expected events, trends or results will actually occur. The statements are based on many assumptions and factors, including general economic and
market conditions, industry conditions, and operating factors. Any changes in such assumptions or factors could cause actual results to differ
materially from current expectations.  
All forward-looking statements are expressly qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement, and you should not place reliance on any
forward-looking statement contained in this press release. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements,
whether as a result of new information or future events or for any other reason.