
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 8-K 
CURRENT REPORT
PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
Date of Report (Date of earliest event reported): November 13, 2012
Walter Energy, Inc.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation)
001-13711
Commission File No.
13-3429953
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
N/A
(Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of registrant’s principal executive offices)
3000 Riverchase Galleria, Suite 1700
Birmingham, Alabama 35244
(205) 745-2000
(Former name or former address, if changed since last report)
Check the appropriate box below if the Form 8-K filing is intended to simultaneously satisfy the filing obligation of the registrant 
under any of the following provisions: 
  
(cid:134)            Written communications pursuant to Rule 425 under the Securities Act (17 CFR 230.425) 
  
(cid:134)            Soliciting material pursuant to Rule 14a-12 under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.14a-12) 
  
(cid:134)            Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 14d-2(b) under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.14d-2(b)) 
  
(cid:134)            Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 13e-4(c) under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.13e-4(c))
Item 7.01
Regulation FD Disclosure
In connection with the offering of the Notes (as defined in Item 8.01 below), Walter Energy, Inc. (the “Company”) is
disclosing under Item 7.01 of this Current Report on Form 8-K the information included as Exhibit 99.1. This information, some of 
which has not been previously reported (including certain supplemental disclosure regarding the Company’s business, such as 
strengths and strategies), is excerpted from the Confidential Preliminary Offering Memorandum, dated November 13, 2012 that is 
being circulated in connection with the offering of the Notes described in Item 8.01. 
  
Item 8.01
Other Events
On November 13, 2012, the Company issued a press release announcing that it has commenced a private offering of $500 
million aggregate principal amount of senior notes (the “Notes”).  The Notes will be offered only to qualified institutional buyers in 
reliance on Rule 144A under the Securities Act and to non-U.S. persons in transactions outside the United States in reliance on 
Regulation S under the Securities Act. A copy of the press release is attached hereto as Exhibit 99.2 and is incorporated by reference. 
  
Item 9.01 
  
(d) 
  
99.1 
  
99.2
Financial Statements and Exhibits
  
Exhibits 
  
Supplemental excerpts from the Confidential Preliminary Offering Memorandum, dated November 13, 2012
  
Press Release, dated November 13, 2012
2
SIGNATURES
be signed on its behalf by the undersigned hereunto duly authorized. 
  
  
  
Date: November 13, 2012
3
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to
WALTER ENERGY, INC.
By:
/s/ Earl H. Doppelt
Earl H. Doppelt, Senior Vice President 
General Counsel and Secretary
Exhibit 99.1
Our Company
We are a leading producer and exporter of metallurgical coal for the global steel industry. We produce, process, and export
metallurgical coal from underground and surface mines located in the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom. We also 
produce thermal coal, anthracite, metallurgical coke and coal bed methane gas.
We operate 13 mines in three countries and have access to both the Atlantic and Pacific Seaborne markets, providing us with 
important geographical and operational flexibility, as well as a diverse mine base. The diversity of our operations enables us to source 
coal from multiple locations to blend and meet virtually any quality specifications that our customers request. With access to both the 
Atlantic and the Pacific, we are favorably positioned to take advantage of the growing seaborne coal market and supply metallurgical 
coal in Latin America, Asia and Europe. We have a diversified global customer base and long-term contracts with customers in North 
America, South America, Europe and Asia.
In 2011, we produced 12.1 million tons of coal, 8.7 million tons of which were high quality metallurgical coal. We estimate
metallurgical coal production in 2012 of 11.5—13.0 million tons and total coal reserves of approximately 375 million tons. Our 
reserves are some of the highest quality metallurgical coal reserves in the world with hard coking coal contract prices at the 
benchmark for premium coking coals. Our premium priced coal and emphasis on low cost production resulted in a 39% gross margin 
for the twelve months ended December 31, 2011 and 28% for the nine months ended September 30, 2012.
We operate through two principal business segments: the U.S. Operations segment and the Canadian and U.K. Operations 
segment. The U.S. Operations segment includes the operations of our underground mines, surface mines, coke plant and natural gas 
operations located in Alabama, and our underground and surface mining operations located in West Virginia. Our Alabama mining 
operations mine metallurgical coal from both underground and surface mines. Our Alabama underground mining operation represents 
the country’s southernmost Appalachian coal producer where we mine high quality metallurgical coal from Alabama’s Blue Creek 
coal seam. Our Alabama underground mines are 1,500 to 2,200 feet underground, making them some of the deepest vertical shaft coal 
mines in North America.
Metallurgical coal mined from the Blue Creek seam contains very low sulfur and has strong coking properties and high heat 
value making it ideally suited to the needs of steel makers as a coking coal. The Alabama operations also mine thermal coal for sale to 
industrial and electric utility customers at our surface mines and underground North River mine. Our Alabama mining operations have 
convenient access to the port of Mobile, Alabama through barge and by railroad allowing us to minimize our transportation costs. In 
2011, the Alabama mining operations produced 5.5 million metric tons of metallurgical coal and 2.5 million metric tons of thermal 
coal. The U.S. Operations segment also extracts methane gas, principally from the Blue Creek coal seam. Our natural gas business 
represents one of the most extensive and comprehensive commercial programs for coal seam degasification in the country, producing 
approximately 52 million cubic feet of gas daily from over 1,760 wells.
The Canadian and U.K. Operations segment includes the operations of surface mines in Northeast British Columbia (Canada)
and underground and surface mines in South Wales (U.K.) The Canadian operations currently operate three surface mines that 
produce primarily metallurgical and low-volatile PCI coals. The Canadian mines are located adjacent to or nearby existing 
infrastructure established for the
1
Northeast coalfields, including established rail and road networks that are available all year round. Coal produced from the mines is 
shipped by rail to a coal terminal facility at the Port of Prince Rupert, British Columbia. The U.K. mining operations mine PCI, 
anthracite and thermal coal from underground and surface mines. 
Business Strategy 
  
strategies to achieve this objective are described below:
Our objective is to increase shareholder value through sustained earnings growth and free cash flow generation. Our key
Increasing Metallurgical Coal Production.  We expect full year 2012 metallurgical coal production of 11.5 million—
13.0 million tons, of which an estimated 75% to 80% will be hard coking coal and the remainder will be low-volatile PCI coal. Our 
production growth is expected to be balanced between existing production assets and growth assets such as Willow Creek, 
Aberpergwm, Blue Creek and Belcourt-Saxon.
Capitalizing on Favorable Long-Term Industry Dynamics.  Despite the volatility in coal prices over the past several years, 
we believe the long-term fundamentals of the global metallurgical coal industry are favorable. Given our premium product and diverse 
operations, we believe we are well positioned to capitalize on the expected growth in international coal consumption, delivering high 
quality metallurgical coal to the European, Asian and Latin American markets.
Maintaining Our Commitment to Reducing Costs.  We seek to continue our operational excellence with a strong focus on 
reducing costs. We plan on leveraging our well-developed infrastructure to increase production, and to drive down our cost per ton 
through economies of scale. We anticipate reducing costs further through increased utilization of the Falling Creek Connector Road in 
Canada, longer panels on the Blue Creek No. 4 mine in Alabama, and a more centralized supply chain among other cost reducing 
initiatives. In addition, we continue to focus on productivity through our culture of workforce involvement by leveraging our strong 
base of experienced, well-trained employees. We anticipate these improvements, combined with competitive transportation costs and 
premium product, will expand our margins further.
Continuing to Provide a Mix of Coal Types and Quantities to Satisfy Our Customers’ Needs Across a Variety of
Geographic Markets.  By producing a variety of metallurgical coal types in three different countries with direct access to Atlantic and 
Pacific markets, we are able to source and blend our coal from multiple mines to meet the specific needs of our customers. Our broad 
geographic scope and mix of coal qualities provide us with the opportunities to work with leading steel producers across the globe and 
provide premium met coal to regions with high and/or growing demand for coal.
Upholding Our Commitment to Excellence in Safety and Environmental Stewardship.  We intend to maintain our
recognized leadership in operating some of the safest mines in the world and in achieving environmental excellence. Our ability to 
minimize workplace incidents and environmental violations improves our operating efficiency, which directly improves our cost 
structure and performance. 
Competitive Strengths
Leading “Pure-Play” Metallurgical Coal Producer.  We are a leading, global, publicly traded producer and exporter of
metallurgical coal for the global steel industry. We had total coal reserves of 375 million metric tons as of December 31, 2011, 75% of 
which is high quality, premium metallurgical coal. We expect to produce 11.5 million—13.0 million tons of metallurgical coal in 
2012.
Premium, High Quality Product.  Blue Creek coal from our Alabama mining operations is recognized to be among the
highest quality coals in the world. Its characteristics are very low sulfur, low ash and low volatility. These strong coking properties 
and high heat value make it ideally suited for steel makers as a coking coal. Contract prices for hard coking coal are consistently equal 
to the benchmark for premium
2
coking coals. Hard coking coal produced from our Canadian mining operations has been well received by steel makers, with five of 
the world’s top 10 largest steel mills as customers. The low-volatile PCI coal from our Canadian operations has been widely accepted 
by customers.
Attractive Industry Dynamics.  We expect that international demand for our metallurgical coal will increase in the future, 
driven by favorable projected global growth trends and the high quality of our coal compared to many other coal producing regions 
around the world. Met coal demand is underpinned by projected growth in world steel production of 3.2% in 2013, according to the 
World Steel Association. Steel producers are also rebuilding inventories and new supply of metallurgical coal is constrained by rail 
and port capacity in emerging basins.
Sales and Geographic Diversification.  We operate 13 mines in three countries and have access to both the Atlantic and
Pacific Seaborne markets. This geographical advantage provides important diversity in terms of production, markets, transportation 
and labor. We have operational flexibility due to this diversification, which makes us less reliant on any single mine for a significant 
portion of our earnings or cash flows. We believe the diversity of our operations and reserves also provides us with a significant 
advantage over competitors with operations in a single coal producing region as it allows us to diversify our customer base, with no 
one customer responsible for a significant portion of our revenues. This geographic diversification also allows us to source the high 
quality coals we produce from multiple sources and to blend to meet the exact specifications of our customers. In addition, with access 
to both the Atlantic and the Pacific, we believe that we are well positioned to take advantage of the growing seaborne coal market and 
to supply metallurgical coal to Latin America, Asia and Europe.
Significant Organic Growth Opportunities.  We provide an organic growth profile in the metallurgical coal market. We 
believe that our organic growth profile will be well balanced between existing production assets and growth assets such as Willow 
Creek, Aberpergwm, Blue Creek and Belcourt-Saxon. As the need for high quality metallurgical coal in the global marketplace grows, 
we expect that we will be able to provide customers with increasing quantities of premium metallurgical coal.
Strong Financial Profile.  Our premium priced coal and emphasis on low cost production lead to robust margins and free
cash flow generation. The result is a 39% gross margin for the twelve months ended December 31, 2011 and 28% for the nine months 
ended September 30, 2012. As of September 30, 2012, on an as adjusted basis after giving effect to this offering and the expected use 
of the proceeds thereof, we had $527 million of cash on hand and undrawn capacity under our revolving credit facility and no 
significant debt maturing until 2015. With a significant portion of total debt prepayable, we expect to further enhance our credit profile 
through deleveraging from the strong cash flows of our existing assets and high return on invested capital expected from development 
projects. 
  
Unconstrained Port Capacity and Low Cost Transportation Infrastructure.  We believe we have sufficient port capacity to
ship all of our current production and forecasted production growth. We have an agreement with the Port of Mobile in Alabama 
through July 31, 2016 with current capacity of 8.5 million tons a year as of the completion of a new export loader. In December 2012 
the capacity will increase to 10 million tons per year. In Canada, Ridley Terminals, located in the port utilized by our operations, can 
handle 12 million metric tons per year of coal with the potential to expand to 24 million metric tons per year. We are able to minimize 
transportation costs due to the close proximity of our mines to our ports, as well as leverage our transportation infrastructure. Our 
principal mines in our Alabama operations, located a very short distance from the Port of Mobile, are serviced by CSX rail. We also 
have access to our barge load out facility on the Black Warrior River. Because customers for our Alabama metallurgical coal are 
primarily in Europe and South America, we are able to ship our coal quickly and at a relatively favorable cost. Our Canadian 
operations are located on CN Rail’s high capacity and uncongested rail lines, minimizing transportation costs to Ridley Terminal.
3
Highly Regarded and Experienced Management Team.  Our top nine officers have an average of more than 30 years of 
experience. Our management team has demonstrated a history of increasing productivity, increasing production and maintaining 
strong customer relationships. Management is committed to the safety and well-being of its employees and communities, respect for 
the environment in which it does business, the continued growth of the Company’s assets, maintaining a conservative capital structure 
and creating long-term shareholder value.
4
Exhibit 99.2
Walter Energy, Inc.
3000 Riverchase Galleria 
Suite 1700 
Birmingham, AL 35244 
  
www.walterenergy.com
Press Release
Walter Energy Commences $500 Million Private Offering of Senior Notes
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 
  
  
BIRMINGHAM, Ala. — November 13, 2012 — Walter Energy Inc. (“Walter Energy”) (NYSE: WLT) (TSX: WLT) today announced 
that it has commenced a private offering of $500 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes due 2020 (the “Notes”). The 
Notes will be guaranteed by Walter Energy’s subsidiaries that guarantee indebtedness under Walter Energy’s existing credit 
agreement.  The Notes and related guarantees will be offered only to qualified institutional buyers in reliance on Rule 144A under the 
Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and to non-U.S. persons in transactions outside the United States in reliance 
on Regulation S under the Securities Act. The Notes have not been registered under the Securities Act, and, unless so registered, may 
not be offered or sold in the United States absent registration or an applicable exemption from, or in a transaction not subject to, the 
registration requirements of the Securities Act and other applicable securities laws. 
  
Walter Energy plans to use the net proceeds of the offering to repay indebtedness outstanding under its credit facilities, to pay fees and 
expenses related to the offering and for general corporate purposes. 
  
This press release does not constitute an offer to sell, or a solicitation of an offer to sell or buy any securities, in any jurisdiction in 
which such offer, solicitation or sale would be unlawful prior to registration or qualification under the securities laws of any such 
jurisdiction. 
  
Walter Energy is the world’s leading, publicly traded “pure-play” metallurgical coal producer for global industry with strategic access 
to high-growth steel markets in Asia, South America and Europe. The Company also produces thermal coal, anthracite, metallurgical 
coke and coal bed methane gas. Walter Energy employs approximately 4,400 employees and contractors with operations in the United 
States, Canada and United Kingdom. 
  
Safe Harbor Statement 
  
Except for historical information contained herein, the statements in this release are forward-looking and made pursuant to the safe 
harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and may involve a number of risks and uncertainties. 
Forward-looking statements are based on information available to management at the time, and they involve judgments and estimates. 
Forward-looking statements include expressions such as “believe,” “anticipate,” “expect,” “estimate,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” 
“predict,” “will,” and similar terms and expressions. These forward-looking statements are made based on expectations and beliefs 
concerning future events affecting us and are subject to various risks, uncertainties and factors relating to our operations and business 
environment, all of which are difficult to predict and many of which are beyond our control, that could cause our actual results to 
differ materially from those matters expressed in or implied by these forward-looking statements. The following factors are among 
those that may cause actual results to differ materially from our forward-looking statements: the market demand for coal, coke and 
natural gas as well as changes in pricing and costs; the availability of raw material, labor, equipment and transportation; changes in 
weather and geologic conditions; changes in extraction costs, pricing and assumptions and projections concerning reserves in our 
mining operations; changes in customer orders; pricing actions by our competitors, customers, suppliers and contractors; changes in 
governmental policies
and laws, including with respect to safety enhancements and environmental initiatives; availability and costs of credit, surety bonds 
and letters of credit; and changes in general economic conditions. Forward-looking statements made by us in this release, or 
elsewhere, speak only as of the date on which the statements were made. See also the “Risk Factors” in our 2011 Annual Report on 
Form 10-K and subsequent filings with the SEC. New risks and uncertainties arise from time to time, and it is impossible for us to 
predict these events or how they may affect us or our anticipated results. We have no duty to, and do not intend to, update or revise the 
forward-looking statements in this release, except as may be required by law. In light of these risks and uncertainties, readers should 
keep in mind that any forward-looking statement made in this press release may not occur. All data presented herein is as of the date 
of this release unless otherwise noted. 
  
Contact: Paul Blalock 
  205.745.2627
2