
EX-10.1 2 kegex1016302016.htm EXHIBIT 10.1 Exhibit
Exhibit 10.1
KEY ENERGY SERVICES, INC.
AMENDED AND RESTATED
2014 EQUITY AND CASH INCENTIVE PLAN
1.Purpose; Eligibility.
1.1    General Purpose. The name of this plan is the Key Energy Services, Inc. Amended and
Restated 2014 Equity and Cash Incentive Plan (this “Plan”). The purpose of this Plan is to enable
Key Energy Services, Inc., a Maryland corporation (the “Company”), and any Affiliate to obtain
and retain the services of the types of Employees, Consultants and Directors who will contribute
to the Company’s long range success and to provide incentives that are linked directly to
increases in share value which will inure to the benefit of all stockholders of the Company.
1.2    Plan History. This Plan was previously established as a successor to the Company’s 2012
Equity Cash and Incentive Plan (the “2012 Plan” ), the 2009 Equity Cash and Incentive Plan (the
“2009 Plan” ) and the 2007 Equity Cash and Incentive Plan (the “2007 Plan”, collectively with the
2012 Plan and the 2009 Plan, the “Prior Plans”). The Prior Plans were merged with and into this
Plan effective as of May 15, 2014 (the “Original Effective Date”), and no additional grants shall be
made thereafter under the Prior Plans. Outstanding awards under the Prior Plans continued in
effect according to their terms as in effect before the merger of the Prior Plans into this Plan
(subject to such amendments as the Administrator deemed appropriate, consistent with the Prior
Plans, as applicable), and the shares with respect to outstanding grants under the Prior Plans
were issued or transferred under this Plan. Shares that remained available under the Prior Plans
were canceled as of May 15, 2014 and not rolled over into this Plan’s share reserve.
This Plan is being amended and restated as of the new Effective Date to include a Bonus Stock
award and to modify certain administrative provisions.
1.3    Eligible Award Recipients. The persons eligible to receive Awards are Employees,
Consultants and Directors of the Company and its Affiliates.
1.4    Available Awards. Available Awards include the following: (a) Incentive Stock Options,
(b) Nonstatutory Stock Options, (c) Restricted Awards, (d) Performance Compensation Awards,
(e) Stock Appreciation Rights, (f) Performance Shares, (g) Performance Units, and (h) Bonus
Stock.
2.Definitions.
2.1    “Administrator” means the Board or the Committee appointed by the Board in accordance
with Section 3.5.
2.2    “Affiliate” means any parent corporation or subsidiary corporation of the Company, whether
now or hereafter existing, as those terms are defined in Sections 424(e) and (f), respectively, of
the Code.
2.3    “Award” means any right granted under this Plan, including an Incentive Stock Option, a
Nonstatutory Stock Option, a Restricted Award, a Performance Compensation Award, a Stock
Appreciation Right, Performance Shares, Performance Units or Bonus Stock.
2.4    “Award Agreement” means an agreement (whether in paper or electronic medium (including
email or the posting on a web site maintained by the Company or a third party under contract with
the Company) between the Company and a holder of an Award evidencing the terms and
conditions of an individual Award grant. Each Award Agreement shall be subject to the terms and
conditions of this Plan.
2.5    “Beneficial Owner” has the meaning assigned to such term in Rule 13d-3 and Rule 13d-5
under the Exchange Act, except that in calculating the beneficial ownership of any particular
“person” (as that term is used in Section 13(d)(3) of the Exchange Act), such “person” shall be
deemed to have beneficial ownership of all securities that such “person” has
the right to acquire by conversion or exercise of other securities, whether such right is currently
exercisable or is exercisable only after the passage of time. The terms “Beneficially Owns” and
“Beneficially Owned” have a corresponding meaning.
2.6    “Board” means the Board of Directors of the Company.
2.7    “Bonus Stock” means Common Stock granted as a bonus pursuant to Section 7.5.
2.8    “Cause” means (a) with respect to any Participant who is a party to an employment or
service agreement with the Company or its Affiliates and such agreement provides for a definition
of Cause, as defined therein and (b) with respect to all other Participants (i) the commission of, or
plea of guilty or no contest to, a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude or the commission of
any other act involving willful malfeasance or material fiduciary breach with respect to the
Company or an Affiliate; (ii) conduct tending to bring the Company or an Affiliate into substantial
public disgrace, or disrepute; (iii) gross negligence or willful misconduct with respect to the
Company or an Affiliate; or (iv) material violation of state or federal securities laws. The
Administrator, in its absolute discretion, shall determine the effect of all matters and questions
relating to whether a Participant has been discharged for Cause.
2.9    “Change in Control” means:
(a)Consummation of a merger of the Company with another entity, a consolidation involving the
Company, or the sale of all or substantially all of the assets of the Company to another entity if, in
any such case, the holders of equity securities of the Company immediately prior to such
transaction or event do not beneficially own immediately after such transaction or event equity
securities of the resulting entity entitled to 50% or more of the votes then eligible to be cast in the
election of directors generally (or comparable governing body) of the resulting entity in
substantially the same proportions that they owned the equity securities of the Company
immediately prior to such transaction or event;
(b)the dissolution or liquidation of the Company;
(c)when any person or entity, including a “group” as contemplated by Section 13(d)(3) of the
Exchange Act, acquires or gains ownership or control (including, without limitation, power to
vote) of more than 50% of the combined voting power of the outstanding securities of the
Company; or
(d)as a result of or in connection with a contested election of directors, the persons who were
members of the Board immediately before such election cease to constitute a majority of the
Board.
As used in this definition of “Change in Control,” (1) ”resulting entity” in the context of a
transaction or event that is a merger, consolidation or sale of all or substantially all assets shall
mean the surviving entity (or acquiring entity in the case of an asset sale) unless the surviving
entity (or acquiring entity in the case of an asset sale) is a subsidiary of another entity and the
holders of Common Stock receive capital stock of such other entity in such transaction or event,
in which event the resulting entity shall be such other entity, and (2) subsequent to the
consummation of a merger or consolidation that does not constitute a Change in Control, the term
“Company” shall refer to the resulting entity and the term “Board” shall refer to the board of
directors (or comparable governing body) of the resulting entity.
Notwithstanding the occurrence of any of the foregoing events described above which would
otherwise result in a Change in Control, the Board may determine in its discretion, if it deems it to
be in the best interest of the Company, that an event or events otherwise constituting a Change in
Control shall not be considered a Change in Control. Such determination shall be effective only if
it is made by the Board prior to the occurrence of an event that otherwise would be or probably
would lead to a Change in Control; or after such event if made by the Board a majority of which is
composed of directors who were members of the Board immediately prior to the event that
otherwise would be or probably would lead to a Change in Control.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, and only to the extent that an Award is subject to
Section 409A of the Code and payment of the Award pursuant to the application of the definition
of “Change in Control” above would cause such Award not to otherwise comply with Section
409A of the Code, payment of an Award may occur upon a “Change in Control” only to the extent
that the event constitutes a “change in the ownership or effective control” of the Company or a
“change in the ownership of a substantial portion of the assets” of the Company under Section
409A of the Code and the applicable Internal Revenue Service and Treasury Department
regulations thereunder.
2.10    “Change in Control Value” means, with respect to a Change in Control, (i) the per share
price offered to stockholders of the Company in any merger, consolidation, reorganization, sale of
assets or dissolution transaction, (ii) the price per share offered to stockholders of the Company
in any tender offer, exchange offer or sale or other disposition of outstanding
2
voting stock of the Company, or (iii) if such Change in Control occurs other than as described in
clause (i) or clause (ii), the Fair Market Value per share of the shares into which Awards are
exercisable, as determined by the Administrator, whichever is applicable. In the event that the
consideration offered to stockholders of the Company consists of anything other than cash, the
Administrator shall determine the fair cash equivalent of the portion of the consideration offered
which is other than cash.
2.11    “Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as it may be amended from time to
time, and any guidance and/or regulations promulgated thereunder.
2.12    “Committee” means a committee of one or more members of the Board appointed by the
Board to administer this Plan in accordance with Section 3.5.
2.13    “Common Stock” means the common stock, $0.10 par value per share, of the Company.
2.14    “Company” has the meaning set forth in Section 1.1.
2.15    “Consultant” means any person, including an advisor (a) engaged by the Company or an
Affiliate to render consulting or advisory services and who is compensated for such services or
who provides bona fide services to the Company or an Affiliate pursuant to a written agreement
or (b) who is a member of the Board of Directors of an Affiliate; provided that, except as otherwise
permitted in Section 5.3 hereof, such person is a natural person and such services are not in
connection with the offer or sale of securities in a capital raising transaction and do not directly or
indirectly promote or maintain a market for the Company’s securities.
2.16    “Continuous Service” means that the Participant’s service with the Company or an
Affiliate, whether as an Employee, Director or Consultant, is not interrupted or terminated. The
Participant’s Continuous Service shall not be deemed to have terminated merely because of a
change in the capacity in which the Participant renders service to the Company or an Affiliate as
an Employee, Consultant or Director or a change in the entity for which the Participant renders
such service, provided that there is no interruption or termination of the Participant’s Continuous
Service. For example, a change in status from an Employee of the Company to a Consultant of
an Affiliate or a Director will not constitute an interruption of Continuous Service. The
Administrator or its delegate, in its sole discretion, may determine whether Continuous Service
shall be considered interrupted in the case of any leave of absence approved by that party,
including sick leave, military leave or any other personal or family leave of absence.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, if an Optionholder who was granted an Incentive
Stock Option exercises such Option on a date that is more than three (3) months after the last
date on which the Optionholder was an Employee, such Option shall be treated as a
Nonstatutory Stock Option, to the extent required by Section 424 of the Code.
2.17    “Covered Employee” has the same meaning as set forth in Section 162(m)(3) of the Code.
2.18    “Date of Grant” means the date on which the Administrator adopts a resolution, or takes
other appropriate action, expressly granting an Award to a Participant that specifies the key terms
and conditions of the Award and from which the Participant begins to benefit from or be adversely
affected by subsequent changes in the Fair Market Value of the Common Stock or, if a later date
is set forth in such resolution, then such date as is set forth in such resolution.
2.19    “Detrimental Activity” means: (a) any violation of the terms of any written agreement
(including an Award Agreement, employment agreement or other agreement) with the Company
or any of its Affiliates relating to covenants with respect to non-disclosure, confidentiality,
intellectual property, work product, inventions assignment, privacy, exclusivity, non-competition,
non-solicitation or non-disparagement; (b) breach of the Company’s Code of Business Conduct;
(c) activity that is discovered to be grounds for or results in termination of the Participant’s
employment or consulting engagement for Cause; (d) the conviction of, or guilty plea entered by,
the Participant for any felony or a crime involving moral turpitude whether or not connected with
the Company or its Affiliates; or (e) the commission of any other act involving willful malfeasance
or material fiduciary breach with respect to the Company or any of its Affiliates.
2.20    “Director” means a member of the Board.
2.21    “Disability” means that the Participant is unable to engage in any substantial gainful
activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment; provided,
however, for purposes of determining the term of an Incentive Stock Option pursuant to
Section 6.9 hereof, the term Disability shall have the meaning ascribed to it under Section 22(e)
(3) of the Code. The Administrator may establish another definition of Disability for purposes of
particular Award Agreements, including as required to comply with Section 409A of the Code, if
applicable. The determination of whether an individual has a Disability shall be determined
under procedures established by the Administrator. Except in situations where the Administrator
is determining Disability for purposes of the term of an Incentive Stock Option pursuant to
Section 6.9 hereof within the meaning
3
of Section 22(e)(3) of the Code, the Administrator may rely on any determination that a
Participant is disabled for purposes of benefits under any long-term disability plan maintained by
the Company or any Affiliate in which a Participant participates.
2.22    “Dividend Equivalents” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.1(b)(2).
2.23    “Effective Date” means May 12, 2016.
2.24    “Employee” means any person employed by the Company or an Affiliate as an employee.
Mere service as a Director or payment of a director’s fee by the Company or an Affiliate shall not
be sufficient to constitute “employment” by the Company or an Affiliate.
2.25    “Exchange Act” means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
2.26    “Fair Market Value” means, as of any date, the value of the Common Stock as determined
below. The Fair Market Value on any date on which the Company’s shares of Common Stock are
registered under Section 12 of the Exchange Act and listed on the New York Stock Exchange
shall be the closing price of a share of Common Stock on the New York Stock Exchange on such
date. In the event that Fair Market Value is to be determined as of a date on which the New York
Stock Exchange is closed, Fair Market Value shall be determined (a) for purposes of establishing
the exercise price of Options and SARs or calculating a payment (whether in cash, Common
Stock or otherwise) to a Participant, using the closing price of a share of Common Stock on the
immediately preceding trading day; and (b) for purposes of calculating income recognized,
amount of tax withholdings or for a similar purpose, using the average of the closing price of a
share of Common Stock on the immediately preceding trading day and the opening price of a
share of Common Stock on the immediately following trading day. If the Common Stock is
admitted to quotation on the over the counter market or any interdealer quotation system, the Fair
Market Value on any given date shall not be less than the average of the highest bid and lowest
asked prices of the Common Stock reported for such date or, if no bid and asked prices were
reported for such date, for the last day preceding such date for which such prices were reported.
In the absence of an established market for the Common Stock, the Fair Market Value
determined in good faith by the Administrator and such determination shall be conclusive and
binding on all persons. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, for purposes of
establishing the exercise price of Options and SARs, the determination of Fair Market Value in all
cases shall be in accordance with Section 409A of the Code and the regulations thereunder.
2.27    “Form S-8” has the meaning set forth in Section 5.3.
2.28    “Free Standing Rights” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.3(a).
2.29    “Incentive Stock Option” means an Option intended to qualify as an incentive stock option
within the meaning of Section 422 of the Code and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
2.30    “Incumbent Directors” means individuals who, on the Effective Date, constitute the Board,
provided that any individual becoming a Director subsequent to the Effective Date whose
election or nomination for election to the Board was approved by a vote of at least two-thirds of
the Incumbent Directors then on the Board (either by a specific vote or by approval of the proxy
statement of the Company in which such person is named as a nominee for Director without
objection to such nomination) shall be an Incumbent Director. No individual initially elected or
nominated as a Director as a result of an actual or threatened election contest with respect to
Directors or as a result of any other actual or threatened solicitation of proxies by or on behalf of
any person other than the Board shall be an Incumbent Director.
2.31    “Negative Discretion” means the discretion authorized by this Plan to be applied by the
Administrator to eliminate or reduce the size of a Performance Compensation Award in
accordance with Section 7.2(d)(4); provided, that, the exercise of such discretion would not cause
the Performance Compensation Award to fail to qualify as “performance-based compensation”
under Section 162(m) of the Code.
2.32    “Non-Employee Director” means a Director who is a “non-employee director” within the
meaning of Rule 16b-3.
2.33    “Nonstatutory Stock Option” means an Option not intended to qualify as an Incentive Stock
Option.
2.34    “Officer” means a person who is an officer of the Company within the meaning of
Section 16 of the Exchange Act and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
4
2.35    “Option” means an Incentive Stock Option or a Nonstatutory Stock Option granted
pursuant to this Plan.
2.36    “Option Agreement” means an Award Agreement (whether in paper or electronic medium
(including email or the posting on a web site maintained by the Company or a third party under
contract with the Company) between the Company and an Optionholder evidencing the terms
and conditions of an individual Option grant. Each Option Agreement shall be subject to the
terms and conditions of this Plan and need not be identical.
2.37    “Optionholder” means a person to whom an Option is granted pursuant to this Plan or, if
applicable, such other person who holds an outstanding Option.
2.38    “Outside Director” means a Director who is an “outside director” within the meaning of
Section 162(m) of the Code and Treasury Regulations Section 1.162-27(e)(3) or any successor
to such statute and regulation.
2.39    “Participant” means a person to whom an Award is granted pursuant to this Plan or, if
applicable, such other person who holds an outstanding Award.
2.40    “Performance Compensation Award” means any Award designated by the Administrator
as a Performance Compensation Award pursuant to Section 7.2.
2.41    “Performance Criteria” means the criterion or criteria that the Administrator shall select for
purposes of establishing the Performance Goal(s) for a Performance Period with respect to any
Performance Compensation Award under this Plan. The Performance Criteria that will be used to
establish the Performance Goal(s) shall be based on the attainment of specific levels of
performance of the Company (or Affiliate, division or operational unit of the Company) and shall
be limited to the following:
(a)net earnings or net income (before or after taxes);
(b)basic or diluted earnings per share (before or after taxes);
(c)net revenue or net revenue growth;
(d)gross revenue;
(e)gross profit or gross profit growth;
(f)net operating profit (before or after taxes);
(g)return measures (including, but not limited to, return on assets, capital, invested capital, equity
or sales);
(h)cash flow (including, but not limited to, operating cash flow, free cash flow, and cash flow
return on capital);
(i)earnings before or after taxes, interest, depreciation and/or amortization;
(j)gross or operating margins;
(k)productivity ratios;
(l)share price (including, but not limited to, growth measures and total stockholders return);
(m)expense targets;
(n)margins;
(o)operating efficiency;
(p)objective measures of customer satisfaction;
5
(q)working capital targets;
(r)measures of economic value added;
(s)inventory control;
(t)enterprise value;
(u)Key Value Added (“KVA”);
(v)safety performance; and
(w)economic profit.
Any one or more of the Performance Criteria may be used on an absolute or relative basis to
measure the performance of the Company and/or an Affiliate as a whole or any business unit of
the Company and/or an Affiliate or any combination thereof, as the Administrator may deem
appropriate, or any of the above Performance Criteria as compared to the performance of a group
of comparable companies, or published or special index that the Administrator, in its sole
discretion, deems appropriate, or the Company may select Performance Criterion (l) above as
compared to various stock market indices. The Administrator also has the authority to provide for
accelerated vesting of any Award based on the achievement of Performance Goals pursuant to
the Performance Criteria specified in this paragraph. To the extent required under Section 162(m)
of the Code, the Administrator shall, within the first ninety (90) days of a Performance Period (or,
if longer or shorter, within the maximum period allowed under Section 162(m) of the Code),
define in an objective fashion the manner of calculating the Performance Criteria it selects to use
for such Performance Period. In the event that applicable tax and/or securities laws change to
permit the Administrator discretion to alter the governing Performance Criteria without obtaining
stockholder approval of such changes, the Administrator shall have sole discretion to make such
changes without obtaining stockholder approval.
2.42    “Performance Formula” means, for a Performance Period, the one or more objective
formulas applied against the relevant Performance Goal to determine, with regard to the
Performance Compensation Award of a particular Participant, whether all, some portion but less
than all, or none of the Performance Compensation Award has been earned for the Performance
Period.
2.43    “Performance Goals” means, for a Performance Period, the one or more goals established
by the Administrator for the Performance Period based upon the Performance Criteria. The
Administrator is authorized at any time during the first ninety (90) days of a Performance Period
(or, if longer or shorter, within the maximum period allowed under Section 162(m) of the Code), or
at any time thereafter (but only to the extent the exercise of such authority after such period would
not cause the Performance Compensation Awards granted to any Participant for the Performance
Period to fail to qualify as “performance-based compensation” under Section 162(m) of the
Code), in its sole and absolute discretion, to adjust or modify the calculation of a Performance
Goal for such Performance Period to the extent permitted under Section 162(m) of the Code in
order to prevent the dilution or enlargement of the rights of Participants based on the following
events:
(a)asset write-downs;
(b)litigation or claim judgments or settlements;
(c)the effect of changes in tax laws, accounting principles, or other laws or regulatory rules
affecting reported results;
(d)any reorganization and restructuring programs;
(e)extraordinary nonrecurring items as described in Accounting Principles Board Opinion No. 30
(or any successor or pronouncement thereto) and/or in management’s discussion and analysis of
financial condition and results of operations appearing in the Company’s annual report to
stockholders for the applicable year;
(f)acquisitions or divestitures;
(g)any other specific unusual or nonrecurring events, or objectively determinable category
thereof;
6
(h)foreign exchange gains and losses; and
(i)a change in the Company’s fiscal year;
(j)changes in generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”); and
(k)such other events as the Administrator shall specify when it establishes the Performance
Goals.
2.44    “Performance Period” means the one or more periods of time not less than one (1) year in
duration, as the Administrator may select, over which the attainment of one or more Performance
Goals will be measured for the purpose of determining a Participant’s right to and the payment of
a Performance Compensation Award.
2.45    “Performance Shares” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.4(a).
2.46    “Performance Units” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.4(a).
2.47    “Plan” has the meaning set forth in Section 1.1.
2.48    “Related Rights” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.3(a).
2.49    “Restricted Award” means any Award granted pursuant to Section 7.1(a).
2.50    “Restricted Period” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.1(a).
2.51    “Restricted Stock” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.1(a).
2.52    “Restricted Stock Units” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.1(a).
2.53    “Retirement” means the voluntary termination of a Participant’s Continuous Service with
the Company, including any Affiliates, constituting retirement if such termination occurs on a date
on which both (a) the Participant’s age is sixty (60) years or older and (b) the number of years of
such Participant’s Continuous Service equals or is greater than five (5) years; or such other age,
years of services or combination thereof as may be designated by the Administrator in such
Participant’s Award Agreement.
2.54    “Rule 16b-3” means Rule 16b-3 promulgated under the Exchange Act or any successor to
Rule 16b-3, as in effect from time to time.
2.55    “SAR exercise price” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.3(b).
2.56    “Securities Act” means the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
2.57    “Stock Appreciation Right” means the right pursuant to an award granted under
Section 7.3 to receive an amount equal to the excess, if any, of (a) the Fair Market Value, as of
the date such Stock Appreciation Right or portion thereof is surrendered, of the shares of stock
covered by such right or such portion thereof, over (b) the aggregate SAR exercise price of such
right or such portion thereof.
2.58    “Stock for Stock Exchange” has the meaning set forth in Section 6.4.
2.59    “Ten Percent Stockholder” means a person who owns (or is deemed to own pursuant to
Section 424(d) of the Code) stock possessing more than ten percent (10%) of the total combined
voting power of all classes of stock of the Company or of any of its Affiliates.
2.60    “Treasury Regulations” means the United States Treasury Regulations promulgated
pursuant to the Code.
2.61    “Vested Units” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.1(e).
7
3.Administration.
3.1Administration by Board.  This Plan shall be administered by the Board unless and until the
Board delegates administration to a Committee, as provided in Section 3.5.
3.2Powers of Administrator.  The Administrator shall have the power and authority to select and
grant to Participants Awards pursuant to the terms of this Plan.
3.3Specific Powers.   In particular, the Administrator shall have the authority: (a) to construe,
interpret and administer this Plan, reconcile any inconsistency in, correct any defect in and/or
supply any omission in this Plan and any instrument or agreement relating to, or Award granted
under, this Plan; (b) to promulgate, amend, and rescind rules and regulations relating to the
administration of this Plan; (c) to authorize any person to execute, on behalf of the Company, any
instrument required to carry out the purposes of this Plan; (d) to the extent permissible under
applicable law, including the corporate law of the state in which the Company is incorporated, to
delegate its authority to one or more Officers with respect to Awards that do not involve Covered
Employees or “insiders” within the meaning of Section 16 of the Exchange Act; (e) to determine
when Awards are to be granted under this Plan and, subject to Section 2.18, the applicable Date
of Grant; (f) from time to time to select, subject to the limitations set forth in this Plan, those
Participants to whom Awards shall be granted; (g) to determine the number of shares of Common
Stock to be made subject to each Award; (h) to determine whether each Option is to be an
Incentive Stock Option or a Nonstatutory Stock Option; (i) to prescribe the terms and conditions of
each Award, including, without limitation, the exercise price and medium of payment, vesting
provisions, right of repurchase provisions, and any applicable restrictive covenants, and to
specify the provisions of the Award Agreement relating to such grant or sale; (j) subject to the
restrictions set forth in Section 14.2, to amend any outstanding Awards, including for the purpose
of modifying the time or manner of vesting, or the term of any outstanding Award; provided,
however, that if any such amendment impairs a Participant’s rights or increases a Participant’s
obligations under his or her Award or creates or increases a Participant’s federal income tax
liability with respect to an Award, such amendment shall also be subject to the Participant’s
consent; (k) to determine the duration and purpose of leaves of absences which may be granted
to a Participant without constituting termination of their employment for purposes of this Plan,
which periods shall be no shorter than the periods generally applicable to Employees under the
Company’s employment policies; (l) to make decisions with respect to outstanding Awards that
may become necessary upon a Change in Control or an event that triggers anti-dilution
adjustments; and (m) to exercise discretion to make any and all other determinations which it
determines to be necessary or advisable for administration of this Plan.
3.4Decisions Final.  All decisions made by the Administrator pursuant to the provisions of this
Plan shall be final and binding on the Company and the Participants, unless such decisions are
determined by a court having jurisdiction to be arbitrary and capricious. All Awards shall be made
conditional upon the Participant’s acknowledgment, by acceptance of the Award in writing, by
electronic signature, or by other electronic means, that all decisions and determinations of the
Administrator shall be final and binding on the Participant, his or her beneficiaries and any other
person having or claiming an interest under such Awards. Awards under a particular Section of
this Plan need not be uniform as among the Participants.
3.5The Committee.
(a)General. The Board may delegate administration of this Plan to a Committee or Committees of
one or more members of the Board, and the term “Committee” shall apply to any person or
persons to whom such authority has been delegated. If administration is delegated to a
Committee, the Committee shall have, in connection with the administration of this Plan, the
powers theretofore possessed by the Board, including the power to delegate to a subcommittee
any of the administrative powers the Committee is authorized to exercise (and references in this
Plan to the Board or the Administrator shall thereafter be to the Committee or subcommittee),
subject, however, to such resolutions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Plan, as may be
adopted from time to time by the Board. The Board may abolish the Committee at any time and
revest in the Board the administration of this Plan. The members of the Committee shall be
appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Board. From time to time, the Board may increase
or decrease the size of the Committee, add additional members to, remove members (with or
without cause) from, appoint new members in substitution therefor, and fill vacancies, however
caused, in the Committee. The Committee shall act pursuant to a vote of the majority of its
members or, in the case that the Committee is comprised of only two members, the unanimous
consent of its members, whether present or not, or by the written consent of the majority of its
members (or of all of its members if there are only two members) and minutes shall be kept of all
of its meetings and copies thereof shall be provided to the Board. Subject to the limitations
prescribed by this Plan and the Board, the Committee may establish and follow such rules and
regulations for the conduct of its business as it may determine to be advisable.
(b)Committee Composition when Common Stock is Registered.  At any such time as the
Common Stock is required to be registered under Section 12 of the Exchange Act, the Board
shall have discretion to determine whether or not it intends to comply with the exemption
requirements of Rule 16b-3 and/or Section 162(m) of the Code. However, if the Board
8
intends to satisfy such exemption requirements, with respect to Awards to any Covered
Employee and with respect to any insider subject to Section 16 of the Exchange Act, the
Committee shall be a compensation committee of the Board that at all times consists solely of
two or more Non-Employee Directors who are also Outside Directors. Within the scope of such
authority, the Board or the Committee may (i) delegate to a committee of one or more members of
the Board who are not Outside Directors the authority to grant Awards to eligible persons who are
either (A) not then Covered Employees and are not expected to be Covered Employees at the
time of recognition of income resulting from such Award or (B) not persons with respect to whom
the Company wishes to comply with Section 162(m) of the Code or (ii) delegate to a committee of
one or more members of the Board who are not Non-Employee Directors the authority to grant
Awards to eligible persons who are not then subject to Section 16 of the Exchange Act. Nothing
herein shall create an inference that an Award is not validly granted under this Plan in the event
Awards are granted under this Plan by a compensation committee of the Board that does not at
all times consist solely of two or more Non-Employee Directors who are also Outside Directors.
3.6Indemnification. In addition to such other rights of indemnification as they may have as
Directors or members of the Committee, and to the extent allowed by applicable law, the
Administrator shall be indemnified by the Company against the reasonable expenses, including
attorneys’ fees, actually incurred in connection with any action, suit or proceeding or in
connection with any appeal therein, to which the Administrator may be party by reason of any
action taken or failure to act under or in connection with this Plan or any Award granted under
this Plan, and against all amounts paid by the Administrator in settlement thereof (provided,
however, that the settlement has been approved by the Company, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld) or paid by the Administrator in satisfaction of a judgment in any such
action, suit or proceeding, except in relation to matters as to which it shall be adjudged in such
action, suit or proceeding that such Administrator did not act in good faith and in a manner which
such person reasonably believed to be in the best interests of the Company, and in the case of a
criminal proceeding, had no reason to believe that the conduct complained of was unlawful;
provided, however, that within sixty (60) days after institution of any such action, suit or
proceeding, such Administrator shall, in writing, offer the Company the opportunity at its own
expense to handle and defend such action, suit or proceeding.
4.Shares Subject to this Plan.
4.1    Share Reserve. Subject to adjustment in accordance with Section 11, the total number of
shares of Common Stock that shall be available for the grant of Awards under this Plan shall be
the sum of the following: (i) nine million seven hundred thousand (9,700,000) shares of Common
Stock, plus (ii) the number of shares of Common Stock subject to outstanding Awards under the
Prior Plans as of the Original Effective Date. For purposes of the limitation described above, any
Common Stock subject to an Award under this Plan, or under an Award under the Prior Plans
that was outstanding as of the Original Effective Date, which terminates by expiration, forfeiture,
cancellation, or otherwise without the issuance of such shares of Common Stock, is settled in
cash, or is exchanged with the Administrator’s permission, prior to the issuance of shares of
Common Stock, for an Award not involving shares of Common Stock, shall be available again for
grant under this Plan. However, the full number of Stock Appreciation Rights granted that are to
be settled by the issuance of shares of Common Stock shall be counted against the aggregate
plan limit described above, regardless of the number of shares of Common Stock actually issued
upon settlement of such Stock Appreciation Rights.
4.2    Individual Limits. Subject to adjustment in accordance with Section 11, no Participant shall
be granted, during any one (1) year period, Options to purchase Common Stock and/or Stock
Appreciation Rights with respect to more than five hundred thousand (500,000) shares of
Common Stock. Stock available for distribution under this Plan shall be authorized and unissued
shares or shares reacquired by the Company in any manner. The limits applicable to
Performance Compensation Awards are set forth in Section 7.2.
4.3    Share Counting. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein: (i) shares of
Common Stock surrendered or withheld in payment of the exercise price of an Option shall count
against the aggregate plan limit described above; and (ii) shares of Common Stock withheld by
the Company to satisfy any tax withholding obligation shall count against the aggregate plan limit
described above. All shares reserved for issuance under this Plan may be used for Incentive
Stock Options. No fractional shares of Common Stock may be issued. The preceding sentences
of this Section shall apply only for purposes of determining the aggregate number of shares of
Common Stock that may be issued under this Plan, but shall not apply for purposes of
determining the maximum number of shares of Common Stock with respect to which Awards may
be granted to any Participant under this Plan. For the avoidance of doubt, if shares of Common
Stock are repurchased by the Company on the open market with the proceeds of the exercise
price of Options, such shares may not again be made available for issuance under this Plan.
5.Eligibility.
5.1    Eligibility for Specific Awards.  Incentive Stock Options may be granted only to Employees.
Awards other than Incentive Stock Options may be granted to Employees, Directors and
Consultants.
9
5.2    Ten Percent Stockholders.  A Ten Percent Stockholder shall not be granted an Incentive
Stock Option unless the exercise price of such Option is at least one hundred ten percent (110%)
of the Fair Market Value of the Common Stock at the Date of Grant and the Option is not
exercisable after the expiration of five (5) years after the Date of Grant.
5.3    Consultants.  A Consultant shall not be eligible for the grant of an Award if, at the time of
grant, a Form S-8 Registration Statement under the Securities Act (“Form S-8”) is not available to
register either the offer or the sale of the Company’s securities to such Consultant because of the
nature of the services that the Consultant is providing to the Company (i.e., capital raising), or
because the Consultant is not a natural person, or as otherwise provided by the rules governing
the use of Form S-8, unless the Company determines both (a) that such grant (i) shall be
registered in another manner under the Securities Act (e.g., on a Form S-3 Registration
Statement) or (ii) does not require registration under the Securities Act in order to comply with the
requirements of the Securities Act, if applicable, and (b) that such grant complies with the
securities laws of all other relevant jurisdictions.
5.4    Directors.  Subject to Section 5.1, each Director shall be eligible to receive discretionary
grants of Awards under this Plan.
6.Option Provisions.
Each Option shall be in such form and shall contain such terms and conditions as the
Administrator shall deem appropriate. All Options shall be separately designated Incentive Stock
Options or Nonstatutory Stock Options at the time of grant, and, if certificates are issued, a
separate certificate or certificates will be issued for shares of Common Stock purchased on
exercise of each type of Option. If for any reason an Option designated as an Incentive Stock
Option (or any portion thereof) shall not qualify as an Incentive Stock Option, then, to the extent of
such nonqualification, such Option or portion thereof shall be regarded as a Nonstatutory Option
appropriately granted under this Plan. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Company shall have no
liability to any Participant or any other person if an Option designated as an Incentive Stock
Option fails to qualify as such at any time. The provisions of separate Options need not be
identical, but each Option shall include (through incorporation of provisions hereof by reference
in the Option or otherwise) the substance of each of the following provisions:
6.1    Term.  Subject to the provisions of Section 5.2 regarding Ten Percent Stockholders, no
Option shall be exercisable after the expiration of ten (10) years from the date it was granted.
6.2    Exercise Price of an Incentive Stock Option.  Subject to the provisions of Section 5.2
regarding Ten Percent Stockholders, the exercise price of each Incentive Stock Option shall be
not less than one hundred percent (100%) of the Fair Market Value of the Common Stock subject
to the Option on the date the Option is granted. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an Incentive Stock
Option may be granted with an exercise price lower than that set forth in the preceding sentence
if such Option is granted pursuant to an assumption or substitution for another option in a manner
satisfying the provisions of Section 424(a) of the Code.
6.3    Exercise Price of a Nonstatutory Stock Option.  The exercise price of each Nonstatutory
Stock Option shall be not less than one hundred percent (100%) of the Fair Market Value of the
Common Stock subject to the Option on the date the Option is granted. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a Nonstatutory Stock Option may be granted with an exercise price lower than that set
forth in the preceding sentence if such Option is granted pursuant to an assumption or
substitution for another option in a manner satisfying the provisions of Section 409A of the Code.
6.4    Consideration.  The exercise price of Common Stock acquired pursuant to an Option shall
be paid, to the extent permitted by applicable statutes and regulations, either (a) in cash or by
certified or bank check at the time the Option is exercised or, (b) in the discretion of the
Administrator, upon such terms as the Administrator shall approve, as follows: (i) by delivery to
the Company of other Common Stock, duly endorsed for transfer to the Company, with a Fair
Market Value on the date of delivery equal to the exercise price (or portion thereof) due for the
number of shares being acquired, or by means of attestation whereby the Participant identifies for
delivery specific shares of Common Stock that have a Fair Market Value on the date of
attestation equal to the exercise price (or portion thereof) and receives a number of shares of
Common Stock equal to the difference between the number of shares thereby purchased and the
number of identified attestation shares of Common Stock (a “Stock for Stock Exchange”); (ii) a
“cashless” exercise program established with a broker; (iii) by reduction in the number of shares
of Common Stock otherwise deliverable upon exercise of such Option with a Fair Market Value
equal to the aggregate exercise price at the time of exercise; or (iv) in any other form of legal
consideration that may be acceptable to the Administrator. Unless otherwise specifically
provided in the Option, the purchase price of Common Stock acquired pursuant to an Option that
is paid by delivery (or attestation) to the Company of other Common Stock acquired, directly or
indirectly from the Company, shall be paid only by shares of the Common Stock of the Company
that have been held such period of time as is required to avoid a charge to earnings for financial
accounting purposes. Notwithstanding the foregoing, during any period for which the Common
10
Stock is publicly traded (i.e., the Common Stock is listed on any established stock exchange or a
national market system), an exercise by a Director or Officer that involves or may involve a direct
or indirect extension of credit or arrangement of an extension of credit by the Company, directly or
indirectly, in violation of Section 402(a) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (codified as Section 13(k) of
the Exchange Act) shall be prohibited with respect to any Award under this Plan.
6.5    Transferability of an Option.  An Option (including an Incentive Stock Option or a
Nonstatutory Stock Option) shall not be transferable except by will or by the laws of descent and
distribution and shall be exercisable during the lifetime of the Optionholder only by the
Optionholder. For the avoidance of doubt, an Option may not be transferred in a divorce.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Optionholder may, pursuant to Section 14.14, designate a
beneficiary who, in the event of the death of the Optionholder, shall thereafter be entitled to
exercise the Option.
6.6    Vesting Generally.  The Option may, but need not, vest and therefore become exercisable
in periodic installments that may, but need not, be equal. The Option may be subject to such
other terms and conditions on the time or times when it may be exercised (which may be based
on performance or other criteria) as the Administrator may deem appropriate. The vesting
provisions of individual Options may vary. No Option may be exercised for a fraction of a share of
Common Stock. The Administrator may, but shall not be required to, provide for an acceleration
of vesting and exercisability in the terms of any Option Agreement upon the occurrence of a
specified event.
6.7    Termination of Continuous Service.  Unless otherwise provided in an Option Agreement or
in an employment or consulting agreement the terms of which have been approved by the
Administrator, in the event an Optionholder’s Continuous Service terminates (other than upon the
Optionholder’s death, Disability or Retirement or termination by the Company for Cause), the
Optionholder may exercise his or her Option (to the extent that the Optionholder was entitled to
exercise such Option as of the date of termination) but only within such period of time ending on
the earlier of (a) the date three (3) months following the termination of the Optionholder’s
Continuous Service, or (b) the expiration of the term of the Option as set forth in the Option
Agreement. If, after termination, the Optionholder does not exercise his or her Option within the
time specified in the preceding sentence, the Option shall terminate. Unless otherwise provided
in an Option Agreement or in an employment or consulting agreement the terms of which have
been approved by the Administrator, outstanding Options that are not exercisable at the time an
Optionholder’s Continuous Service terminates for any reason other than for Cause (including an
Optionholder’s death, Disability or Retirement) shall be forfeited and expire at the close of
business on the date of such termination. Unless otherwise provided in an Option Agreement or
in an employment or consulting agreement the terms of which have been approved by the
Administrator, if the Optionholder’s Continuous Service terminates for Cause, all outstanding
Options shall be forfeited (whether or not vested) and expire as of the beginning of business on
the date of such termination for Cause.
6.8    Extension of Termination Date.  An Optionholder’s Option Agreement may also provide that
if the exercise of the Option following the termination of the Optionholder’s Continuous Service
for any reason would be prohibited at any time because the issuance of shares of Common Stock
would violate the registration requirements under the Securities Act or any other state or federal
securities law or the rules of any securities exchange or interdealer quotation system, then the
Option shall terminate on the earlier of (a) the expiration of the term of the Option in accordance
with Section 6.1 or (b) the expiration of a period after termination of the Participant’s Continuous
Service that is three (3) months after the end of the period during which the exercise of the Option
would be in violation of such registration or other securities law requirements.
6.9    Disability of Optionholder.  Unless otherwise provided in an Option Agreement, in the event
that an Optionholder’s Continuous Service terminates as a result of the Optionholder’s Disability,
the Optionholder may exercise his or her Option (to the extent that the Optionholder was entitled
to exercise such Option as of the date of termination), but only within such period of time ending
on the earlier of (a) the date twelve (12) months following such termination or (b) the expiration of
the term of the Option as set forth in the Option Agreement. If, after termination, the Optionholder
does not exercise his or her Option within the time specified herein, the Option shall terminate.
6.10    Death of Optionholder.  Unless otherwise provided in an Option Agreement, in the event
an Optionholder’s Continuous Service terminates as a result of the Optionholder’s death, then
the Option may be exercised (to the extent the Optionholder was entitled to exercise such Option
as of the date of death) by the Optionholder’s beneficiary (as determined under Section 14.14),
but only within the period ending on the earlier of (a) the date twelve (12) months following the
date of death or (b) the expiration of the term of such Option as set forth in the Option Agreement.
If, after death, the Option is not exercised within the time specified herein, the Option shall
terminate.
6.11    Retirement.  Unless otherwise expressly provided in an Option Agreement, in the event of
an Optionholder’s Continuous Service terminates as a result of Retirement, the Optionholder may
exercise his or her Option (to the extent the Optionholder was entitled to exercise such Option as
of the date of termination), but only within such period of time
11
ending on the earlier of (a) the expiration of the term of the Option as set forth in the Option
Agreement or (b) the date one (1) year following such termination.
6.12    Incentive Stock Option $100,000 Limitation.  To the extent that the aggregate Fair Market
Value (determined at the time of grant) of Common Stock with respect to which Incentive Stock
Options are exercisable for the first time by any Optionholder during any calendar year (under all
plans of the Company and its Affiliates) exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000), the
Options or portions thereof which exceed such limit (according to the order in which they were
granted) shall be treated as Nonstatutory Stock Options.
6.13    Section 409A. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, if an Option is granted to a
Participant with respect to whom Common Stock does not constitute “service recipient stock” (as
defined in Treasury Regulation Section 1.409A-1(b)(5)(iii)), the Option shall comply with Section
409A of the Code to the extent applicable.
7.Provisions of Awards Other Than Options.
7.1    Restricted Awards.
(a)General. A Restricted Award is an Award of actual shares of Common Stock (“Restricted
Stock”) or hypothetical Common Stock units (“Restricted Stock Units”) having a value equal to
the Fair Market Value of an identical number of shares of Common Stock, which may, but need
not, provide that such Restricted Award may not be sold, assigned, transferred or otherwise
disposed of, pledged or hypothecated as collateral for a loan or as security for the performance of
any obligation or for any other purpose for such period (the “Restricted Period”) as the
Administrator shall determine.
(b)Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units.
(1)Each Participant granted Restricted Stock shall execute and deliver to the Company an Award
Agreement with respect to the Restricted Stock setting forth the restrictions and other terms and
conditions applicable to such Restricted Stock. If the Administrator determines that the Restricted
Stock shall be held by the Company or in escrow rather than delivered to the Participant pending
the release of the applicable restrictions, the Administrator may require the Participant to
additionally execute and deliver to the Company (A) an escrow agreement satisfactory to the
Administrator, if applicable and (B) the appropriate blank stock power with respect to the
Restricted Stock covered by such agreement. If a Participant should fail to execute an agreement
evidencing an Award of Restricted Stock and, if applicable, an escrow agreement and stock
power, within a reasonable period of time following the Date of Grant, the Award shall be null and
void. Subject to the restrictions set forth in the Award Agreement, the Participant generally shall
have the rights and privileges of a stockholder as to such Restricted Stock, including the right to
vote such Restricted Stock. At the discretion of the Administrator, cash dividends and stock
dividends with respect to the Restricted Stock may be either currently paid to the Participant or
withheld by the Company for the Participant’s account, and interest may be credited on the
amount of the cash dividends withheld at a rate and subject to such terms as determined by the
Administrator. The cash dividends or stock dividends so withheld by the Administrator and
attributable to any particular share of Restricted Stock (and earnings thereon, if applicable) shall
be distributed to the Participant in cash or, at the discretion of the Administrator, in shares of
Common Stock having a Fair Market Value equal to the amount of such dividends, if applicable,
upon the release of restrictions on such share and, if such share is forfeited, the Participant shall
have no right to such dividends. Any right to receive dividends with respect to performance-
based Restricted Stock shall vest only if and to the extent that the underlying Restricted Stock
vests.
(2)The terms and conditions of a grant of Restricted Stock Units shall be reflected in an Award
Agreement. No shares of Common Stock shall be issued at the time a Restricted Stock Unit is
granted, and the Company will not be required to set aside a fund for the payment of any such
Award. At the discretion of the Administrator, each Restricted Stock Unit (representing one
(1) share of Common Stock) may be credited with cash and stock dividends paid by the
Company in respect of one share of Common Stock (“Dividend Equivalents”). At the discretion of
the Administrator, Dividend Equivalents may be either currently paid to the Participant or
withheld by the Company for the Participant’s account, and interest may be credited on the
amount of cash Dividend Equivalents withheld at a rate and subject to such terms as determined
by the Administrator. Dividend Equivalents credited to a Participant’s account and attributable to
any particular Restricted Stock Unit (and earnings thereon, if applicable) shall be distributed in
cash or, at the discretion of the Administrator, in shares of Common Stock having a Fair Market
Value equal to the amount of such Dividend Equivalents and earnings, if applicable, to the
Participant upon settlement of such Restricted Stock Unit. Any right to receive Dividend
Equivalents with respect to performance-based Restricted Stock Units shall vest only if and to the
extent that the underlying Restricted Stock Unit vests.
12
(c)Restrictions.
(1)Restricted Stock awarded to a Participant shall be subject to the following restrictions until the
expiration of the Restricted Period, and to such other terms and conditions as may be set forth in
the applicable Award Agreement: (A) if an escrow arrangement is used, the Participant shall not
be entitled to delivery of the stock certificate; (B) the shares shall be subject to the restrictions on
transferability set forth in the Award Agreement; (C) the shares shall be subject to forfeiture to the
extent provided in the applicable Award Agreement; and (D) to the extent such shares are
forfeited, the stock certificates shall be returned to the Company, and all rights of the Participant
to such shares and as a stockholder with respect to such shares shall terminate without further
obligation on the part of the Company.
(2)Restricted Stock Units awarded to any Participant shall be subject to (A) forfeiture until the
expiration of the Restricted Period, and satisfaction of any applicable Performance Goals during
such period, to the extent provided in the applicable Award Agreement, and to the extent such
Restricted Stock Units are forfeited, all rights of the Participant to such Restricted Stock Units
shall terminate without further obligation on the part of the Company and (B) such other terms
and conditions as may be set forth in the applicable Award Agreement.
(3)The Administrator shall have the authority to remove any or all of the restrictions on the
Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units whenever it may determine that, by reason of
changes in applicable laws or other changes in circumstances arising after the date of the
Restricted Stock or Restricted Stock Units are granted, such action is appropriate.
(d)Restricted Period.  With respect to Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units, the Restricted
Period shall commence on the Date of Grant and end at the time or times set forth on a schedule
established by the Administrator in the applicable Award Agreement. If neither the grant nor the
vesting of the Restricted Stock or Restricted Stock Units are subject to performance conditions,
the Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units shall vest over a period of not less than three (3)
years and if the grant or vesting of Restricted Stock or Restricted Stock Units is subject to
performance conditions, the Restricted Stock or Restricted Stock Units shall vest over a period of
not less than one (1) year; provided that the Award Agreement may provide that (x) Restricted
Stock or Restricted Stock Units may vest on an accelerated basis in the event of a Participant’s
death, Disability, Retirement or involuntary termination without Cause, or in the event of a
Change in Control, and (y) up to ten percent (10%) of the shares of Common Stock initially
authorized for issuance under this Plan may be granted as Restricted Stock, Restricted Stock
Units, Performance Shares or Performance Units free of the limitations on vesting set forth herein
and in Section 7.4(c). Notwithstanding the foregoing, in addition to other Awards, each Non-
Employee Director shall be eligible to receive grants of fully vested Stock as part of his or her
director fees.
(e)Delivery of Restricted Stock and Settlement of Restricted Stock Units.  Upon the expiration of
the Restricted Period with respect to any shares of Restricted Stock, the restrictions set forth in
Section 7.1(c) and the applicable Award Agreement shall be of no further force or effect with
respect to such shares, except as set forth in the applicable Award Agreement. If an escrow
arrangement is used, upon such expiration, the Company shall deliver to the Participant, or his or
her beneficiary, without charge, the stock certificate evidencing the shares of Restricted Stock
which have not then been forfeited and with respect to which the Restricted Period has expired
(to the nearest full share) and any cash dividends or stock dividends credited to the Participant’s
account with respect to such Restricted Stock and the interest thereon, if any. Upon the expiration
of the Restricted Period with respect to any outstanding Restricted Stock Units, or at such other
payment date as may be specified in the applicable Award Agreement, the Company shall
deliver to the Participant, or his or her beneficiary, without charge, one (1) share of Common
Stock for each such outstanding Restricted Stock Unit (“Vested Unit”) and cash equal to any
Dividend Equivalents credited with respect to each such Vested Unit in accordance with
Section 7.1(b)(2) hereof and the interest thereon, if any, or, at the discretion of the Administrator,
in shares of Common Stock having a Fair Market Value equal to such Dividend Equivalents and
the interest thereon, if any; provided, however, that, if explicitly provided in the applicable Award
Agreement, the Administrator may, in its sole discretion, elect to pay cash or part cash and
part Common Stock in lieu of delivering only shares of Common Stock for Vested Units. If a cash
payment is made in lieu of delivering shares of Common Stock, the amount of such payment
shall be equal to the Fair Market Value of the Common Stock as of a date immediately preceding
the date of payment of such Vested Unit, as determined by the Administrator.
(f)Stock Restrictions.  Each certificate representing Restricted Stock awarded under this Plan
shall bear a legend in the form the Company deems appropriate.
7.2    Performance Compensation Awards.
(a)General.  The Administrator shall have the authority, at the time of grant of any Award
described in this Plan (other than Options and Stock Appreciation Rights granted with an
exercise price or grant price, as the case
13
may be, equal to or greater than the Fair Market Value per share of Common Stock on the date of
grant), to designate such Award as a Performance Compensation Award in order to qualify such
Award as “performance-based compensation” under Section 162(m) of the Code. In addition, the
Administrator shall have the authority to make an award of a cash bonus to any Participant and
designate such Award as a Performance Compensation Award in order to qualify such Award as
“performance-based compensation” under Section 162(m) of the Code.
(b)Eligibility.  The Administrator will, in its sole discretion, designate within the first ninety
(90) days of a Performance Period (or, if longer or shorter, within the maximum period allowed
under Section 162(m) of the Code) which Participants will be eligible to receive Performance
Compensation Awards in respect of such Performance Period. However, designation of a
Participant eligible to receive an Award hereunder for a Performance Period shall not in any
manner entitle the Participant to receive payment in respect of any Performance Compensation
Award for such Performance Period. The determination as to whether or not such Participant
becomes entitled to payment in respect of any Performance Compensation Award shall be
decided solely in accordance with the provisions of this Section 7.2. Moreover, designation of a
Participant eligible to receive an Award hereunder for a particular Performance Period shall not
require designation of such Participant eligible to receive an Award hereunder in any subsequent
Performance Period and designation of one person as a Participant eligible to receive an Award
hereunder shall not require designation of any other person as a Participant eligible to receive an
Award hereunder in such period or in any other period.
(c)Discretion of Administrator with Respect to Performance Compensation Awards.  With regard
to a particular Performance Period, the Administrator shall have full discretion to select the length
of such Performance Period (provided any such Performance Period shall be not less than one
(1) year in duration), the type(s) of Performance Compensation Awards to be issued, the
Performance Criteria that will be used to establish the Performance Goal(s), the kind(s) and/or
level(s) of the Performance Goals(s) that is (are) to apply to the Company and the Performance
Formula. Within the first ninety (90) days of a Performance Period (or, if longer or shorter, within
the maximum period allowed under Section 162(m) of the Code), the Administrator shall, with
regard to the Performance Compensation Awards to be issued for such Performance Period,
exercise its discretion with respect to each of the matters enumerated in the immediately
preceding sentence of this Section 7.2(c) and record the same in writing.
(d)Payment of Performance Compensation Awards.
(1)Condition to Receipt of Payment.  Unless otherwise provided in the applicable Award
Agreement, a Participant must be employed by the Company on the last day of a Performance
Period to be eligible for payment in respect of a Performance Compensation Award for such
Performance Period.
(2)Limitation.  A Participant shall be eligible to receive payment in respect of a Performance
Compensation Award only to the extent that: (A) the Performance Goals for such period are
achieved and (B) the Performance Formula as applied against such Performance Goals
determines that all or some portion of such Participant’s Performance Compensation Award has
been earned for the Performance Period.
(3)Certification.  Following the completion of a Performance Period, the Administrator shall
review and certify in writing whether, and to what extent, the Performance Goals for the
Performance Period have been achieved and, if so, calculate and certify in writing that amount of
the Performance Compensation Awards earned for the period based upon the Performance
Formula. The Administrator shall then determine the actual size of each Participant’s
Performance Compensation Award for the Performance Period and, in so doing, may apply
Negative Discretion in accordance with Section 7.2(d)(4) hereof, if and when it deems
appropriate.
(4)Use of Discretion.  In determining the actual size of an individual Performance Compensation
Award for a Performance Period, the Administrator may reduce or eliminate the amount of the
Performance Compensation Award earned under the Performance Formula in the Performance
Period through the use of Negative Discretion if, in its sole judgment, such reduction or
elimination is appropriate. The Administrator shall not have the discretion to (A) grant or provide
payment in respect of Performance Compensation Awards for a Performance Period if the
Performance Goals for such Performance Period have not been attained or (B) increase a
Performance Compensation Award above the maximum amount payable under Section 7.2(d)
(6).
(5)Timing of Award Payments.  Performance Compensation Awards granted for a Performance
Period shall be paid to Participants or their beneficiaries as soon as administratively practicable
following completion of the certifications required by this Section 7.2.
(6)Maximum Award Payable.  Subject to adjustment under Section 11, the following limitations
shall apply:
14
(A)The maximum amount that may be payable to any Participant for a calendar year in a
Performance Period with respect to Performance Compensation Awards of Restricted Stock,
Restricted Stock Units, Performance Shares or Performance Units is five hundred thousand
(500,000) shares of Common Stock or, in the event such Performance Compensation Award is
paid in cash, the equivalent cash value thereof, determined as of the date set forth in the
applicable Award Agreement. The limit set forth in the preceding sentence will be applied
separately to each type of Award.
(B)The maximum amount that can be paid in any calendar year to any Participant pursuant to a
cash bonus Award described in the last sentence of Section 7.2(a) shall be two million dollars
($2,000,000).
(7)Death, Disability or Change in Control. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, an
Award Agreement may provide that a Performance Compensation Award may be payable upon
death, disability or change of ownership or control prior to the attainment of the applicable
Performance Goals, provided that any such Award will not constitute “performance-based
compensation” under Section 162(m) of the Code if the Award is actually paid prior to the
attainment of the Performance Goals.
(8)Dividends and Dividend Equivalents. With respect to Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock
Units that are intended to constitute “performance-based compensation” under Section 162(m) of
the Code, the Administrator has the discretion to determine whether dividends on such Restricted
Stock and Dividend Equivalents on such Restricted Stock Units are intended to constitute
“performance-based compensation.” If any dividends or Dividend Equivalents are so intended,
such dividends or Dividend Equivalents must satisfy the requirements of Section 162(m) of the
Code separately from the underlying Awards. Any right to receive dividends or Dividend
Equivalents with respect to performance-based Awards shall vest only if and to the extent that the
underlying Award vests.
(9)Acceleration or Deferral of Payment. If, after the attainment of the applicable Performance
Goals, payment of a Performance Compensation Award in cash is accelerated to an earlier date,
the amount paid will be discounted to reasonably reflect the time value of money. Any
Performance Compensation Award that has been deferred shall not (between the date as of
which the Award is deferred and the payment date) increase (A) with respect to a Performance
Compensation Award that is payable in cash, by a measuring factor for each fiscal year greater
than a reasonable rate of interest set by the Committee or (B) with respect to a Performance
Compensation Award that is payable in Stock, by an amount greater than the appreciation of a
share of Stock from the date such Award is deferred to the payment date.
7.3    Stock Appreciation Rights.
(a)General.  Stock Appreciation Rights may be granted either alone (“Free Standing Rights”) or,
provided the requirements of Section 7.3(b) are satisfied, in tandem with all or part of any Option
granted under this Plan (“Related Rights”). In the case of a Nonstatutory Stock Option, Related
Rights may be granted either at or after the time of the grant of such Option. In the case of an
Incentive Stock Option, Related Rights may be granted only at the time of the grant of the
Incentive Stock Option.
(b)Grant Requirements.  A Stock Appreciation Right may only be granted if the Stock
Appreciation Right does not provide for the deferral of compensation within the meaning of
Section 409A of the Code. A Stock Appreciation Right does not provide for a deferral of
compensation if: (i) the value of the Common Stock the excess over which the right provides for
payment upon exercise (the “SAR exercise price”) may never be less than the Fair Market Value
of the underlying Common Stock on the date the right is granted; (ii) the compensation payable
under the Stock Appreciation Right can never be greater than the difference between the SAR
exercise price and the Fair Market Value of the Common Stock on the date the Stock
Appreciation Right is exercised; (iii) the number of shares of Common Stock subject to the Stock
Appreciation Right must be fixed on the Date of Grant of the Stock Appreciation Right; and
(iv) the right does not include any feature for the deferral of compensation other than the deferral
of recognition of income until the exercise of the right.
(c)Exercise and Payment.  Upon exercise thereof, the holder of a Stock Appreciation Right shall
be entitled to receive from the Company an amount equal to the product of (i) the excess of the
Fair Market Value, on the date of such exercise, of one (1) share of Common Stock over the SAR
exercise price per share specified in the Award Agreement for such Stock Appreciation Right or
its related Option, multiplied by (ii) the number of shares for which such Stock Appreciation Right
shall be exercised. Payment with respect to the exercise of a Stock Appreciation Right shall be
paid on the date of exercise and may be made in the form of shares of Common Stock (with or
without restrictions as to substantial risk of forfeiture and transferability, as determined by the
Administrator in its sole discretion), cash or a combination thereof, as determined by the
Administrator. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if, on the last day of the applicable exercise period,
the Fair Market Value of the Common Stock exceeds the SAR exercise price and the Participant
has not exercised the Stock Appreciation Right or the
15
corresponding Option (if applicable), to the extent vested and exercisable, such Stock
Appreciation Right shall be deemed to have been exercised by the Participant on such last day
and the Company shall make the appropriate payment therefor.
(d)Exercise Price.  The exercise price of a Free Standing Stock Appreciation Right shall be
determined by the Administrator, but shall not be less than one hundred percent (100%) of the
Fair Market Value of one (1) share of Common Stock on the Date of Grant of such Stock
Appreciation Right. A Related Right granted simultaneously with or subsequent to the grant of an
Option and in conjunction therewith or in the alternative thereto shall have the same exercise
price as the related Option, shall be transferable only upon the same terms and conditions as the
related Option, and shall be exercisable only to the same extent as the related Option; provided,
however, that a Stock Appreciation Right, by its terms, shall be exercisable only when the Fair
Market Value per share of Common Stock subject to the Stock Appreciation Right and related
Option exceeds the exercise price per share thereof and no Stock Appreciation Rights may be
granted in tandem with an Option unless the Administrator determines that the requirements of
Section 7.3(b) are satisfied.
(e)Reduction in the Underlying Option Shares.  Upon any exercise of a Stock Appreciation Right,
the number of shares of Common Stock for which any related Option shall be exercisable shall
be reduced by the number of shares for which the Stock Appreciation Right shall have been
exercised. The number of shares of Common Stock for which a Stock Appreciation Right shall be
exercisable shall be reduced upon any exercise of any related Option by the number of shares of
Common Stock for which such Option shall have been exercised.
(f)Transferability of a Stock Appreciation Right.  A Stock Appreciation Right (including a Free
Standing Right or a Related Right) shall not be transferable except by will or by the laws of
descent and distribution and shall be exercisable during the lifetime of the holder thereof only by
such holder. For the avoidance of doubt, a Stock Appreciation Right may not be transferred in a
divorce. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the holder may, pursuant to Section 14.14, designate a
beneficiary who, in the event of the death of the holder, shall thereafter be entitled to exercise the
Stock Appreciation Right.
7.4    Performance Shares and Performance Units.
(a)General. An Award of Performance Shares (“Performance Shares”) is an Award representing
the right to receive a number of shares of Common Stock for each Performance Share granted,
as the Administrator may determine. An Award of Performance Units (“Performance Units”) is an
Award representing the right to receive a payment (either in cash or Common Stock) equal to the
value of the Performance Units earned, as the Administrator may determine. Performance Shares
and Performance Units may be granted alone or in combination with any other Award under this
Plan.
(b)Value of Performance Shares and Performance Units. The Administrator shall establish
Performance Goals for any specified Performance Periods. Prior to each grant of Performance
Shares or Performance Units, the Administrator shall establish an initial amount of Common
Stock for each award of Performance Shares. Each Performance Unit represents the value of
one (1) share of Common Stock. The Administrator also shall set the Performance Goals that will
be used to determine the extent to which the Participant receives Common Stock for the
Performance Shares or payment of the value of the Performance Units awarded for such
Performance Period. With respect to each such Performance Goal utilized during a Performance
Period, the Administrator may assign percentages or other relative values to various levels of
performance which shall be applied to determine the extent to which the Participant shall receive
a payout of the number of Performance Shares or value of Performance Units awarded.
(c)Vesting of Performance Shares and Performance Units. The Administrator shall establish the
vesting conditions for Performance Shares and Performance Units. Performance Shares and
Performance Units shall vest over a period of not less than one (1) year; provided that the Award
Agreement may provide that (x) Performance Shares and Performance Units may vest on an
accelerated basis in the event of a Participant’s death, Disability, Retirement or involuntary
termination without Cause, or in the event of a Change in Control, and (y) up to ten percent (10%)
of the shares of Common Stock initially authorized for issuance under this Plan may be granted
as Restricted Stock, Restricted Stock Units, Performance Shares or Performance Units free of the
limitations on vesting set forth herein and in Section 7.1(d).
(d)Dividend Equivalents. The Administrator may grant Dividend Equivalents in connection with
Performance Shares and Performance Units, under such terms and conditions as the
Administrator deems appropriate. Dividend Equivalents credited to a Participant’s account and
attributable to any particular Performance Shares and Performance Units (and earnings thereon,
if applicable) shall be distributed in cash or, at the discretion of the Administrator, in shares of
Common Stock having a Fair Market Value equal to the amount of such Dividend Equivalents
and earnings, if applicable, to the Participant upon settlement of such Performance Shares and
Performance Units. Any right to receive Dividend Equivalents with respect to performance-based
Performance Shares and Performance Units shall vest only if and to the extent that the
underlying Performance Shares and Performance Units vest.
16
(e)Payment of Performance Shares and Performance Units. After a Performance Period has
ended, a Participant holding Performance Shares or Performance Units shall be entitled to
receive the value thereof as determined by the Administrator. The Administrator shall make this
determination by first determining the extent to which the Performance Goals set pursuant to
Section 7.4(b) have been met. The Administrator shall then determine the applicable percentage
or other relative value to be applied to, and will apply such percentage or other relative value to,
the number of Performance Shares or value of Performance Units to determine the payout to be
received by the Participant. In addition, with respect to Performance Shares and Performance
Units granted to each Participant, no payout shall be made hereunder except upon written
certification by the Administrator that the applicable Performance Goals have been satisfied to a
particular extent.
(f)Form and Timing of Payment. The payment described in Section 7.4(e) shall be made in
Common Stock, or in cash, or partly in Common Stock and partly in cash, at the discretion of the
Administrator and as set forth in the Award Agreement. The value of any fractional shares shall
be paid in cash. Payment shall be made in a lump sum or installments as prescribed by the
Administrator or the Award Agreement, as applicable. If Common Stock is to be converted into an
amount of cash as of any date, or if an amount of cash is to be converted into Common Stock as
of any date, such conversion shall be done at the then-current Fair Market Value of the Common
Stock on such date.
7.5    Bonus Stock and Awards in Lieu of Obligations. Common Stock may be granted under this
Plan as a bonus, or Common Stock or other Awards may be granted in lieu of obligations to pay
cash or deliver other property under this Plan or under other plans or compensatory
arrangements, provided that, in the case of Participants subject to Section 16 of the Exchange
Act, the amount of such grants remains within the discretion of the Administrator to the extent
necessary to ensure that acquisitions of Common Stock or other Awards are exempt from liability
under Section 16(b) of the Exchange Act. Common Stock or Awards granted hereunder shall be
subject to such other terms as shall be determined by the Administrator. In the case of any grant
of Common Stock to an officer of the Company or any of its Affiliates in lieu of salary or other
cash compensation, the number of shares granted in place of such compensation shall be
reasonable, as determined by the Administrator.
8.Covenants of the Company.
8.1    Availability of Shares.  During the terms of the Awards, the Company shall keep available at
all times the number of shares of Common Stock required to satisfy such Awards.
8.2    Securities Law Compliance.  Each Award Agreement shall provide that no shares of
Common Stock shall be purchased or sold thereunder unless and until (a) any then applicable
requirements of state or federal laws and regulatory agencies shall have been fully complied with
to the satisfaction of the Company and its counsel and (b) if required to do so by the Company,
the Participant shall have executed and delivered to the Company a letter of investment intent in
such form and containing such provisions as the Administrator may require. The Company shall
use reasonable efforts to seek to obtain from each regulatory commission or agency having
jurisdiction over this Plan such authority as may be required to grant Awards and to issue and
sell shares of Common Stock upon exercise of the Awards; provided, however, that this
undertaking shall not require the Company to register under the Securities Act this Plan, any
Award or any Common Stock issued or issuable pursuant to any such Award. If, after reasonable
efforts, the Company is unable to obtain from any such regulatory commission or agency the
authority which counsel for the Company deems necessary for the lawful issuance and sale of
Common Stock under this Plan, the Company shall be relieved from any liability for failure to
issue and sell Common Stock upon exercise of such Awards unless and until such authority is
obtained.
9.Use of Proceeds from Stock.
Proceeds from the sale of Common Stock pursuant to Awards, or upon exercise thereof, shall
constitute general funds of the Company.
10.    Miscellaneous.
10.1    Acceleration of Exercisability and Vesting.  The Administrator shall have the power to
accelerate the time at which an Award may first be exercised or the time during which an Award
or any part thereof will vest in accordance with this Plan, notwithstanding the provisions in the
Award stating the time at which it may first be exercised or the time during which it will vest.
10.2    Stockholder Rights.  Except as provided in this Plan or an Award Agreement, no
Participant shall be deemed to be the holder of, or to have any of the rights of a holder with
respect to, any shares of Common Stock subject to such Award unless and until such Participant
has satisfied all requirements for exercise of the Award pursuant to its terms and no adjustment
shall be made for dividends (ordinary or extraordinary, whether in cash, securities or other
property) or distributions
17
of other rights for which the record date is prior to the date such Common Stock certificate is
issued, except as provided in Section 12 hereof.
10.3    No Employment or Other Service Rights.  Nothing in this Plan or any instrument executed
or Award granted pursuant thereto shall confer upon any Participant any right to continue to serve
the Company or an Affiliate in the capacity in effect at the time the Award was granted or shall
affect the right of the Company or an Affiliate to terminate (a) the employment of an Employee
with or without notice and with or without Cause; (b) the service of a Consultant pursuant to the
terms of such Consultant’s agreement with the Company or an Affiliate; or (c) the service of a
Director pursuant to the bylaws of the Company or governing documents of any Affiliate, and any
applicable provisions of the corporate law of the state in which the Company or the Affiliate is
incorporated, as the case may be.
10.4    Transfer, Approved Leave of Absence.  For purposes of this Plan, no termination of
employment by an Employee shall be deemed to result from either (a) a transfer to the
employment of the Company from an Affiliate or from the Company to an Affiliate, or from one
Affiliate to another or (b) an approved leave of absence for military service or sickness, or for any
other purpose approved by the Company, if the Employee’s right to re-employment is guaranteed
either by a statute or by contract or under the policy pursuant to which the leave of absence was
granted or if the Administrator otherwise so provides in writing.
10.5    Investment Assurances.  The Company may require a Participant, as a condition of
exercising or acquiring Common Stock under any Award (a) to give written assurances
satisfactory to the Company as to the Participant’s knowledge and experience in financial and
business matters and/or to employ a purchaser representative reasonably satisfactory to the
Company who is knowledgeable and experienced in financial and business matters and that he
or she is capable of evaluating, alone or together with the purchaser representative, the merits
and risks of exercising the Award and (b) to give written assurances satisfactory to the Company
stating that the Participant is acquiring Common Stock subject to the Award for the Participant’s
own account and not with any present intention of selling or otherwise distributing the Common
Stock. The foregoing requirements, and any assurances given pursuant to such requirements,
shall be inoperative if (i) the issuance of the shares of Common Stock upon the exercise or
acquisition of Common Stock under the Award has been registered under a then currently
effective registration statement under the Securities Act or (ii) as to any particular requirement, a
determination is made by counsel for the Company that such requirement need not be met in the
circumstances under the then applicable securities laws. The Company may, upon advice of
counsel to the Company, place legends on stock certificates issued under this Plan as such
counsel deems necessary or appropriate in order to comply with applicable securities laws,
including, but not limited to, legends restricting the transfer of the Common Stock.
10.6    Withholding Obligations.  To the extent provided by the terms of an Award Agreement and
subject to the discretion of the Administrator, the Participant may satisfy any federal, state or local
tax withholding obligation relating to the exercise or acquisition of Common Stock under an
Award by any of the following means (in addition to the Company’s right to withhold from any
compensation paid to the Participant by the Company) or by a combination of such means:
(a) tendering a cash payment; (b) authorizing the Company to withhold shares of Common Stock
from the shares of Common Stock otherwise issuable to the Participant as a result of the exercise
or acquisition of Common Stock under the Award, provided, however, that no shares of Common
Stock are withheld with a value exceeding the maximum value that may be utilized without
creating adverse accounting treatment with respect to such Award; or (c) delivering to the
Company previously owned and unencumbered shares of Common Stock of the Company.
11.    Adjustments Upon Changes in Stock.
Awards granted under this Plan and any agreements evidencing such Awards, the maximum
number of shares of Common Stock subject to all Awards stated in Section 4 and the maximum
number of shares of Common Stock with respect to which any one person may be granted
Awards during any period stated in Section 4 and Section 7.2(d)(6) will be equitably adjusted or
substituted, as to the number, price or kind of a share of Common Stock or other consideration
subject to such Awards, and as to other terms of the Awards, including performance goals, as
appropriate, to the extent necessary to preserve the economic intent of such Award in the event
of changes in the outstanding Common Stock or in the capital structure of the Company by
reason of stock or extraordinary cash dividends, stock splits, reverse stock splits, recapitalization,
reorganizations, mergers, consolidations, combinations, exchanges or other relevant changes in
capitalization occurring after the Date of Grant of any such Award. Any adjustment in Incentive
Stock Options under this Section 11 shall be made only to the extent not constituting a
“modification” within the meaning of Section 424(h)(3) of the Code, and any adjustments under
this Section 11 shall be made in a manner which does not adversely affect the exemption
provided pursuant to Rule 16b-3 or otherwise result in a violation of Section 409A of the Code.
Further, with respect to Awards intended to qualify as “performance-based compensation” under
Section 162(m) of the Code, such adjustments or substitutions shall be made only to the extent
that the Administrator determines that such adjustments or substitutions may be made without
causing the Company to be denied a tax deduction on account of Section 162(m) of the
18
Code or as otherwise permitted under the Plan. The Company shall give each Participant notice
of an adjustment hereunder and, upon notice, such adjustment shall be conclusive and binding
for all purposes.
12.    Effect of Change in Control.
12.1    Effect on Awards.
(a)The Committee may provide in an Award Agreement terms under which Awards may vest and,
as applicable, be exercisable or payable in the event of a Change in Control or in the event of a
Participant’s termination of Continuous Service in connection with, upon or within a specified
time period after a Change of Control.
12.2    In addition, in the event of a Change in Control, the Administrator, in its discretion, may
take any action with respect to outstanding Awards that it deems appropriate, which action may
vary among Awards granted to individual Participants; provided, however, that such action shall
not reduce the value of an Award. In particular, with respect to Options, the actions the
Administrator may take upon a Change in Control include, but are not limited to, the following: (i)
providing that Options and Stock Appreciation Rights then outstanding may be exercised in full
for a limited period of time on or before a specified date (before or after such Change in Control)
fixed by the Administrator, after which specified date all unexercised Options and Stock
Appreciation Rights and all rights of holders thereunder shall terminate, (ii) requiring the
mandatory surrender to the Company by selected holders of Options and Stock Appreciation
Rights of some or all of the outstanding Options and Stock Appreciation Rights held by such
holders as of a date, before or after such Change in Control, specified by the Administrator, in
which event the Administrator shall thereupon cancel such Options and Stock Appreciation
Rights and the Company shall pay to each such holders an amount of cash per share equal to
the excess, if any, of the Change in Control Value of the shares subject to such Option and Stock
Appreciation Rights over the exercise price(s) under such Options and Stock Appreciation Rights
for such shares, (iii) make such adjustments to Options and Stock Appreciation Rights then
outstanding as the Administrator deems appropriate to reflect such Change in Control (provided,
however, that the Administrator may determine in its sole discretion that no adjustment is
necessary to Options and Stock Appreciation Rights then outstanding), or (iv) provide that the
shares of Common Stock covered by an Option or Stock Appreciation Right theretofore granted
shall be adjusted so that such Option and Stock Appreciation Right shall thereafter cover the
number and class of shares of stock or other securities or property (including, without limitation,
cash) to which the holder would have been entitled pursuant to the terms of the agreement of
merger, consolidation or sale of assets and dissolution if, immediately prior to such merger,
consolidation or sale of assets and dissolution, the holder had been the holder of record of the
number of shares of Common Stock then covered by such Option or Stock Appreciation Right.
The provisions contained in this paragraph shall not terminate any rights of a Participant to
further payments pursuant to any other agreement with the Company with respect to a Change in
Control. Without limiting the foregoing, if the per share Fair Market Value of the Common Stock
does not exceed the per share exercise price of the Options or Stock Appreciation Rights, the
Company shall not be required to make any payment to the Participant upon surrender of the
Option or Stock Appreciation Right.
12.3    The obligations of the Company under this Plan shall be binding upon any successor
corporation or organization resulting from the merger, consolidation or other reorganization of the
Company, or upon any successor corporation or organization succeeding to all or substantially
all of the assets and business of the Company and its Affiliates, taken as a whole.
13.    Amendment of this Plan and Awards.
13.1    Amendment/Termination of Plan.  The Board at any time, and from time to time, may
amend or terminate this Plan. However, except as provided in Section 11 relating to adjustments
upon changes in Common Stock, Section 13.3 and Section 14.2, no amendment shall be
effective unless approved by the stockholders of the Company to the extent stockholder approval
is necessary to satisfy any applicable law or securities exchange listing requirements. At the time
of such amendment, the Board shall determine, upon advice from counsel, whether such
amendment will be contingent on stockholder approval.
13.2    Stockholder Approval.  The Board may, in its sole discretion, submit any other amendment
to this Plan for stockholder approval, including, but not limited to, amendments to this Plan
intended to satisfy the requirements of Section 162(m) of the Code and the regulations
thereunder regarding the exclusion of performance-based compensation from the limit on
corporate deductibility of compensation paid to certain executive officers.
13.3    Contemplated Amendments.  It is expressly contemplated that the Board may amend this
Plan in any respect the Board deems necessary or advisable to provide eligible Employees with
the maximum benefits provided or to be provided under the provisions of the Code and the
regulations promulgated thereunder relating to Incentive Stock Options and/or to bring this Plan
and/or Awards granted under it into compliance therewith.
19
13.4    No Impairment of Rights.  Rights under any Award granted before amendment of this Plan
shall not be impaired by any amendment of this Plan unless (a) the Company requests the
consent of the Participant and (b) the Participant consents in writing.
13.5    Amendment of Awards.  Subject to the restrictions set forth in Section 14.12, the
Administrator at any time, and from time to time, may amend the terms of any one or more
Awards; provided, however, that the Administrator may not effect any amendment which would
otherwise constitute an impairment of the rights under any Award unless (a) the Company
requests the consent of the Participant and (b) the Participant consents in writing.
14.    General Provisions.
14.1    Other Compensation Arrangements.  Nothing contained in this Plan shall prevent the
Board from adopting other or additional compensation arrangements, subject to stockholder
approval if such approval is required, and such arrangements may be either generally applicable
or applicable only in specific cases. This Plan is intended to constitute an “unfunded” plan for
incentive compensation and nothing contained in this Plan shall give any Participant any rights
that are greater than those of a general unsecured creditor of the Company.
14.2    Recapitalizations.  Each Award Agreement shall contain provisions required to reflect the
provisions of Section 11.
14.3    Delivery.  Upon exercise of a right granted under this Plan, the Company shall issue
Common Stock or pay any amounts due within a reasonable period of time thereafter. Subject to
any statutory or regulatory obligations the Company may otherwise have, for purposes of this
Plan, thirty (30) days shall be considered a reasonable period of time.
14.4    Other Provisions.  The Award Agreements authorized under this Plan may contain such
other provisions not inconsistent with this Plan, including, without limitation, restrictions upon the
exercise of the Awards, restrictive covenant obligations (including, without limitation,
confidentiality, non-competition and non-solicitation covenants), and clawback or recoupment
provisions, as the Administrator may deem advisable.
14.5    Cancellation and Rescission of Awards for Detrimental Activity.
(a)Upon exercise, payment or delivery pursuant to an Award, the Participant shall certify in a
manner acceptable to the Company that the Participant has not engaged in any Detrimental
Activity described in Section 2.19.
(b)Unless the Award Agreement specifies otherwise, the Administrator may cancel, rescind,
suspend, withhold or otherwise limit or restrict any unexpired, unpaid or deferred Awards at any
time if the Participant engages in any Detrimental Activity described in Section 2.19.
(c)In the event a Participant engages in Detrimental Activity described in Section 2.19 after any
exercise, payment or delivery pursuant to an Award, during any period for which any restrictive
covenant prohibiting such activity is applicable to the Participant, such exercise, payment or
delivery may be rescinded within one (1) year after the Participant engages in such Detrimental
Activity. In the event of any such rescission, the Participant shall pay to the Company the amount
of any gain realized or payment received as a result of the exercise, payment or delivery, in such
manner and on such terms and conditions as may be required by the Company. The Company
shall be entitled to set-off against the amount of any such gain any amount owed to the
Participant by the Company, subject to compliance with Section 409A of the Code, if applicable.
14.6    Clawbacks. Notwithstanding any other provisions in this Plan, any Award which is subject
to recovery under any law, government regulation or stock exchange listing requirement will be
subject to such deductions and clawback as may be required to be made pursuant to such law,
government regulation or stock exchange listing requirement. In addition, all Awards are subject
to any applicable clawback policy or provision that may be implemented by the Board from time
to time or is set forth in any Award Agreement.
14.7    Company Policies. All Awards made under this Plan shall be subject to any applicable
share trading, stock ownership or other policies that may be implemented by the Board from time
to time.
14.8    Disqualifying Dispositions.  Any Participant who shall make a “disposition” (as defined in
Section 424 of the Code) of all or any portion of shares of Common Stock acquired upon exercise
of an Incentive Stock Option within two (2) years from the Date of Grant of such Incentive Stock
Option or within one (1) year after the issuance of the shares of Common
20
Stock acquired upon exercise of such Incentive Stock Option shall be required to immediately
advise the Company in writing as to the occurrence of the sale and the price realized upon the
sale of such shares of Common Stock.
14.9    Section 16.  It is the intent of the Company that this Plan satisfy, and be interpreted in a
manner that satisfies, the applicable requirements of Rule 16b-3 so that Participants will be
entitled to the benefit of Rule 16b-3, or any other rule promulgated under Section 16 of the
Exchange Act, and will not be subject to short-swing liability under Section 16 of the Exchange
Act. Accordingly, if the operation of any provision of this Plan would conflict with the intent
expressed in this Section 14.9, such provision to the extent possible shall be interpreted and/or
deemed amended so as to avoid such conflict.
14.10    Section 162(m).  To the extent the Administrator issues any Award that is intended to be
exempt from the application of Section 162(m) of the Code, the Administrator may, without
stockholder or grantee approval, amend this Plan or the relevant Award agreement retroactively
or prospectively to the extent it determines necessary in order to comply with any subsequent
clarification of Section 162(m) of the Code required to preserve the Company’s federal income
tax deduction for compensation paid pursuant to any such Award.
14.11    Section 409A. This Plan is intended to comply with Section 409A of the Code to the
extent subject thereto, and, accordingly, to the maximum extent permitted, this Plan shall be
interpreted and administered to be in compliance therewith. Any payments described in this Plan
that are due within the “short-term deferral period” as defined in Section 409A of the Code shall
not be treated as deferred compensation unless applicable laws require otherwise. If the
Administrator (or its delegate) determines in its discretion that an Award is determined to be
“nonqualified deferred compensation” subject to Section 409A of the Code, and that a Participant
is a “specified employee” as defined in Section 409A(a)(2)(B)(i) of the Code and the regulations
and other guidance issued thereunder, then the exercise or distribution of such Award upon a
separation from service may not be made before the date which is six months after the date the
Participant separates from service with the Company or any of its Affiliates. Notwithstanding any
other provision contained herein, terms such as “termination of service,” “termination of
employment” and “termination of engagement” shall mean a “separation from service” within the
meaning of Section 409A of the Code, to the extent any exercise or distribution hereunder could
be deemed “nonqualified deferred compensation” for purposes thereof.
14.12    No Repricing.  Except in connection with a corporate transaction involving the Company
(including, without limitation, any stock dividend, stock split, extraordinary cash dividend,
recapitalization, reorganization, merger, consolidation, split-up, spin-off, combination, or
exchange of shares), the terms of outstanding Awards may not be amended to reduce the
exercise price of outstanding Options or Stock Appreciation Rights or cancel outstanding Options
or Stock Appreciation Rights in exchange for cash, other awards of Options or Stock
Appreciation Rights with an exercise price that is less than the exercise price of the original
Options or Stock Appreciation Rights, without stockholder approval.
14.13    Electronic Delivery. The Committee may, in its sole discretion, deliver any documents
related to an Award by electronic means. To participate in this Plan, a Participant consents to
receive all applicable documentation by electronic delivery and through an on-line (and/or voice
activated) system established and maintained by the Committee or a third party vendor
designated by the Committee.
14.14    Designation of Beneficiary. A Participant shall have the right to appoint any individual or
legal entity, in writing, on a form prescribed by and filed with the Administrator, as his beneficiary
to receive any Award (to the extent the Award allows for transfer upon death and the Award has
not been previously terminated or forfeited) upon the Participant’s death. Such designation may
be revoked by the Participant at any time and a new beneficiary may be appointed by the
Participant by execution and submission to the Administrator of a revised beneficiary designation
form. In order to be effective, a designation of beneficiary must be completed by the Participant
and received by the Administrator, or its designee, prior to the date of the Participant’s death. In
the absence of a designation, the Participant’s beneficiary shall be the legal representative of the
Participant’s estate.
14.15    Incapacity of Holder or Beneficiary. If any person holding an Award or otherwise entitled
to make an election or receive a distribution under this Plan is deemed by the Administrator to be
incapable of making an election hereunder or of personally receiving and giving a valid receipt
for a distribution hereunder, then, unless and until an election or claim therefore shall have been
made by a duly appointed guardian or other legal representative of such person, the
Administrator may provide for such election or distribution or any part thereof to be made by or to
any other person or institution then contributing toward or providing for the care and maintenance
of such person. Any such distribution shall be a distribution for the account of such person and a
complete discharge of any liability of the Administrator, the Company and this Plan therefore.
14.16    Changes in Law. The Board may amend this Plan and any outstanding Awards granted
thereunder in such respects as the Board shall, in its sole discretion, deem advisable in order to
incorporate in this Plan or any such Awards any
21
new provision or change designed to comply with or take advantage of requirements or
provisions of the Code or any other statute, or rules or regulations of the Internal Revenue
Service or any other federal or state governmental agency enacted or promulgated after the
adoption of this Plan.
15.    Effective Date of Plan.
This Plan shall become effective as of the Effective Date.
16.    Termination or Suspension of this Plan.
This Plan shall terminate automatically on the date one (1) day before the tenth (10th)
anniversary of the Original Effective Date. No Award shall be granted pursuant to this Plan after
such date, but Awards theretofore granted may extend beyond that date. The Board may
suspend or terminate this Plan at any earlier date pursuant to Section 13.1 hereof. No Awards
may be granted under this Plan while this Plan is suspended or after it is terminated. Unless the
Company determines to submit Section 7.2 and the definition of “Performance Goal” and
“Performance Criteria” to the Company’s stockholders at the first stockholder meeting that occurs
in the fifth (5th) year following the year in which this Plan was last approved by stockholders (or
any earlier meeting designated by the Board), in accordance with the requirements of
Section 162(m) of the Code, and such stockholder approval is obtained, then no further
Performance Compensation Awards shall be made to Covered Employees under Section 7.2
after the date of such annual meeting, but this Plan may continue in effect for Awards to
Participants not in accordance with Section 162(m) of the Code.
17.    Choice of Law.
The law of the State of Maryland shall govern all questions concerning the construction, validity
and interpretation of this Plan, without regard to such state’s conflict of law rules.
18.    Foreign Employees.
Without the amendment of this Plan, the Board may provide for the participation in this Plan by
employees who are subject to the laws of foreign countries or jurisdictions, and such participation
may be on such terms and conditions different from those specified in this Plan as may be
administratively necessary or necessary or desirable to foster and promote achievement of the
purposes of this Plan and, in furtherance of such purposes the Board or its designee may make
such modifications, amendments, procedures, subprograms and the like as may be necessary or
advisable to comply with the provisions of laws of other countries or jurisdictions in which
Affiliates operate or have employees.
22