
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>EX-31.2
<SEQUENCE>3
<FILENAME>ex31_2.txt
<DESCRIPTION>CERTIFICATION
<TEXT>
Exhibit 31.2
CERTIFICATION OF PERIODIC REPORT
I, Carlton Parfitt, Chief Financial Officer of Avalon Energy Corporation
Ltd. a Delaware Corporation (the "Company"), certify, pursuant to Section 302 of
the Sarbanes- Oxley Act of 2002, 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, that:
1.      I have reviewed this quarterly report on Form 10-QSB for the period
ended September 30, 2005 of Golden Spirit Gaming Ltd..;
2.      Based on my knowledge, this quarterly report does not contain any untrue
statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make
the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements
were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this annual
report;
3.      Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial
information included in this quarterly report, fairly present in all material
respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the
registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this quarterly report;
4.      The registrant's other certifying officers and I are responsible for
establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in
Exchange Act Rules 13a - 14 and 15d - 14) for the registrant and we have:
a.      designed such disclosure controls and procedures to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its
consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this quarterly report
is being prepared;
b.      evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure
controls and procedures as of a date within June 30, 2005 prior to the
filing date of this quarterly report (the "Evaluation Date"); and
c.      presented in this quarterly report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures based on our
evaluation as of the Evaluation Date;
5.      The registrant's other certifying officers and I have disclosed, based
on our most recent evaluation, to the registrant's auditors and the audit
committee of registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the
equivalent function):
a.      All significant deficiencies in the design or operation of
internal controls which could adversely affect the registrant's ability
to record, process, summarize and report financial data and have
identified for the registrant's auditors any material weaknesses in
internal controls; and
b.      Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or
other employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal
controls; and
6.      The registrant's other certifying officers and I have indicated in this
quarterly report whether or not there were significant changes in internal
controls or in other factors that could significantly affect internal controls
subsequent to the date of our most recent evaluation, including any corrective
actions with regard to significant deficiencies and material weaknesses.
Date: November 14, 2005
/s/ Carlton Parfitt
      --------------
    Carlton Parfitt
     Director and Chief Financial Officer
</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>