
EX-99.1 8 a2220803zex-99_1.htm EX-99.1
Use these links to rapidly review the document
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
Table of Contents
Exhibit 99.1
, 2014
Dear Occidental Petroleum Corporation Stockholder:
I am pleased to inform you that on                    , 2014, the board of directors of Occidental Petroleum Corporation ("Occidental") approved the spin-off of our California oil
and gas operations and related assets as a separate, publicly traded company, which we have named California Resources Corporation ("CRC"). We believe that this
separation of CRC to form a new, independent, publicly traded company is in the best interests of Occidental, its stockholders and CRC.
The spin-off will be completed by way of a pro rata distribution on                    , 2014 of at least 80.1% of CRC's outstanding common stock to Occidental stockholders of
record as of the close of business on                    , 2014, the spin-off record date. Each Occidental stockholder will receive            shares of CRC common stock for each
share of Occidental common stock held by such stockholder on the record date. The distribution of these shares will be made in book-entry form, which means that no physical
share certificates will be issued. Following the spin-off, stockholders may request that their shares of CRC common stock be transferred to a brokerage or other account at any
time. No fractional shares of CRC common stock will be issued. If you would otherwise have been entitled to a fractional common share in the distribution, you will receive the
net cash proceeds of the sale of such fractional share instead.
The spin-off is subject to certain customary conditions. Stockholder approval of the distribution is not required, nor are you required to take any action to receive your
shares of CRC common stock.
Immediately following the spin-off, you will own common stock in both Occidental and CRC. Occidental's common stock will continue to trade on the New York Stock
Exchange under the symbol "OXY." CRC's common stock is expected to be traded on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol "CRC."
Occidental is seeking a private letter ruling from the Internal Revenue Service to the effect that certain aspects of the transactions that will be undertaken in preparation
for, or in connection with, the spin-off will not cause the distribution to be taxable to Occidental or its affiliates. However, any cash that you receive in lieu of fractional shares
generally will be taxable to you. You should consult your own tax advisor as to the particular tax consequences of the distribution to you, including potential tax consequences
under state, local and non-U.S. tax laws. The spin-off is also subject to other conditions, as described in the enclosed information statement.
The enclosed information statement, which is being mailed to all Occidental stockholders, describes the spin-off in detail and contains important information about CRC,
including its combined financial statements. We urge you to read this information statement carefully.
I want to thank you for your continued support of Occidental. We look forward to your support of CRC in the future.
Yours sincerely,
Stephen I. Chazen
President and Chief Executive Officer
Occidental Petroleum Corporation
Table of Contents
, 2014
Dear California Resources Corporation Stockholder:
It is our pleasure to welcome you as a stockholder of our company, California Resources Corporation. We are an independent oil and natural gas exploration and
production company focused on high-growth, high-return conventional and unconventional assets exclusively in California. We are the largest producer in California on a gross-
operated basis and believe we have established the largest privately-held mineral acreage position in the state.
As an independent, publicly-traded company, we believe we can more effectively focus on our objectives and satisfy the capital needs of our company, and thus bring
more value to you as a stockholder.
Our common stock is expected to be listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the ticker symbol "CRC" in connection with the distribution of our common stock by
Occidental Petroleum Corporation.
We invite you to learn more about California Resources Corporation by reviewing the enclosed information statement. We look forward to our future as an independent,
publicly-traded company and to your support as a holder of our common stock.
Very truly yours,
Todd A. Stevens
President and Chief Executive Officer
California Resources Corporation
"Energy for California by Californians"
Table of Contents
Information contained herein is subject to completion or amendment. A Registration Statement on Form 10 relating to these securities has been filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
PRELIMINARY INFORMATION STATEMENT
(Subject to Completion, Dated August 20, 2014)
INFORMATION STATEMENT
California Resources Corporation
Common Stock
(par value $0.01 per share)
This information statement is being sent to you in connection with the separation of California Resources Corporation ("CRC") from Occidental Petroleum Corporation
("Occidental"), following which CRC will be an independent, publicly traded company. As part of the separation, Occidental will distribute at least 80.1% of the outstanding
shares of CRC common stock on a pro rata basis to the holders of Occidental's common stock. We refer to this pro rata distribution as the "distribution" and we refer to the
separation, including the restructuring transactions (which will precede the separation) and the distribution, as the "spin-off." We expect that the spin-off will be tax-free to
Occidental stockholders for U.S. federal income tax purposes, except to the extent of cash received in lieu of fractional shares. Each Occidental stockholder will
receive                        shares of CRC common stock for each share of Occidental common stock held by such stockholder as of the close of business on                        ,
2014, the record date for the distribution. The distribution of shares will be made in book-entry form. Occidental will not distribute any fractional shares of CRC common stock.
Instead, the distribution agent will aggregate fractional shares into whole shares, sell the whole shares in the open market at prevailing market prices and distribute the
aggregate net cash proceeds from the sales pro rata to each holder who would otherwise have been entitled to receive a fractional share in the spin-off. See "The Spin-Off—
Treatment of Fractional Shares." As discussed under "The Spin-Off—Trading Prior to the Distribution Date," if you sell your Occidental common stock in the "regular-way"
market after the record date and before the distribution date, you also will be selling your right to receive shares of CRC common stock in connection with the spin-off. If you
sell your Occidental common stock in the "ex-distribution" market after the record date and before the distribution date, you will still receive shares of our common stock in the
spin-off. The distribution will be effective as of 11:59 p.m., Eastern Time, on                        , 2014. Immediately after the distribution becomes effective, CRC will be an
independent, publicly traded company.
No vote or further action of Occidental stockholders is required in connection with the spin-off. We are not asking you for a proxy. Occidental stockholders will
not be required to pay any consideration for the shares of CRC common stock they receive in the spin-off, and they will not be required to surrender or exchange shares of their
Occidental common stock or take any other action in connection with the spin-off.
All of the outstanding shares of CRC common stock are currently owned by Occidental. Accordingly, there currently is no public trading market for CRC common stock.
We expect, however, that a limited trading market for CRC common stock, commonly known as a "when-issued" trading market, will develop on or shortly before the record
date for the distribution, and we expect "regular-way" trading of CRC common stock will begin the first trading day after the distribution date. We intend to apply to list CRC
common stock on the New York Stock Exchange under the ticker symbol "CRC."
In reviewing this information statement, you should carefully consider the matters described under the caption "Risk Factors"
beginning on page 28 of this information statement.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved or disapproved these securities or determined if this
information statement is truthful or complete. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
This information statement is not an offer to sell, or a solicitation of an offer to buy, any securities.
The date of this information statement is                        , 2014.
This information statement was first mailed to Occidental stockholders on or about                    , 2014.
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY
RISK FACTORS
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
THE SPIN-OFF
TRADING MARKET
DIVIDEND POLICY
CAPITALIZATION
SELECTED HISTORICAL COMBINED FINANCIAL DATA
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA COMBINED FINANCIAL DATA
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
BUSINESS
MANAGEMENT
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT
ARRANGEMENTS BETWEEN OCCIDENTAL AND OUR COMPANY
OTHER RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
DESCRIPTION OF MATERIAL INDEBTEDNESS
DESCRIPTION OF CAPITAL STOCK
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
Page  
1 
 
28 
 
44 
 
46 
 
57 
 
59 
 
 
59 
60 
 
61 
 
67 
 
 
82 
  121 
  125 
  156 
  157 
  163 
  164 
  165 
  170 
  171 
  F-1
This information statement is being furnished solely to provide information to Occidental stockholders who will receive shares of CRC common stock in
connection with the spin-off. It is not provided as an inducement or encouragement to buy or sell any securities. You should not assume that the information
contained in this information statement is accurate as of any date other than the date set forth on the cover. Changes to the information contained in this
information statement may occur after that date, and we undertake no obligation to update the information contained in this information statement, unless we are
required by applicable securities laws to do so.
Table of Contents
i
SUMMARY
This summary highlights information contained in this information statement and provides an overview of our company, our separation from Occidental and the distribution
of our common stock by Occidental to its stockholders. You should read this entire information statement carefully, including the risks discussed under "Risk Factors," our
audited and unaudited historical combined financial statements and the notes thereto and our unaudited pro forma combined financial statements and the notes thereto included
elsewhere in this information statement. Some of the statements in this summary constitute forward-looking statements. See "Forward-Looking Statements."
Except when the context otherwise requires or where otherwise indicated, (1) all references to "CRC," the "Company," "we," "us" and "our" refer to California Resources
Corporation and its subsidiaries or, as the context requires, the California business, (2) all references to the "California business" refer to Occidental's California oil and gas
exploration and production operations and related assets, liabilities and obligations, which we will assume in connection with the spin-off and (3) all references to "Occidental"
refer to Occidental Petroleum Corporation, our parent company, and its subsidiaries, other than us. Except as otherwise indicated or unless the context otherwise requires, the
information included in this information statement assumes the completion of certain internal restructuring transactions and the spin-off and distribution described below. Except
as otherwise indicated or unless the context otherwise requires, references in this information statement to drilling locations are to "gross" drilling locations and exclude our
prospective resource drilling locations.
Overview
California Resources Corporation will, following its spin-off from Occidental, be an independent oil and natural gas exploration and production company focused on high-
growth, high-return conventional and unconventional assets exclusively in California. California is one of the most prolific oil and natural gas producing regions in the world and
is the third largest oil producing state in the nation. It has five of the 12 largest fields in the lower 48 states based on estimated proved reserves as of 2009, and our portfolio
includes interests in four of these fields. We are the largest producer in California on a gross operated basis and we believe we have established the largest privately-held
mineral acreage position in the state, consisting of approximately 2.3 million net acres spanning the state's four major oil and gas basins. We have developed a sizable
inventory of over 17,500 identified drilling locations and, as an independent company, we intend to exploit our significant portfolio of conventional and unconventional
opportunities to generate double-digit production growth over the longer-term. We produced approximately 154,000 Boe/d net in 2013 and, as of December 31, 2013, we had
proved reserves of 744 MMBoe, with approximately 69% proved developed and 72% proved oil reserves and an aggregate PV-10 value of $14.0 billion. For an explanation of
the non-GAAP financial measure PV-10 and a reconciliation of PV-10 to Standardized Measure, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, see "—Summary
Combined Historical Operating and Reserve Data—Non-GAAP Financial Measure and Reconciliations."
California oil and gas development began in 1876, and oil-in-place estimates have generally increased throughout the ensuing decades, with over 29 billion Bbls of oil and
40 Tcf of natural gas produced and over 53,000 currently active producing wells as of December 31, 2013 (according to California's Division of Oil, Gas & Geothermal
Resources ("DOGGR")). We began our operations in California in the 1950s and have accumulated extensive, proprietary knowledge and experience in developing this world-
class resource base. Over the past decade, we have also built an exceptional 3D seismic library, which covers over 4,250 square miles, representing approximately 90% of the
3D seismic data available for California, and we have developed unique and proprietary stratigraphic and structural models of the subsurface geology and hydrocarbon potential
in each of the four basins in which we operate. As a result of our long, successful operating history, our extensive exploration programs, our exceptional 3D seismic library and
proprietary subsurface geologic models, we have tested and successfully implemented in recent years various exploration, drilling, completion and enhanced recovery
technologies to enhance and increase recoveries, growth and returns from our portfolio.
Table of Contents
1
We believe that over the last several decades the oil and gas industry has focused significantly less effort on utilizing modern development and exploration processes and
technologies in California relative to other prolific U.S. basins. We believe this is largely due to other oil companies' limited capital spending in California, focus on shallow zone
thermal projects or investments in other assets within their global portfolios. As an independent company focused exclusively on California, we expect to drive strong
production growth through increased application of modern technologies and increased capital spending on development of the significant potential in our portfolio.
Our large acreage position contains numerous growth opportunities due to its varied geologic characteristics and multiple stacked pay reservoirs that, in most cases, are
thousands of feet thick. We have a significant portfolio of unconventional growth opportunities, with approximately 4,500 identified drilling locations targeting unconventional
reservoirs primarily in the San Joaquin basin. Over the last few years, we have increased our production by exploiting seven discrete stacked pay horizons within the Monterey
formation, primarily within the upper Monterey. We continue to drill unconventional wells within these intervals and are also applying the knowledge acquired from these
successes to the Kreyenhagen and Moreno shales, which we believe offer significant development opportunities as well. We also intend to pursue development opportunities in
the lower Monterey shale, which contains a variety of reservoir lithologies and is the principal hydrocarbon source rock within the overall Monterey formation. The lower
Monterey has a more limited production history than the upper Monterey, and therefore limited knowledge exists regarding its potential. However, we believe it will be productive
over time. Over the last five years, we have drilled and completed over 570 development wells in unconventional reservoirs, primarily in the upper Monterey formation, with a
nearly 100% commercial success rate.
We also have a large portfolio of lower-risk, high-growth conventional opportunities in each of California's four major oil and gas basins with approximately 71% of our
proved reserves associated with conventional opportunities. We have a proven track record of successful exploration and development using primary, waterflood and
steamflood recovery methods. In 2014, we anticipate that 75% of our capital expenditures will target conventional development, primarily low-risk waterflood and steamflood
projects that we expect to generate significant near-term production and cash flow growth. For example, our Lost Hills and Kern Front steamflood projects and our Huntington
field waterflood project are expected to deliver combined production growth of over 35% compounded annually through 2016 from their combined 2013 production of
15,000 Boe/d.
The following table summarizes certain information concerning our acreage and drilling activities (as of December 31, 2013, unless otherwise stated):
San Joaquin basin(4)
Los Angeles basin(5)
Ventura basin
Sacramento basin
Total
(1)
(2)
Acreage
(in millions)
Gross   Net
Producing
Wells,
gross
Average
Working
Interest
(%)
Gross
Gross
Acreage
Held in
Fee (%)
1.8 
<0.1 
0.3 
0.6
1.5 
  <0.1 
0.3 
 
0.5
2.7
2.3
59%  
73%  
77%  
36%
56%
5,764 
1,382 
780 
729
8,655
90%  
95%  
98%  
100%
92%
Our total identified drilling locations include 2,141 gross (2,024 net) locations associated with proved undeveloped reserves as of December 31, 2013 and 2,344 gross (2,251 net) injector well locations associated
with our waterflood and steamflood projects. Our total identified drilling locations excludes 6,400 gross (5,300 net) prospective resource drilling locations. Please see "Business—Our Reserves and Production
Information—Determination of Identified Drilling Locations" for more information regarding the processes and criteria through which we identified our drilling locations. Of our total identified drilling locations, we
believe approximately 75% are attributable to acreage owned or held by production.
Includes 207 injection wells expected to be drilled in connection with our waterflood and steamflood projects.
2
Table of Contents
(3)
(4)
(5)
Includes drilling and completion expenditures of $173 million associated with injection wells. Our 2014 capital budget of $2.1 billion also includes spending on support equipment, facilities, workovers and
exploration.
Excluding Elk Hills, our average working interest in the San Joaquin basin is 97%.
We currently hold approximately 27,173 gross (20,817 net) acres in the Los Angeles basin. Our Los Angeles basin operations are concentrated with pad drilling.
We currently have 26 drilling rigs employed in California with 17 drilling in the San Joaquin basin, 8 in the Los Angeles basin, and 1 rig in the Ventura basin. During the
first half of the year, we drilled over 700 gross development wells with roughly 583 in San Joaquin basin, 114 in the Los Angeles basin, 11 in Ventura basin and 3 in
Sacramento basin. We expect our pace of drilling to improve slightly in the second half of the year as we receive additional permits and will add an additional rig in the San
Joaquin basin during the 3rd quarter.
In 2013, oil represented 58% of our net production. We expect the percentage of oil production to continue to increase over time and favorably impact our overall margins
as we anticipate directing virtually all of our capital expenditures towards oil-weighted opportunities in 2014 and beyond to the extent the current oil to gas price relationship
continues. Approximately 42% of our 2013 production was generated from our growth-oriented fields through a combination of unconventional and conventional primary,
waterflood and steamflood projects with attractive returns. The remaining 58% was generated by our world-class Elk Hills and Wilmington fields, each of which is ranked in the
top 20 onshore fields in the lower 48 states based on 2009 proved reserves. Over the last three years, we grew our total production 6% on a compound annual basis, from 138
MBoe/d in 2011 to 154 MBoe/d in 2013, while the proportionate share of liquids production grew from 69% to 71%. We intend to accelerate our production growth by
significantly increasing our capital investments and focusing on higher-growth opportunities in our extensive drilling inventory. Our 2014 capital budget of $2.1 billion represents
an increase of approximately 26% over the $1.7 billion we spent in 2013. After the spin-off, we intend to reinvest substantially all of our operating cash flow in our capital
program for the foreseeable future as we will no longer be required to distribute cash to Occidental. We expect to increase our production by 6-9% on a compound annual basis
in 2015 and 2016 with a 15% compound annual increase in our oil production for the same period. Over 90% of our expected production for this period is from currently
producing fields where we have existing or permitted capacity in our production facilities.
As we develop our sizable inventory of over 17,500 identified drilling locations, the majority of which are vertical drilling locations with thousands of feet of stacked pay,
and utilize horizontal drilling techniques, we expect that our inventory of drilling locations will increase. As a result, we believe our total annual production growth will increase to
over 10% after 2016, as we continue to reinvest our cash flow from operations in our capital program and accelerate our unconventional development program.
The table below summarizes our proved reserves as of December 31, 2013 and production for the six months ended June 30, 2014 in each of California's four major oil
and gas basins.
San Joaquin basin
Los Angeles basin
Ventura basin
Sacramento basin
Total operations
(1)
Calculated as total proved reserves as of December 31, 2013 divided by annualized Average Net Daily Production for the six months ended June 30, 2014.
Table of Contents
Portfolio Management and 2014 Capital Budget
3
Oil
(MMBbl)
331
156
532
We develop our capital programs by prioritizing rates of return and balancing the short- and long-term growth potential of each of our assets. The diversity of our portfolio
allows us to generate attractive investment opportunities in a variety of operating and commodity price environments. We regularly monitor internal performance and external
factors and adjust our capital program with the objective of achieving the highest total returns on our portfolio of drilling opportunities.
We have a 2014 capital expenditure budget of $2.1 billion for projects targeting investments in the San Joaquin, Los Angeles and Ventura basins, as compared to
$1.7 billion in 2013. Virtually all of our 2014 capital budget is being directed towards oil-weighted production consistent with 2013. Of the total 2014 capital budget,
approximately $1.4 billion is allocated to well drilling and completions, $200 million to workovers, $180 million to surface support equipment to handle higher production,
$100 million to additional steam generation capacity expansion, $95 million to exploration and the rest to maintenance capital, HES projects and other items. As a result of
recent investments in infrastructure, we do not anticipate any substantial spending on new infrastructure during the next several years. We believe the absence of such
significant expenditures should support strong cash flows. The table below sets forth the expected allocation of our 2014 capital expenditure budget as compared to the
allocation of our 2013 capital expenditures and actual 2014 capital expenditures through June 30, 2014.
Conventional:
Primary recovery
Waterfloods
Steamfloods
Total conventional
2014 Capital
Expenditures
through
Total
2014 Capital
Expenditure
June 30, 2014
Budget
(in millions)
2013 Capital
Expenditures
$
157  $
 
298 
219
342  $
 
787 
343
266 
480 
375
674
1,472
1,121
Total conventional
Unconventional
Exploration
Total
$
272 
57
543 
95
1,003  $
2,110  $
457 
91
1,669
Assuming current market conditions and a drilling success rate comparable to our historical performance, we believe we will be able to fund our entire 2014 capital
program with our cash flow from operations. We have a significant inventory of high-quality drilling locations to support higher spending. We expect our 2015 capital budget to
increase further from 2014 levels to a range of $2.3 billion to $2.5 billion as we reinvest substantially all of our increased cash flow in our capital program.
Our Business Strategy
We plan to maximize shareholder returns by accelerating production growth profitably through the development of our high-growth unconventional assets and low-risk
conventional assets. The principal elements of our business strategy include the following:
•
Accelerate development of high-growth unconventional drilling opportunities.  Over the longer term, we expect substantial production growth to come from
unconventional reservoirs such as tight sandstones and shales. We hold mineral interests in approximately 1.1 million net acres with unconventional potential and
have identified 4,682 drilling locations on this acreage. As a result of our increased focus on these reservoirs over the past few years, more than one third of our
production now comes from unconventional assets, an increase of approximately 160% since the acquisition of our Elk Hills field properties in 1998. As of
December 31, 2013, we had proved reserves of 217 MMBoe associated with our unconventional properties, of which approximately 30% was proved undeveloped.
We have been building a growing technical understanding of these
Table of Contents
4
reservoirs through our successful development of portions of our acreage. For example, we have developed seven discrete, productive intervals within the
Monterey formation, primarily within the upper Monterey, with a nearly 100% commercial success rate on our development wells. We are now applying the
knowledge acquired from these successes to operations in other unconventional reservoirs, such as the Kreyenhagen and Moreno shale formations, which we
believe offer significant development opportunities due to similar reservoir characteristics with multiple potentially productive zones in each well bore.
Drive significant production growth from high-return, low-risk conventional assets.  In the near term, we intend to increase our capital spending and
generate significant production and cash flow growth from proven IOR methods, such as waterflooding, and EOR methods, such as steamflooding. The oil and
gas industry has observed that primary recovery methods typically produce less than 10% of the oil volume initially in place and that subsequent waterfloods and
steamfloods typically increase recovery to a range of 20% to 60%. Our Lost Hills and Kern Front steamflood projects and our Huntington field waterflood project
are expected to deliver combined production growth of over 35% compounded annually through 2016 and together account for approximately 60% of our projected
6-9% annual production growth through 2016. We believe these projects are substantially derisked as they are currently producing and we have existing or
permitted capacity in our production facilities sufficient to develop these projects through 2016. We have significant additional low-risk conventional opportunities
like these with over 13,009 identified drilling locations, 52% of which are associated with IOR and EOR projects. The remaining 48% are associated with primary
recovery methods, many of which we expect will develop into IOR and EOR projects in the future.
Aggressively apply modern technologies to enhance production growth.  We believe that over the last several decades the oil and gas industry has focused
significantly less effort on utilizing modern development and exploration processes and technologies in California relative to other prolific U.S. basins. We believe
this is largely due to other oil companies' limited capital spending in California, focus on shallow zone thermal projects or investments in other assets within their
global portfolios. As an independent company focused exclusively on California, we intend to make significant use of modern technologies in drilling and
completing wells, which we expect will substantially increase both our cost-efficiency and production growth over time. We are well positioned to execute on this
strategy as we have developed an extensive 3D seismic library, which covers over 4,250 square miles, representing approximately 90% of the 3D seismic data
available for California, and have tested and successfully implemented various exploration, drilling, completion and IOR and EOR technologies in the state. As a
result of our long, successful operating history, our geographically broad exploration drilling programs and exceptional 3D seismic library, we believe we have
developed a leading understanding of the geology, petroleum systems and hydrocarbon potential in the basins in which we operate. Our unique and proprietary
stratigraphic and structural models of the subsurface geology allow us to recognize new development and exploration areas in each of our basins, and identify the
applicable modern drilling and completion technologies needed to enhance recoveries and returns. For example, we recently applied rigorous seismic,
stratigraphic and reservoir analyses to discover unconventional resources in a new field in the Monterey zone in the San Joaquin basin. This area was previously
tested from the 1940s to the 1970s with six wells drilled by major oil companies, but hydrocarbon resources were not recognized until our 2012 discovery,
following our seismic evaluation and application of our unique and proprietary subsurface models. We have already increased production five-fold to over 1,400
Bbls/d from first quarter production in 2012 and have identified an additional 150 drilling locations in the field.
Generate strong cash flows through a focus on high-margin crude oil in order to internally fund our capital budget. We intend to focus on increasing
cost-efficiency and developing profitable opportunities in our portfolio in order to achieve self-funded growth in any foreseeable market or regulatory environment.
We intend to reinvest substantially all of our operating cash flow in our capital
•
•
•
Table of Contents
5
program for the foreseeable future as we will no longer be required to distribute cash to Occidental. In 2013, we generated cash flow from operations of
approximately $763 million after capital spending of approximately $1.7 billion. We believe we will continue to generate a substantial amount of free cash flow in
2014 after planned capital spending of $2.1 billion. Almost all our 2014 capital budget will be focused on oil producing projects and we expect this emphasis to
continue in a high oil price environment. As of December 31, 2013, crude oil represented 72% and 58%, respectively, of our total reserves and production, which
positions us well to grow our oil production. In addition, we believe we have significant potential upside in a more favorable natural gas price environment,
•
•
particularly with respect to our Sacramento basin acreage, where we have identified 1,008 gross (864 net) drilling locations as of December 31, 2013. Given our
large acreage position and drilling inventory across both oil and natural gas opportunities, we expect to generate strong production and cash flow growth in
different commodity price environments.
Proactive and collaborative approach to safety, environmental protection and community relations. We are committed to developing our assets in a
manner that safeguards people and protects the environment. We seek to proactively engage with regulatory agencies, communities, other stakeholders and our
workforce to pursue mutually beneficial outcomes. To further implement this strategy and commitment, we have recently appointed a senior manager whose
primary duty is to collaborate with the regulatory agencies and other stakeholders to address their concerns and obtain required approvals in a timely fashion. One
recent example of our proactive approach is our development of a regional water mapping tool based on existing public data from the San Joaquin Valley, which
we have shared with state and local agencies. Our multidisciplinary team worked with regulatory agencies to integrate those data sets with computer modeling
and field validation, which allowed us to obtain new well stimulation permits for a key operating area at Elk Hills. This strategy also applies directly to our
protection of the environments in which we operate. For example, we actively promote biodiversity, having set aside approximately 8,000 acres of certified habitat
conservation areas at our Elk Hills and Long Beach field operations. To reduce our use of fresh water, we employ water recycling and treatment extensively in our
operations, such as our use of reclaimed municipal wastewater in Long Beach for pressure maintenance and waterflooding.
As a result of these water management projects, our oil and gas operations supply more fresh water than we use, providing the surplus to agriculture. We believe
our commitment to safety and the environment and our proactive and collaborative approach benefit both the company and our stakeholders and enhance our
ability to obtain required approvals for our development and exploration projects.
Significantly increase our successful exploration program.  We intend to significantly increase our investment in exploration over the next several years,
focusing on both unconventional and conventional opportunities, primarily in areas that we believe can be quickly developed, such as those adjacent to our
existing properties. In addition, we plan to explore and test new unconventional resource areas, which, if successful, could result in significant longer-term
production growth. We believe our exceptional 3D seismic library, which covers over 4,250 square miles, or 2.7 million acres, including 47% of our current
acreage, and our experience in drilling deep wells, provide us a significant competitive advantage in our exploration program. Our technical staff has analyzed this
extensive 3D seismic data along with modern well-log data, and mapped multiple exploration plays and drilling prospects across our key basins. From 2007 to
2013, we drilled more than 100 exploration wells targeting both conventional and unconventional reservoirs and substantially all of these wells encountered strong
indications of hydrocarbons. Our two most significant exploration discoveries over the past five years were the result of employing our unique and proprietary
stratigraphic and structural models of the subsurface geology, proprietary 3D seismic data and understanding of the petroleum systems and hydrocarbon
potential. They now together contribute approximately 18,000 Boe/d to our production. Our current drilling inventory includes 7,237 gross (5,117 net) exploration
drilling locations that are located in
Table of Contents
6
proven formations, the majority of which are located near existing producing fields. Additionally, we have identified 6,400 gross (5,300 net) prospective resource
drilling locations in the lower Monterey, Kreyenhagen, and Moreno resource plays. We expect that these exploration drilling locations, together with additional
prospects within our current large acreage holdings, will drive significant growth in our successful exploration program for many years.
Our Competitive Strengths
We believe we are well-positioned to successfully execute our business strategies because of the following competitive strengths:
•
•
•
Largest acreage position in a world-class oil province.  California is one of the most prolific oil and natural gas producing regions in the world and is the third
largest oil producing state in the nation. It has five of the top 12 largest fields in the lower 48 states based on estimated proved reserves as of 2009, and our
portfolio includes interests in four of these fields. We believe we are the largest private oil and natural gas mineral acreage holder in California, with interests in
approximately 2.3 million net acres that contain attractive conventional and unconventional drilling opportunities using primary, IOR and EOR methods. Our large
and diverse acreage position, approximately 60% of which we hold in fee, allows us to prioritize projects by value and risk to achieve strong returns and maintain
strong reserve replacement and production growth rather than drill simply to hold leases. A significant percentage of our opportunities are oil-weighted, with
approximately 90% of our identified drilling locations associated with oil production. For the year ended December 31, 2013, we were the largest producer in the
state on a combined gross operated basis with approximately 188,000 Boe/d of production, 59% of which was oil. As of December 31, 2013, we had total
combined reserves of over 744 MMBoe, of which approximately 72% was oil and 81% was liquids.
Significant growth potential from opportunity-rich drilling portfolio.  Our drilling inventory at December 31, 2013 consisted of 17,691 identified well locations,
including 4,682 gross (4,264 net) unconventional drilling locations and 13,009 gross (10,921 net) conventional drilling locations. We believe we can achieve
significant production growth through the development of unconventional reservoirs. Over the last five years, we have drilled and completed over 570
unconventional development wells, primarily in the upper Monterey formation, with an almost 100% commercial success rate. Our successful unconventional
drilling program has demonstrated the productive potential of seven stacked pay zones within the Monterey formation, primarily within the upper Monterey, and we
believe that these successes are repeatable in other formations such as the Kreyenhagen formation, which has similar geologic attributes. We also have a large
inventory of conventional development opportunities that will provide low-risk, near-term production growth with attractive returns. We believe that a significant
portion of our production growth over the next two to three years will be driven by IOR and EOR projects, many of which are already being implemented. Over
90% of our expected 6-9% production growth through 2016 is expected to come from currently producing fields. As we develop our sizable inventory of drilling
locations, the majority of which are vertical drilling locations with thousands of feet of stacked pay, and utilize horizontal drilling techniques, we expect that we will
achieve double-digit production growth over the longer term.
Unique ability to drive high returns and growth in different commodity price environments.  Our current drilling inventory comprises a diversified portfolio of
oil and natural gas locations, which allows us to target drilling projects that are the most economically compelling depending on the prevailing commodity price
outlook. Approximately 90% of our drilling inventory is associated with oil-rich projects, primarily located in the San Joaquin, Los Angeles and Ventura basins, and
the remaining inventory is associated with natural gas properties in the Sacramento, San Joaquin and Ventura basins. We have operating control over 97% of our
properties, enabling us to determine all aspects of our development program, including the selection of specific drilling locations, the timing of the
Table of Contents
7
development and the drilling and completion techniques used. Our retention of operating control coupled with our diversified portfolio provides us with the flexibility
to invest our capital in the highest return projects and control operating costs to drive strong production and cash flow growth in different commodity price
•
•
environments as well as to adapt to any changes in regulatory and market conditions. Approximately 26% of our production for the six months ended June 30,
2014 was natural gas. If conditions change and gas prices become more favorable, we believe that we have the ability to significantly increase our gas production
within a few years through accelerated capital investment in gas projects currently in our portfolio. In addition to our drilling opportunities, we have made
significant investments in infrastructure, including our state-of-the-art Elk Hills cryogenic gas plant and our 550 megawatt Elk Hills power plant, which increase our
operational flexibility and ability to maximize returns in any commodity price environment.
Strong free cash flow and premium margins driven by deficit California energy market.  We sell almost all of our crude oil into the California refining
markets at prices we believe are among the most favorable in the United States. California, the largest state economy in the United States, imports approximately
62% of its oil and approximately 90% of its natural gas. Oil is imported via rail or supertanker. As a result, California refiners have typically purchased crude oil at
international waterborne-based prices that exceed WTI-based prices for comparable grades. Our 2013 realized price averaged across all grades of crude oil
reflected a 6% premium to WTI index prices. We believe that the limited crude transportation infrastructure from other parts of the country to California will allow
us to continue to realize strong cash margins. In addition, we own the fee minerals on approximately 60% of our acreage position. The returns on developed
mineral fee acreage are greatly enhanced because we do not pay royalties and other lease payments. We expect the resulting substantial operating cash flow to
fund our growth while allowing us to maintain ample liquidity.
Proven management and technical teams with extensive experience operating in California.  Our experienced management team and technical staff have a
proven track record of applying the leading technologies and operating methods to develop our assets. The members of our management and technical teams
have an average of over            years' experience in the oil and natural gas industry, with an average of            years focused on California oil and gas
operations. We believe this focused experience gives us an inherent competitive advantage. As a result of our long operating history in the state, our team of
geoscientists and engineers has developed a growing understanding of the geology and can quickly identify and apply suitable recovery methods, as well as
drilling, completion and other relevant technologies, to increase production and reserves. For example, our technical team has extensive experience developing
unconventional opportunities and growing large, world-class fields, such as Elk Hills and Wilmington. Our cumulative production and year end proven reserves
from these fields are twice the proved reserves originally purchased and we continue to find additional reserves in these fields. In addition, production from
unconventional reservoirs within these fields accounted for over 50% of our 2013 daily combined production for these fields. We are applying the expertise gained
through re-developing Elk Hills and Wilmington to many of the other fields we operate. In addition, we believe that our team has established a favorable reputation
among regulators and other stakeholders for our commitment to safety and demonstrated sensitivity to the environment. We believe that our favorable record and
reputation with communities and regulators sustains our operations, and gives us an important advantage when we seek to acquire and develop opportunities
throughout California.
Other Information
We were incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware on April 23, 2014. Our principal executive offices are located at                                    . Our telephone
number is                            . Our website address is www.                        .com. Information contained on our website is not incorporated by reference into this information
statement or the registration statement on Form 10 of which this
Table of Contents
8
information statement is a part, and you should not consider information on our website as part of this information statement or such registration statement on Form 10.
The Spin-Off
On February 14, 2014, Occidental announced that its board of directors had authorized management to pursue the spin-off of the California business into a standalone,
publicly traded company. Immediately following the distribution, Occidental stockholders as of the record date will own at least 80.1% of the outstanding shares of our common
stock.
Before our separation from Occidental, we and Occidental will enter into a Separation and Distribution Agreement and several other agreements to effect the spin-off.
These agreements will provide for the allocation between us and Occidental of Occidental's assets, liabilities and obligations, and we will generally be allocated those assets,
liabilities and obligations relating to the California business. These agreements will also govern certain interactions between us and Occidental after the separation (including
with respect to employee matters, tax matters and intellectual property matters). We and Occidental will also enter into a Transition Services Agreement which will provide for,
among other matters, assistance to us or Occidental as needed. For more information regarding these agreements, see "Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company"
and the historical and pro forma financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this information statement. The terms of these agreements may be more or
less favorable to us than if they had been negotiated with unaffiliated third parties. See "Risk Factors—Risks Related to the Spin-Off." Our entry into the Separation and
Distribution Agreement and the several ancillary agreements, our amendment and restatement of our certificate of incorporation and bylaws and other related transactions are
collectively referred to as our "restructuring transactions" throughout this information statement.
The spin-off is expected to provide each company with a number of material opportunities and benefits, including the following:
creating two independent businesses that will be competitive industry leaders in their respective areas of operations;
allowing each business to pursue strategies tailored to its needs, including enabling CRC to reinvest substantially all of its cash flow in growing its business;
focusing each management team on the development and execution of its business in its areas of operation;
enabling each business to focus on and accelerate its technical expertise in specific reservoirs and fields; and
•
•
•
•
•
enhancing each company's market recognition with investors because of its status as an industry leader in its geographic areas of focus.
The distribution of our common stock as described in this information statement is subject to the satisfaction or waiver, in the sole discretion of Occidental, of certain
conditions. In addition, Occidental has the right not to complete the spin-off if, at any time prior to the distribution, the board of directors of Occidental determines, in its sole
discretion, that the spin-off is not in the best interests of Occidental or its stockholders or market conditions do not warrant completing the separation at that time. See "The
Spin-Off—Conditions to the Spin-Off."
Questions and Answers About the Spin-Off
The following provides answers only to certain key questions we expect you may have regarding the spin-off. For a more detailed description of the terms of the spin-off,
see "The Spin-Off."
Table of Contents
9
What is the spin-off?
In this information statement, when we refer to the "spin-off," we are referring to the separation of Occidental's California business from the remaining business of
Occidental through a series of transactions, including the restructuring transactions, that will result in the California business being owned by us, and Occidental's pro
rata distribution of at least 80.1% of our outstanding shares to its stockholders. Following the spin-off, we will be a separate and independent company from Occidental.
The number of shares of Occidental common stock you own will not change as a result of the spin-off. Your proportionate direct interest in CRC, however, will be lower
than your proportionate direct interest in Occidental, due to the fact that Occidental will continue to hold up to 19.9% of our outstanding shares (the "Retained
Securities") for up to 18 months following the spin-off.
What will I receive in the spin-off?
As a holder of Occidental stock, you will retain your Occidental shares and will receive            shares of our common stock for each share of Occidental common stock
you hold as of the record date. Your proportionate interest in Occidental will not change as a result of the spin-off.
What is CRC?
CRC is currently a wholly-owned subsidiary of Occidental whose shares will be distributed to Occidental stockholders if the spin-off is completed. After the spin-off is
completed, CRC will be an independent publicly traded company and will own and operate the California business.
When is the record date for the distribution, and when will the distribution occur?
The record date for determining Occidental stockholders entitled to receive our shares in the distribution will be the close of business of the New York Stock Exchange
(the "NYSE") on                , 2014. The distribution will occur on                , 2014.
What are the reasons for and benefits of separating us from Occidental?
Our separation from Occidental and the distribution of our common stock will provide you with equity investments in two separate companies that are intended to be
more focused and competitive industry leaders. The spin-off will enable each company to pursue strategies tailored to the respective needs of their businesses. For a
more detailed discussion of the reasons for and benefits of the spin-off, see "The Spin-Off—Reasons for the Spin-Off."
What are the risks associated with the spin-off?
There are a number of risks associated with the spin-off and resultant ownership of our common stock. These risks are discussed under "Risk Factors" beginning on
page 28.
Why is the separation of CRC structured as a spin-off as opposed to a sale?
Occidental believes that a tax-free distribution of our common stock is an efficient way to separate us from Occidental in a manner that will improve flexibility, benefit
both Occidental and CRC and create long-term value for stockholders of both Occidental and CRC.
What is being distributed in the spin-off?
Approximately            shares of our common stock will be distributed in the spin-off, based on the number of shares of Occidental common stock expected to be
outstanding as of the record date of                        , 2014. The actual number of shares of our common stock to be distributed will be calculated on            , 2014, the
record date. The shares of our common stock to be distributed by Occidental will constitute at least 80.1% of the issued and outstanding shares of our common stock
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
10
Table of Contents
immediately prior to the distribution. For more information on the shares being distributed in the spin-off, see "Description of Capital Stock—Common Stock."
What will the relationship be between Occidental and CRC after the spin-off?
Q:
A:
Following the spin-off, CRC will be an independent, publicly traded company and Occidental will hold the Retained Securities for a maximum of 18 months. In connection
with the spin-off, we will enter into a Separation and Distribution Agreement and several other agreements with Occidental for the purpose of allocating between us and
Occidental various assets, liabilities and obligations relating to the California business. These agreements will also provide arrangements for employee matters, tax
matters and some other liabilities and obligations attributable to periods before and, in some cases, after the spin-off. These agreements will also include arrangements
with respect to transition services. We will also have an Area of Mutual Interest Agreement with Occidental that provides Occidental the right to acquire        % of certain
oil and gas properties we acquire in the United States outside of the state of California. Occidental will determine the principal terms of these agreements and the
allocation between us and Occidental of Occidental's assets, liabilities and obligations, with the assets, liabilities and obligations relating to the California business
generally allocated to us.
What will Occidental do with the Retained Securities?
Occidental expects to dispose of all of the Retained Securities by making one or more offers to exchange such Retained Securities for outstanding shares of Occidental
common stock. For each share of Occidental common stock tendered for exchange, the holder of such Occidental common stock will receive a number of shares of
CRC common stock based on an exchange ratio to be determined by Occidental. Any Retained Securities Occidental does not dispose of through such exchanges will
be distributed pro rata to Occidental shareholders no later than 18 months after the spin-off.
How will equity-based and other long-term incentive compensation awards held by Occidental employees be affected as a result of the spin-off?
We currently anticipate that equity-based and long-term incentive compensation awards from Occidental held by employees who will be employed by us and our
subsidiaries following the spin-off will be converted into awards under our equity and long-term incentive compensation programs and that such awards held by others
who do not transfer will remain outstanding pursuant to the applicable plans maintained by Occidental, with corresponding adjustments made to the number of shares of
Occidental common stock subject to such awards and the reference price of such awards. For additional information regarding the expected treatment of equity-based
and long-term incentive compensation awards, see "Treatment of Long-Term Incentive Awards for Current and Former Employees."
What do I have to do to participate in the spin-off?
You are not required to take any action, although you are urged to read this entire document carefully. No stockholder approval of the spin-off is required and none is
being sought. You are not being asked for a proxy. No action is required on your part to receive your shares of our common stock. You will neither be required to pay
anything for the new shares nor to surrender any shares of Occidental common stock to participate in the spin-off.
How will fractional shares be treated in the spin-off?
Fractional shares of our common stock will not be distributed. Fractional shares of our common stock to which Occidental stockholders of record would otherwise be
entitled will be aggregated and sold in the public market by the distribution agent. The aggregate net cash proceeds of the sales will be
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
Table of Contents
11
distributed ratably to those stockholders who would otherwise have received fractional shares of our common stock. Proceeds from these sales will generally result in a
taxable gain or loss to those stockholders. Each stockholder entitled to receive cash proceeds from these shares should consult his, her or its own tax advisor as to the
stockholder's particular circumstances. The tax consequences of the distribution are described in more detail under "The Spin-Off—U.S. Federal Income Tax
Consequences of the Spin-Off."
What are the U.S. federal income tax consequences of the spin-off?
The spin-off is conditioned on the receipt by Occidental of a private letter ruling from the Internal Revenue Service (the "IRS") substantially to the effect that certain
aspects of the transactions that will be undertaken in preparation for, or in connection with, the spin-off will not cause the distribution to be taxable to Occidental or its
affiliates. The distribution is further conditioned on Occidental's tax counsel issuing an opinion in form and substance acceptable to Occidental, which may rely on the
effectiveness of the private letter ruling with respect to certain issues, that (i) certain transactions that will be undertaken in preparation for, or in connection with, the
spin-off will not be taxable to Occidental or its affiliates for federal income tax purposes and (ii) the spin-off qualifies generally as a tax-free transaction under
Sections 355, 361 and/or 368(a)(1)(D) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the "Code"). See "The Spin-Off—Conditions to the Spin-Off." Assuming that
the spin-off will qualify as a tax-free transaction under Sections 355, 361 and/or 368(a)(1)(D) of the Code, for U.S. federal income tax purposes, except for gain realized
on the receipt of cash paid in lieu of fractional shares, no gain or loss will generally be recognized by an Occidental shareholder, and no amount generally will be included
in such Occidental shareholder's taxable income, as a result of the spin-off. You should, however, consult your own tax advisor as to the particular consequences to
you. The U.S. federal income tax consequences of the distribution are described in more detail under "The Spin-Off—U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the
Spin-Off."
Will our common stock be listed on a stock exchange?
Yes. Although there is currently no public market for our common stock, we intend to apply to list our common stock on the NYSE under the symbol "CRC."
It is anticipated that trading of our common stock will commence on a "when-issued" basis on or shortly before the record date. When-issued trading refers to a sale or
purchase made conditionally because the security has been authorized but not yet issued. When-issued trades generally settle within four trading days after the
distribution date. On the first trading day following the distribution date, any when-issued trading with respect to our common stock will end and "regular-way" trading will
begin. "Regular-way" trading refers to trading after a security has been issued and typically involves a transaction that settles on the third full trading day following the
date of the transaction. See "Trading Market."
Will my shares of Occidental common stock continue to trade?
Yes. Occidental common stock will continue to be listed and traded on the NYSE under the symbol "OXY."
If I sell, on or before the distribution date, shares of Occidental common stock that I held on the record date, am I still entitled to receive shares of CRC common stock
distributable with respect to the shares of Occidental common stock I sold?
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
Beginning on or shortly before the record date and continuing through the distribution date for the spin-off, Occidental's common stock will begin to trade in two markets
on the NYSE: a "regular-way" market and an "ex-distribution" market. If you are a holder of record of shares of Occidental common stock as of the record date for the
distribution and choose to sell those shares in the regular-way
Table of Contents
12
market after the record date for the distribution and before the distribution date, you also will be selling the right to receive the shares of our common stock in connection
with the spin-off. However, if you are a holder of record of shares of Occidental common stock as of the record date for the distribution and choose to sell those shares
in the ex-distribution market after the record date for the distribution and before the distribution date, you will still receive shares of our common stock in the spin-off.
Will the spin-off affect the trading price of my Occidental stock?
Yes, the trading price of shares of Occidental common stock immediately following the distribution is expected to be lower than immediately prior to the distribution
because of the dividend to Occidental common stockholders in the form of our common stock and the fact that the Occidental common stock trading price will no longer
reflect the value of the California business, partially offset by the value of the cash we will distribute to Occidental. We cannot provide you with any assurance as to the
price at which shares of Occidental common stock will trade following the spin-off.
What indebtedness will CRC have following the spin-off?
We intend to enter into new financing arrangements in anticipation of the spin-off. We expect to incur up to $6.065 billion in new debt, which may include long-term notes,
term loans or borrowings under a revolving credit facility or a combination thereof. At separation, we intend to make a cash distribution of approximately $6.0 billion to
Occidental. The amount of the cash distribution to be paid by us to Occidental will be determined by Occidental after consideration of several factors, including our
resulting capital structure and anticipated credit ratings. Our capital structure will be designed to provide us with the financial flexibility to maintain our current level of
operations and the ability to invest substantially all of our future cash flow in growing our California oil and gas operations. We expect that our revolving credit facility will
be available for our immediate working capital needs and for general corporate purposes including issuance of letters of credit. See "Description of Material
Indebtedness" included elsewhere in this information statement.
Following the spin-off, our debt obligations could restrict our business and may adversely impact our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. In addition,
our separation from Occidental's other businesses may increase the overall cost of debt funding and decrease the overall debt capacity and commercial credit available
to us. Our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows could be harmed by a deterioration of our credit profile or by factors adversely affecting the
credit markets generally. See "Risk Factors—Risks Related to the Spin-Off—We will have significant indebtedness and may incur more debt. Higher levels of
indebtedness could make us more vulnerable to economic downturns and adverse developments in our business."
What will our dividend and share repurchase policy be after the spin-off?
We intend to pay a cash dividend of $0.01 per share per quarter, or $0.04 per share per year. We do not anticipate increasing the dividend on our common stock in the
foreseeable future as we currently intend to retain the remainder of our future earnings to support the growth and development of our business. In addition, we will be
authorized to implement a share repurchase program if circumstances warrant. The payment of future cash dividends, if any, will be at the discretion of our board of
directors and will depend upon, among other things, our capital investment program, financial condition, results of operations, capital requirements and development
expenditures, future business prospects and any restrictions imposed by future debt instruments. For more information, see "Dividend Policy."
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
Table of Contents
13
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
Q:
A:
If I was enrolled in an Occidental dividend reinvestment plan, will I automatically be enrolled in the CRC dividend reinvestment plan?
Yes. If you elected to have your Occidental cash dividends applied toward the purchase of additional Occidental shares, the CRC shares you receive in the distribution
will be automatically enrolled in the                        sponsored by American Stock Transfer & Trust Company, LLC ("AST") (CRC's transfer agent and registrar), unless
you notify AST that you do not want to reinvest any CRC cash dividends in additional CRC shares. Contact information for AST is provided on page 169 of this
Information Statement.
What are the anti-takeover effects of the spin-off?
Some provisions of our amended and restated certificate of incorporation, our amended and restated bylaws and Delaware law may have the effect of making more
difficult an acquisition of control of us in a transaction not approved by our board of directors. For example, our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and
amended and restated bylaws will require advance notice for shareholder proposals and nominations, place limitations on convening shareholder meetings and authorize
our board of directors to issue one or more series of preferred stock. See "Description of Capital Stock—Anti-Takeover Effects of Provisions of our Amended and
Restated Certificate of Incorporation, our Amended and Restated Bylaws and Delaware Law" for more information.
In addition, under the Tax Sharing Agreement we will enter into with Occidental in connection with the spin-off, we will agree to take certain actions and refrain from
taking certain actions, including agreeing to refrain from entering into certain strategic and corporate transactions. The purpose of these covenants is to help ensure the
tax free status of the spin-off. These restrictions and our related tax indemnification obligations in the Tax Sharing Agreement may have the effect, for a period of time
following the spin-off, of making it more difficult and less desirable for us to enter into certain transactions, including those that may result in a change of control. See
"Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company—Tax Sharing Agreement" for more information.
Where can I get more information?
If you have any questions relating to the mechanics of the distribution, you should contact the distribution agent at:
American Stock Transfer & Trust Company, LLC
6201 15th Avenue
Brooklyn, NY 11219
Phone: (800) 937-5449
Before the spin-off, if you have any questions relating to the spin-off, you should contact Occidental at:
Occidental Petroleum Corporation
Attn: Investor Relations
1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, New York 10020
Phone: (212) 603-8111
www.oxy.com
After the spin-off, if you have any questions relating to CRC, you should contact CRC at:
California Resources Corporation
Attn: Investor Relations
Address:
Phone:
www.            .com
Table of Contents
14
Summary of the Spin-Off
Distributing Company
Occidental Petroleum Corporation, a Delaware corporation. After the distribution, Occidental will hold the Retained Securities for up to
18 months.
Distributed Company
California Resources Corporation, a Delaware corporation and a wholly-owned subsidiary of Occidental. After the spin-off, we will be an
Distributed Securities
Occidental will distribute at least 80.1% of the outstanding shares of CRC common stock. Based on approximately            shares of
independent, publicly owned company.
Retained Securities
Occidental common stock outstanding as of                        , 2014 and assuming distribution of 80.1% of our common stock and
applying the distribution ratio, approximately            shares of our common stock will be distributed.
Occidental expects to dispose of all of the Retained Securities by making one or more offers to exchange such Retained Securities for
outstanding shares of Occidental common stock. For each share of Occidental common stock tendered for exchange, the holder of
such Occidental common stock will receive a number of shares of CRC common stock based on an exchange ratio to be determined by
Occidental. Any Retained Securities Occidental does not dispose of through such exchanges will be distributed pro rata to Occidental
shareholders no later than 18 months after the spin-off.
Record Date
Distribution Date
Restructuring Transactions
The record date for the distribution is the close of business of the NYSE on                        , 2014.
  The distribution date is                        , 2014.
  As part of the spin-off, Occidental will generally contribute and transfer to us the assets, liabilities and obligations related to the
California business and we will amend and restate our certificate of incorporation and bylaws.
Distribution Ratio
Each Occidental stockholder will receive            shares of our common stock for each share of Occidental common stock held by such
Distribution Method
Our common stock will be issued only by direct registration in book-entry form. Registration in book-entry form is a method of recording
stock ownership when no physical paper certificates are issued to stockholders, as is the case in this distribution.
stockholder on the record date.
Table of Contents
Fractional Shares
15
The distribution agent will not distribute any fractional shares of our common stock to Occidental stockholders. Fractional shares of our
common stock to which Occidental stockholders of record would otherwise be entitled will be aggregated and sold in the public market
by the distribution agent. The aggregate net cash proceeds of the sales will be distributed ratably to those stockholders who would
otherwise have received fractional shares of our common stock. Proceeds from these sales will generally result in a taxable gain or loss
to those stockholders. Each stockholder entitled to receive cash proceeds from these shares should consult his, her or its own tax
advisor as to the stockholder's particular circumstances. The tax consequences of the distribution are described in more detail under
"The Spin-Off—U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Spin-Off."
Conditions to the Spin-Off
The spin-off is subject to the satisfaction or waiver by Occidental, in its sole discretion, of the following conditions, as well as other
conditions described in this information statement in "The Spin-Off—Conditions to the Spin-Off":
•
the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  ("SEC")  shall  have  declared  effective  our  registration  statement  on  Form  10,  of  which  this
information  statement  is  a  part,  under  the  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  as  amended  (the  "Exchange  Act");  no  stop  order  suspending  the
effectiveness of the registration statement shall be in effect; and no proceedings for such purpose shall be pending before or threatened
by the SEC;
•
any  required  actions  and  filings  with  regard  to  state  securities  and  blue  sky  laws  of  the  U.S.  (and  any  comparable  laws  under  any
foreign jurisdictions) shall have been taken and, where applicable, have become effective or been accepted;
•
our common stock shall have been authorized for listing on the NYSE, or another national securities exchange approved by Occidental,
subject to official notice of issuance;
•
Occidental  shall  have  received  a  private  letter  ruling  from  the  IRS  to  the  effect  that  certain  aspects  of  the  transactions  that  will  be
undertaken in preparation for, or in connection with, the spin-off will not cause the distribution to be taxable to Occidental or its affiliates,
and such private letter ruling shall not have been revoked or modified in any material respect;
•
Occidental shall have received an opinion of its tax counsel, in form and substance acceptable to Occidental and which shall remain in
full force and effect, that (i) certain transactions that will be undertaken in preparation for, or in connection with, the spin-off will not be
taxable  to  Occidental  or  its  affiliates  for  federal  income  tax  purposes  and  (ii)  the  spin-off  generally  qualifies  as  a  tax-free  transaction
under Sections 355, 361 and/or 368(a)(1)(D) of the Code;
Table of Contents
•
16
no order, injunction, decree or regulation issued by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction or other legal restraint or prohibition
preventing consummation of the distribution will be in effect;
•
the completion of our new financing arrangements;
•
no other events or developments shall have occurred or exist that, in the judgment of the board of directors of Occidental, in its sole
discretion,  makes  it  inadvisable  to  effect  the  distribution  or  other  transactions  contemplated  by  the  Separation  and  Distribution
Agreement;
•
each of the ancillary agreements contemplated by the Separation and Distribution Agreement shall have been executed by each party
thereto; and
•
any government approvals and other material consents necessary to consummate the distribution will have been obtained and remain in
full force and effect.
The fulfillment of the foregoing conditions does not create any obligations on Occidental's part to effect the spin-off, and the Occidental
board of directors has reserved the right, in its sole discretion, to abandon, modify or change the terms of the spin-off, including by
waiving any conditions to the spin-off or accelerating or delaying the timing of the consummation of all or part of the spin-off, at any time
prior to the distribution date.
Trading Market and Symbol
We intend to apply to list our common stock on the NYSE under the ticker symbol "CRC." We anticipate that, on or shortly before the
record date, trading of shares of our common stock will begin on a "when-issued" basis and will continue up to and including the
distribution date, and we expect "regular-way" trading of our common stock will begin the first trading day after the distribution date. We
also anticipate that, on or shortly before the record date, there will be two markets in Occidental common stock: a "regular-way" market
on which shares of Occidental common stock will trade with an entitlement to shares of our common stock to be distributed pursuant to
the distribution, and an "ex-distribution" market on which shares of Occidental common stock will trade without an entitlement to shares
of our common stock. For more information, see "Trading Market."
Table of Contents
Tax Consequences
Table of Contents
17
The distribution is conditioned on the receipt by Occidental of a private letter ruling from the IRS substantially to the effect that certain
aspects of the transactions that will be undertaken in preparation for, or in connection with, the spin-off will not cause the distribution to
be taxable to Occidental or its affiliates. The distribution is further conditioned on Occidental's tax counsel issuing an opinion in form
and substance acceptable to Occidental, which may rely on the effectiveness of the private letter ruling with respect to certain issues,
that for U.S. federal income tax purposes, (i) certain transactions that will be undertaken in preparation for, or in connection with, the
spin-off will not be taxable to Occidental or its affiliates for federal income tax purposes and (ii) the spin-off generally qualifies as a tax-
free transaction under Sections 355, 361 and/or 368(a)(1)(D) of the Code.
Assuming that the spin-off will qualify as a tax-free transaction for U.S. federal income tax purposes, except for gain realized on the
receipt of cash paid in lieu of fractional shares, no gain or loss will generally be recognized by an Occidental stockholder, and no
amount generally will be included in such Occidental stockholder's taxable income, as a result of the spin-off.
For a more detailed description of the U.S. federal income tax consequences of the spin-off, see "The Spin-Off—U.S. Federal Income
Tax Consequences of the Spin-Off."
Each stockholder is urged to consult his, her or its tax advisor as to the specific tax consequences of the spin-off to such stockholder,
including the effect of any state, local or non-U.S. tax laws and of changes in applicable tax laws.
18
Relationship
with
Occidental
after the
Spin-Off
We will enter into a Separation and Distribution Agreement and other ancillary agreements with Occidental related to the spin-off. These agreements will provide
for the allocation between us and Occidental of Occidental's assets, liabilities and obligations, and we will generally be allocated those assets, liabilities and
obligations relating to the California business. These agreements will also govern certain interactions between us and Occidental after the separation (including
with respect to employee matters, tax matters and intellectual property matters). We and Occidental will also enter into a Transition Services Agreement that will
provide for, among other matters, assistance to us or Occidental as needed. We also intend to enter into an Employee Matters Agreement that will set forth the
agreements between Occidental and us concerning certain employee compensation and benefit matters. Further, we intend to enter into a Tax Sharing
Agreement with Occidental regarding the respective rights, responsibilities, and obligations of Occidental and us with respect to the payment of taxes, filing of
tax returns, reimbursements of taxes, control of audits and other tax proceedings, liability for taxes that may be triggered as a result of the spin-off and other
matters regarding taxes. We will also enter into an Area of Mutual Interest Agreement with Occidental, which will provide Occidental with the right to acquire an
interest in and rights with respect to certain oil and gas properties in the United States (excluding the state of California). Occidental will determine the principal
terms of these agreements. We describe these and other arrangements in greater detail under "Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company," and
describe some of the risks of these arrangements under "Risk Factors—Risks Related to the Spin-Off."
Indemnities   We will indemnify Occidental under the Tax Sharing Agreement for taxes incurred as a result of the failure of the spin-off or certain transactions undertaken in
preparation for, or in connection with, the spin-off, to qualify as tax-free transactions under the relevant provisions of the Code, to the extent caused by our
breach of any representations or covenants made in the Tax Sharing Agreement or made in connection with the private letter ruling or the tax opinion or by
certain other actions taken by us. We also have agreed to pay 50% of any taxes arising from the spin-off or related transactions to the extent that the tax is not
attributable to the fault of either party. See "Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company—Tax Sharing Agreement." In addition, under the Separation
and Distribution Agreement, we and Occidental will indemnify each other and certain of our respective subsidiaries against claims and liabilities relating to the
past operation of our business. See "Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company."
Table of Contents
Dividend Policy
Transfer Agent
Summary Risk Factors
19
We intend to pay a cash dividend of $0.01 per share per quarter, or $0.04 per share per year. We do not anticipate increasing the
dividend on our common stock in the foreseeable future as we currently intend to retain the remainder of our future earnings to support
the growth and development of our business. In addition, we will be authorized to implement a share repurchase program if
circumstances warrant. See "Dividend Policy."
American Stock Transfer & Trust Company, LLC will be the transfer agent and registrar for the shares of our common stock.
We face both general and specific risks and uncertainties relating to our business and our being an independent, publicly owned company. We also are subject to risks
related to the spin-off. Below is a summary of certain key risk factors that you should consider. Please read the full discussion of these risks and the other risks described
under "Risk Factors" beginning on page 28 of this information statement and "Forward-Looking Statements."
Risks Related to our Business
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Our business is highly regulated and governmental authorities can delay or deny permits and approvals or change legal requirements governing our operations.
Commodity pricing can fluctuate widely and strongly affects our results of operations, financial condition, cash flow and ability to grow.
Part of our strategy involves exploratory drilling, including drilling in new or emerging plays. Our drilling results are uncertain, and the value of our undeveloped
acreage may decline if drilling is unsuccessful.
Federal, state and local legislation and regulatory initiatives relating to hydraulic fracturing and other well stimulation techniques could result in increased costs
and additional operating restrictions or delay our implementation of, or cause us to change, our business strategy.
Tax law changes may adversely affect our operations.
Drilling for and producing oil and gas are high-risk activities with many uncertainties.
We operate in a highly competitive environment for oilfield equipment, services, qualified personnel and acquisitions.
Estimates of proved reserves and related future net cash flows are not precise. The actual quantities of our proved reserves and future net cash flows may prove
to be lower than estimated.
We will have significant indebtedness and may incur more debt. Higher levels of indebtedness could make us more vulnerable to economic downturns and
adverse developments in our business.
Our business requires substantial capital expenditures. We may be unable to fund these expenditures through operating cash flow or obtain any needed additional
capital on satisfactory terms or at all, which could lead to a decline in our oil and gas reserves or production. Our capital investment program is susceptible to
risks that could materially affect its implementation.
Our producing properties are located exclusively in California, making us vulnerable to risks associated with having operations concentrated in this geographic
area.
We periodically evaluate our unproved oil and natural gas properties for impairment, and could be required to recognize noncash charges to earnings of future
periods.
Table of Contents
20
•
•
•
•
•
•
Laws and regulations, including those pertaining to land use and environmental protection, could delay or restrict our operations and cause us to incur substantial
costs.
Restrictions on our ability to obtain, use, manage or dispose of water may have an adverse effect on our operations.
Our AMI Agreement may adversely affect our ability to operate outside of California.
We may not drill our identified sites at the times we have scheduled or at all and sites we decide to drill may not yield crude oil or natural gas in economically
producible quantities.
Concerns about climate change and other air quality issues may affect our operations or results.
Risks related to our acquisition activities could negatively impact our financial condition and results of operations.
We may incur substantial losses and be subject to substantial liability claims as a result of catastrophic events. We may not be insured for, or our insurance may
be inadequate to protect us against, these risks.
Cyber attacks could significantly affect us.
•
•
•
Operational issues could restrict access to markets for the commodities we produce.
Risks Related to the Spin-Off
We may not realize the anticipated benefits from our separation from Occidental.
The combined value of Occidental and our shares after the spin-off may not equal or exceed the value of Occidental shares prior to the spin-off.
Our historical and pro forma financial information may not be representative of the results we would have achieved as a stand-alone public company and may not
be a reliable indicator of our future results.
A large number of our shares are or will be eligible for future sale, which may cause the market price for our common stock to decline.
In connection with our separation from Occidental, we will indemnify Occidental for certain liabilities, including those related to the operation of our business while
it was still owned by Occidental, and Occidental will indemnify us for certain liabilities, and such indemnities may not be adequate.
Our costs may increase as a result of operating as a stand-alone public company, and our management will be required to devote substantial time to complying
with public company regulations.
Following the separation, Occidental will provide us with certain transitional services that may not be sufficient to meet our needs. We may have difficulty finding
supplemental or, ultimately, replacement services or be required to pay increased costs to supplement or, ultimately, replace these services.
The agreements between us and Occidental will not be made on an arm's length basis.
Our Tax Sharing Agreement with Occidental may limit our ability to take certain actions, including strategic transactions, and may require us to indemnify
Occidental for significant tax liabilities.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
We could have significant tax liabilities for periods during which Occidental operated our business.
Table of Contents
21
The amount of tax for which we are liable for taxable periods preceding the spin-off may be impacted by elections or decisions Occidental makes on our behalf.
Occidental, its stockholders, or we could have significant tax liabilities if the separation, and certain transactions in preparation therefore, are not tax-free.
Following the spin-off, several members of our board of directors and management may have actual or potential conflicts of interest because of their ownership of
shares of common stock of Occidental.
•
•
•
•
The spin-off may expose us to potential liabilities arising out of state and federal fraudulent conveyance laws and legal dividend requirements.
Risks Related to our Common Stock
•
•
•
•
•
No market currently exists for our common stock. We cannot assure you that an active trading market will develop for our common stock.
The market price and trading volume of our common stock may be volatile and you may not be able to resell your shares at or above the initial market price of our
common stock following the spin-off.
We do not anticipate paying significant dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future. As a result, you will need to sell your shares of common stock
to receive any significant income.
Provisions contained in our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and amended and restated bylaws could discourage a takeover attempt, which may
reduce or eliminate the likelihood of a change of control transaction and, therefore, the ability of our stockholders to sell their shares for a premium.
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation will designate the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware as the sole and exclusive forum for certain
types of actions and proceedings that may be initiated by our stockholders, which could limit our stockholders' ability to obtain an alternative judicial forum for
disputes with us or our directors, officers, employees or agents.
22
Table of Contents
SUMMARY COMBINED HISTORICAL AND PRO FORMA FINANCIAL DATA
Set forth below is a summary of our combined historical and pro forma financial data for the periods indicated. The historical unaudited combined financial data for the six
months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 and the balance sheet data as of June 30, 2014 have been derived from our unaudited condensed combined financial statements
included elsewhere in this information statement. The unaudited condensed combined financial statements have been prepared on the same basis as our audited combined
financial statements, except as stated in the related notes thereto, and include all normal recurring adjustments that, in the opinion of management, are necessary to present
fairly our financial condition and results of operations for such periods. The results of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2014 presented below are not necessarily
indicative of results for the entire fiscal year. The historical financial data for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 and the balance sheet data as of
December 31, 2013 and 2012 have been derived from our audited combined financial statements included elsewhere in this information statement.
The unaudited pro forma financial data have been derived from our historical combined financial statements included in this information statement. While the historical
combined financial statements reflect the past financial results of the California business, these pro forma statements give effect to the separation of those operations into a
stand-alone, publicly traded company in the spin-off. The pro forma adjustments are based on available information and assumptions that we believe are reasonable; however,
such adjustments are subject to change based on the finalization of the terms of the spin-off and the related separation and distribution agreements, as well as our expected
debt offering. We have attempted to include recurring costs of operating as a stand-alone company, although only the additional costs we have determined to be factually
supportable are included as pro forma adjustments, and there could be incremental costs not reflected in the unaudited pro forma combined financial statements. However, we
expect the costs of operating as a stand-alone public company, other than the debt-related costs, will be generally comparable to the costs reported in the historical combined
financial statements. Additionally, such adjustments are estimates and may not prove to be accurate. The adjustments include certain costs associated with the spin-off
related to certain management actions which are either in the balance sheet or income statement, as appropriate. Subject to the terms of the Separation and Distribution
Agreement, nonrecurring third-party costs and expenses related to the separation, other than the debt-related costs, and incurred prior to the separation date will generally be
paid by Occidental. We expect such nonrecurring amounts to include costs to separate and/or duplicate information technology systems, outside legal and accounting fees,
and similar costs. The pro forma adjustments, including related tax effects, to reflect the spin-off include the following:
the receipt of $6.065 billion from the issuance of new debt, before deducting fees and costs, as well as the interest expense related to such debt;
the distribution of approximately $6.0 billion to Occidental from the net proceeds from our new debt;
the issuance of approximately       million shares of our common stock; and
•
•
•
•
the trade receivables CRC would carry as it starts marketing its own products and the assumption of certain liabilities in connection with the spin-off.
The separation and distribution, tax sharing, transition services, employee matters and other related agreements have not been finalized, and the pro forma statements
will be revised in future amendments to reflect any effects of those agreements, to the extent material.
You should read the following summary financial data in conjunction with "Selected Historical Combined Financial Data," "Unaudited Pro Forma Financial Data,"
"Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" and our audited combined financial
Table of Contents
23
statements, unaudited interim combined condensed financial statements and the notes to those statements included in this information statement.
The financial information presented below is not necessarily indicative of our future performance or what our financial position and results of operations would have been
had we operated as a stand-alone public company during the periods presented, or in the case of the unaudited pro forma information, had the transactions reflected in the pro
forma adjustments actually occurred as of the dates assumed. The unaudited pro forma combined financial data are for illustrative purposes only. The unaudited pro forma
combined financial data constitute forward-looking information and are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those
anticipated. See "Forward-Looking Statements" in this information statement.
Statement of Income Data:
Net sales, including to related parties
Income before income taxes
Net income
Other Financial Data:
EBITDAX(1)
(1)
For more information, please read "—Non-GAAP Financial Measures and Reconciliations" below.
Six Months
Ended
June 30,
2014
$ 2,262 
782 
  $
469 
  $
 
 
  
  $ 1,410
Balance Sheet Data:
Property, plant and equipment, net
Net investment
Statement of Cash Flows Data:
Net cash provided by operating activities
Net cash used by investing activities
Net cash (used) provided by financing activities
June 30,
2014
December 31,
Pro Forma
June 30,
2013
2012
2014
(in millions)
$ 14,434  $ 14,008  $ 13,499  $ 14,434 
  $ 10,274  $ 9,989  $ 9,860  $
4,657
Six Months
Ended
June 30,
2014
2013
2013
(in millions)
Year Ended December 31,
2012
2011
$ 1,234  $ 1,177  $ 2,476  $ 2,223  $ 2,456 
  $ (1,038) $ (768) $ (1,713) $ (2,755) $ (3,565)
Net cash (used) provided by financing activities
Capital expenditures
Payments for purchases of assets and businesses, and other
Table of Contents
$
532  $ 1,106 
  $ (1,003) $ (737) $ (1,669) $ (2,331) $ (2,164)
(196) $ (409) $
(763) $
$
(35) $
(31) $
(48) $
(427) $ (1,405)
24
SUMMARY COMBINED HISTORICAL OPERATING AND RESERVE DATA
The following table presents a summary of our estimated net proved oil and gas reserves as of the dates indicated. In 2013, Ryder Scott Company, L.P. ("Ryder Scott")
reviewed the specific application of reserve estimation methods and procedures for approximately 37% of our proved oil and gas reserves. Since being engaged by Occidental,
Ryder Scott has reviewed the specific application of reserve estimation methods and procedures for approximately 79% of our proved reserves that existed at December 31,
2013. Based on its reviews, including the data, technical processes and interpretations presented with respect to our oil and gas reserves, Ryder Scott concluded that the
overall procedures and methodologies utilized in estimating the proved reserves volumes, documenting the changes in reserves from prior estimates, preparing the economic
evaluations and determining the reserves classifications for the reviewed properties were appropriate for the purpose thereof and complied with SEC regulations as of
December 31, 2013. The reserve estimates mentioned here were prepared in a manner consistent with SEC rules regarding oil and gas reserves reporting currently in effect.
You should refer to "Risk Factors," "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" and "Business" when evaluating the material
presented below.
Estimated Proved Reserves and Other Information:
Oil (MMBbl)
NGLs (MMBbl)
Natural Gas (Bcf)
Total (MMBoe)
PV-10 (in millions)(1)
Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net Cash Flows (in millions)(1)
(1)
At December 31,
2013
2012
532 
72 
838 
744
497 
 
62 
 
928 
 
714 
 
  $ 14,018  $ 13,773 
  $ 9,223  $ 9,073
For an explanation of the non-GAAP financial measure PV-10 and a reconciliation of PV-10 to Standardized Measure, the most directly comparable GAAP financial
measure, see "—Non-GAAP Financial Measure and Reconciliations" below.
The following table summarizes our net production, average realized prices and average costs for the periods indicated.
Production Data:
Oil (MBbl/d)
NGLs (MBbl/d)
Natural gas (MMcf/d)
Average daily combined production (MBoe/d)(1)
Total combined production (MMBoe)(1)
Average realized prices:
Oil (per Bbl)
NGLs (per Bbl)
Natural gas (per Mcf)
Average costs per Boe:
Production costs
Other operating expenses
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Taxes other than on income
Six Months Ended
June 30,
2014
2013
Year Ended December 31,
2013
2012
2011
96 
18 
243 
155 
28
88 
20 
262 
152 
28
90 
20 
260 
154 
56
88 
17 
256 
148 
54
80 
15 
260 
138 
50
$ 103.43  $ 105.21  $ 104.16  $ 104.02  $ 103.80 
  $ 54.86  $ 47.90  $ 50.43  $ 52.76  $ 70.03 
  $
4.31
4.67  $
3.82  $
3.73  $
2.94  $
$ 20.59  $ 19.12  $ 18.99  $ 24.34  $ 21.30 
  $
3.89 
  $ 20.73  $ 20.47  $ 20.38  $ 17.15  $ 13.38 
  $
2.84
4.80  $
4.15  $
4.38  $
4.04  $
3.80  $
3.97  $
3.29  $
3.09  $
(1)
Natural gas volumes have been converted to Boe based on energy content of six Mcf of gas to one barrel of oil. Barrels of oil equivalence does not necessarily result in
price equivalence. The price of natural gas on a barrel of oil equivalent basis is currently substantially lower than the corresponding price for oil and has been similarly
lower for a number of years. For example, in 2013, the average prices of WTI oil and NYMEX natural gas were $97.97 per Bbl and $3.66 per Mcf, respectively, resulting
in an oil-to-gas ratio of over 25 to 1.
Table of Contents
Non-GAAP Financial Measures and Reconciliations
EBITDAX
25
We define EBITDAX as earnings before interest expense; income taxes; depreciation, depletion and amortization; and exploration expense. Our management believes
EBITDAX provides useful information in assessing our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows and is widely used by the industry and investment community.
The amounts included in the calculation of EBITDAX were computed in accordance with GAAP. This measure is provided in addition to, and not as an alternative for income
and liquidity measures calculated in accordance with GAAP, and should be read in conjunction with the information contained in our financial statements prepared in
accordance with GAAP.
The following table presents a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure of EBITDAX to the GAAP financial measure of net income:
Net income
Interest expense
Provision for income taxes
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
$
  $
  $
  $
Six Months
Ended
June 30,
2014
469 
— 
313 
582
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Exploration expense
EBITDAX
$
46
$ 1,410
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure of EBITDAX to the GAAP measure of net cash provided by operating activities:
Net cash provided by operating activities
Interest expense
Cash income taxes
Cash exploration expenses
Changes in operating assets and liabilities
Asset impairments and related items
Other, net
EBITDAX
Net cash used by investing activities
Net cash (used) provided by financing activities
Table of Contents
PV-10
Six Months
2011
2012
2013
Year Ended December 31,
Ended June 30,
2014
2013
$ 1,234  $ 1,177  $ 2,476  $ 2,223  $ 2,456 
— 
 
 
84 
40 
 
(123)
 
— 
 
(27)
(102)  
— 
 
(29)
(121)  
 
20 
202 
 
(41)  
(28)
— 
 
135 
 
14 
 
48 
— 
 
(21)
— 
 
155 
16 
 
(13)  
— 
 
(27)
— 
318 
44
—
$ 1,410  $ 1,308  $ 2,707  $ 2,255  $ 2,430
$ (1,038) $ (768) $ (1,713) $ (2,755) $ (3,565)
$
(196) $ (409) $
(763) $
26
532  $ 1,106
PV-10 is a non-GAAP financial measure and represents the year-end present value of estimated future cash inflows from proved oil and gas reserves, less future
development and production costs, discounted at 10% per annum to reflect the timing of future cash flows and using SEC prescribed pricing assumptions for the period. PV-10
differs from Standardized Measure because Standardized Measure includes the effects of future income taxes on future income. Neither PV-10 nor Standardized Measure
should be construed as the fair value of our oil and gas reserves. PV-10 and Standardized Measure are used by the industry and by our management as an asset value
measure to compare against our past reserve bases and the reserve bases of other business entities because the pricing, cost environment and discount assumptions are
prescribed by the SEC and are comparable. PV-10 further facilitates the comparisons to other companies as it is not dependent on the taxpaying status of the entity.
The following table provides a reconciliation of our Standardized Measure to PV-10.
PV-10
Present value of future income tax discounted at 10%
Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net Cash Flows
Table of Contents
27
RISK FACTORS
(in millions)
At December 31,
2013
2012
$ 14,018  $ 13,773 
(4,700)
(4,795)
$ 9,223  $ 9,073
You should carefully consider the information included in this information statement, including the matters addressed under "Forward-Looking Statements," and the
following risks.
We are subject to certain risks and hazards due to the nature of the business activities we conduct. The risks discussed below, any of which could materially and
adversely affect our business, financial condition, cash flows, results of operations and stock price, are not the only risks we face. We may experience additional risks and
uncertainties not currently known to us or, as a result of developments occurring in the future, conditions that we currently deem to be immaterial may ultimately materially and
adversely affect our business, financial condition, cash flows, results of operations and stock price.
Risks Related to Our Business
Our business is highly regulated and governmental authorities can delay or deny permits and approvals or change legal requirements governing our operations.
Our operations are subject to complex and stringent federal, state and local laws and regulations. See "Business—Regulation of the Oil and Natural Gas Industry" for a
description of the laws and regulations that affect our business. In order to conduct operations in compliance with these laws and regulations, we must obtain and maintain
permits, approvals and certificates from federal, state and local governmental authorities. Costs of compliance may increase or operational delays may occur if existing laws
and regulations are revised or reinterpreted, or if new laws and regulations become applicable to our operations. New or additional permitting requirements, new interpretations of
requirements or changes in our operations could also trigger the need for Environmental Assessments or more detailed Environmental Impact Statements under the National
Environmental Policy Act ("NEPA") or Environmental Impact Reviews under the California Environmental Quality Act ("CEQA"), as well as litigation over the adequacy of those
reviews, which could result in increased costs or delays of, or denial of rights to conduct, our development programs.
For example, in 2011 changes in the implementation of the permitting process of DOGGR depressed our capital spending in California for the year and slowed our
development program. DOGGR is currently implementing additional changes, such as new hydraulic fracturing and well stimulation regulations pursuant to Senate Bill ("SB") 4
that are causing, and may cause additional, costs, delays and uncertainty.
Commodity pricing can fluctuate widely and strongly affects our results of operations, financial condition, cash flow and ability to grow.
Our financial results, financial condition, cash flow and rate of growth correlate closely to the prices we obtain for our products. Product prices can fluctuate widely and are
affected by a variety of factors, including changes in consumption patterns, global and local (particularly for gas) economic conditions, inventory levels, actual or threatened
production disruptions, the actions of OPEC and other oil and natural gas producing countries, currency exchange rates, worldwide drilling and exploration activities, the effects
of conservation, weather, geophysical and technical limitations, refining and processing disruptions, transportation bottlenecks and other matters affecting the supply and
demand dynamics of oil, gas and NGLs, and the effect of changes in market perceptions. These and other factors make it impossible to predict realized prices reliably.
Occidental typically has not hedged commodity price risk and we do not expect to have a hedging program in the future. In addition, any significant increase in transportation
infrastructure that increases the importation of crude oil to California from other parts of the country could negatively impact the price we receive for our crude oil.
Significant and sustained declines in oil and gas prices could require substantial downward adjustments to our estimated proved reserves. If this occurs, accounting rules
may require us to write-down, as a noncash charge to earnings, part of the carrying value of our oil and gas properties.
28
Table of Contents
Part of our strategy involves exploratory drilling, including drilling in new or emerging plays. Our drilling results are uncertain, and the value of our undeveloped
acreage may decline if drilling is unsuccessful.
Exploration is inherently risky and its results are unpredictable. The results of our exploratory drilling in new or emerging plays are more uncertain than drilling results in
areas that are developed and have established production, and we may increase the proportion of our drilling in new or emerging plays over time. We may not find commercial
amounts of oil or gas, in which case the value of our undeveloped acreage may decline and could be impaired.
One of our important assets is our acreage in the Monterey shale play in the San Joaquin, Los Angeles and Ventura basins. The geology of the Monterey shale is highly
complex and not uniform due to localized and varied faulting and changes in structure and rock characteristics. As a result, it differs from other shale plays that can be
developed in part on the basis of their uniformity. Instead, individual Monterey shale drilling sites may need to be more fully understood and may require a more precise
development approach, which could affect our ability, the timing or the cost to develop this asset.
Federal, state and local legislation and regulatory initiatives relating to hydraulic fracturing and other enhanced production techniques or fluid disposal could
result in increased costs and additional operating restrictions or delay our implementation of, or cause us to change, our business strategy.
Well stimulation techniques like hydraulic fracturing and acid well stimulation are important and common practices used in our operations to increase the flow of fluids to
production wells. These techniques have been regulated by DOGGR for decades; however, several federal, state and local agencies have recently proposed to further regulate
them.
For example, in 2013, California adopted SB 4, which mandates further regulation of certain well stimulation techniques. Among other things, SB 4 requires:
new permitting of defined well stimulation treatments;
prior notification to proximate property owners or lessees of proposed stimulation treatments, and pre- and post-stimulation groundwater sampling as requested by
the owner or lessee;
monitoring of groundwater quality in areas where well stimulation treatments occur; and
•
•
•
•
public disclosure of stimulation data, including data that may be considered proprietary or trade secret.
The federal, state, and local governments could continue to seek to impose new or more stringent requirements for permitting, well construction, public disclosure or
environmental review, seek to impose land use or other restrictions on hydraulic fracturing and other enhanced production techniques or fluid disposal, or otherwise seek to ban
some or all of these activities. Some local governments have proposed or adopted ordinances within their jurisdictions that purport to restrict hydraulic fracturing and other
stimulation and completion activities or to ban such activities outright. In addition, government agencies have investigated and continue to study whether injection activity can
induce ground movement or seismicity. Our enhanced production operations or fluid disposal could give rise to litigation over claims related to alleged damage to the
environment. Such new requirements, restrictions or litigation could result in potentially significant added costs to comply, delay or curtailment of our exploration, development,
or production activities, and preclude us from drilling or stimulating wells, which could impair our expected production growth over the longer term.
Tax law changes may adversely affect our operations.
In California, there have been proposals for tax increases for the past several years including a severance tax as high as 12.5% on all oil, gas and NGLs production in
California. Although the proposals have not become law, well-funded campaigns by various interest groups could lead to future oil and gas severance taxes. The imposition of
such a tax could severely reduce our profit margins and cash flow and
29
Table of Contents
could ultimately result in lower oil production, which may reduce our capital expenditures and growth plans in California.
In addition, President Obama's budget proposal for the fiscal year 2015 recommended the elimination of certain federal income tax preferences currently available to oil
and gas exploration and production companies. These changes include (i) the repeal of the percentage depletion allowance for oil and gas properties, (ii) the elimination of
current deductions for intangible drilling and development costs and (iii) an increase in the amortization period from two years to seven years for geophysical costs paid or
incurred by independent producers in connection with the exploration for, or development of, oil or gas, all of which could potentially harm us.
Drilling for and producing oil and gas are high-risk activities with many uncertainties.
Unless we conduct successful development and exploration activities or acquire properties containing proved reserves, our proved reserves will decline as those reserves
are produced. Our decisions to explore, develop, purchase or otherwise exploit prospects or properties will depend in part on the evaluation of geophysical, geologic,
engineering, production and other technical data, the analysis of which is often inconclusive or subject to varying interpretations. Our cost of drilling, completing, equipping and
operating wells is also often uncertain. Overruns in budgeted expenditures are a common risk that can make a particular project uneconomical or less economical than
forecast. We bear the risks of equipment failures, accidents, environmental hazards, adverse weather conditions, permitting or construction delays, title disputes, surface
access disputes, disappointing drilling results or reservoir performance, including response to IOR or EOR efforts, and other associated risks.
We operate in a highly competitive environment for oilfield equipment, services, qualified personnel and acquisitions.
We compete for services to profitably develop our assets, to find or acquire additional reserves and to attract and retain qualified personnel. We have many competitors,
some of which: (i) are larger and better funded, (ii) may be willing to accept greater risks or (iii) have special competencies. Historically, there have been periodic shortages of
drilling and workover rigs, pipe and other oilfield equipment as demand for rigs and equipment has increased along with the number of wells being drilled. The demand for
qualified and experienced field personnel to drill wells and conduct field operations, geologists, geophysicists, engineers and other professionals in the oil and gas industry can
fluctuate significantly, often in correlation with commodity prices, causing periodic shortages. Finally, competition for reserves can make it more difficult to find attractive
investment opportunities or require delay of reserve replacement efforts.
Estimates of proved reserves and related future net cash flows are not precise. The actual quantities of our proved reserves and future net cash flows may prove to
be lower than estimated.
Many uncertainties exist in estimating quantities of proved reserves and related future net cash flows. Our estimates are based on various assumptions, which may
ultimately prove to be inaccurate.
The reserves information included in this information statement represents estimates prepared by Occidental's internal engineers, including some who will continue to
work for us following the spin-off. The procedures and methods used to estimate our reserves by these internal engineers were reviewed by independent petroleum consultants;
however, no audit of estimated reserve volumes was conducted by these consultants. Reserves estimation is a partially subjective process of estimating accumulations of oil
and gas. Estimates of economically recoverable oil and gas reserves and of future net cash flows depend upon a number of variables and assumptions, including:
•
•
historical production from the area compared with production from similar areas;
the quality, quantity and interpretation of available relevant data;
30
Table of Contents
•
•
•
•
•
•
commodity prices;
production costs;
ad valorem, excise and income taxes;
development costs;
the effects of government regulations; and
future workover and remedial costs.
Misunderstanding of the variables, inaccurate assumptions, changed circumstances or new information could require us to make significant negative reserve revisions.
We currently expect improved recovery, extensions and discoveries to be our main sources for reserve additions, but factors such as geology, government regulations
and permits and the effectiveness of development plans are partially or fully outside management's control and could cause unforeseen results.
We will have significant indebtedness and may incur more debt. Higher levels of indebtedness could make us more vulnerable to economic downturns and adverse
developments in our business.
Following our separation from Occidental, we expect to have total outstanding debt of approximately $6.065 billion, including $5.0 billion in senior notes and a $1.0 billion
term loan credit facility. Revolving commitments from our bank group are expected to total $2.0 billion, of which approximately $1.935 billion is expected to remain available to
be borrowed.
Indebtedness outstanding under our credit facility bears interest at a variable rate, so a rise in interest rates will generate greater interest expense to the extent we do not
purchase interest rate hedges. The amount of our debt may also cause us to be more vulnerable to economic downturns and adverse developments in our business because
we would be required to use a greater proportion of our cash flow to pay interest and principal. Following the separation and incurrence of $6.065 billion of debt, we could incur
$1.935 billion in additional indebtedness in compliance with the terms of our debt facilities. In addition, we can incur obligations that do not constitute indebtedness under the
indenture or credit facility.
Our ability to meet our debt obligations and other expenses will depend on our future performance, which will be affected by financial, business, economic, regulatory and
other factors. If our cash flow is not sufficient to service our debt, we may be required to refinance debt, sell assets or sell additional equity on terms that we may not find
attractive if it may be done at all. Further, our failure to comply with the financial and other restrictive covenants relating to our indebtedness could result in a default under that
indebtedness.
Our business requires substantial capital expenditures. We may be unable to fund these expenditures through operating cash flow or obtain any needed additional
capital on satisfactory terms or at all, which could lead to a decline in our oil and gas reserves or production. Our capital investment program is also susceptible to
risks that could materially affect its implementation.
The oil and gas industry is capital intensive. We make and expect to continue to make substantial capital expenditures for the development and exploration of oil and gas
reserves. We have developed a multi-year capital investment program to execute our growth strategy. We spent approximately $1.7 billion of capital on development and
exploration expenses during the year ended December 31, 2013, funded by our operating cash flow of $2.5 billion. Under our 2014 capital budget, we currently intend to invest
approximately $2.1 billion for development and exploration activities this year.
Our ability to deploy capital as planned depends on a number of uncertainties, including: (i) regulatory and third-party approvals; (ii) our inability to timely drill wells due to
technical factors and contract terms; (iii) the availability of capital, equipment, services and personnel; (iv) commodity prices and sales point disruptions; and (v) drilling and
completion costs and results. Because of these and other
31
Table of Contents
potential uncertainties, we may be unable to deploy capital in the manner planned and actual development activities may materially differ from those presently anticipated.
We intend to finance our future capital expenditures, other than any significant acquisitions, primarily through cash flow from operations and, if necessary, through
borrowings under our credit facility or the issuance of debt or equity securities. We may not generate sufficient cash flow to fund our growth plans or to generate acceptable
returns. Additional financing may not be available on acceptable terms or at all if there is not market demand or if our lenders refuse to expand our existing credit as they may
do at their discretion. In the event additional capital is needed and unavailable, we may curtail drilling, development and other activities or be forced to sell some our assets on
an unfavorable basis.
Our producing properties are located exclusively in California, making us vulnerable to risks associated with having operations concentrated in this geographic
area.
Our operations are geographically concentrated exclusively in California. Because of this geographic concentration, the success and profitability of our operations may be
disproportionately exposed to the effect of regional events. These include, among others, fluctuations in the prices of crude oil and natural gas produced from wells in the
region, changes in state or regional laws and regulations affecting our operations, and other regional supply and demand factors, including gathering, pipeline and rail
transportation capacity constraints, available rigs, equipment, oil field services, supplies, labor and infrastructure capacity. The concentration of our operations in California also
increases exposure to unexpected events that may occur in this region such as natural disasters, industrial accidents or labor difficulties. Any one of these events has the
potential to cause producing wells to be shut-in, delay operations and growth plans, decrease cash flows, increase operating and capital costs and prevent development of
lease inventory before expiration. Any of the risks described above could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
We periodically evaluate our unproved oil and natural gas properties for impairment, and could be required to recognize noncash charges to earnings of future
periods.
At December 31, 2013, we carried unproved property costs of $0.9 billion. GAAP requires periodic evaluation of these costs to assess realizability. These evaluations will
be affected by management's development plans, the results of exploration activities, commodity prices, planned future sales and expiration of all or a portion of the leases,
contracts and permits appurtenant to such properties. If the quantity of potential reserves is not sufficient to fully recover the cost invested in or management's plans change
with respect to such properties, we will recognize noncash charges to earnings of future periods.
Laws and regulations, including those pertaining to land use and environmental protection, could delay or restrict our operations and cause us to incur substantial
costs.
Our operations are subject to numerous federal, state, local and other laws and regulations governing health and safety, the release or discharge of materials into the
environment or otherwise relating to land use or environmental protection. These laws and regulations:
require various permits and approvals before drilling, workovers, production, or underground fluid injection commences, or before facilities are constructed or put
into operation;
require the installation of sophisticated safety and pollution control equipment;
restrict the types, quantities, and concentration of various materials, including, oil, natural gas and water, that can be released or discharged into the environment
in connection with drilling, production, processing or transportation activities;
•
•
•
•
limit or prohibit operations on lands lying within coastal, wilderness, wetlands, endangered species habitat, and other protected areas;
32
Table of Contents
establish standards for the closure, abandonment, cleanup or restoration of former operations, such as plugging of abandoned wells;
impose substantial liabilities for unauthorized releases or discharges of regulated materials into the environment;
require comprehensive environmental analyses; and
•
•
•
•
may expose us to litigation by governmental authorities, special interest groups and other claimants.
These laws and regulations may have the effect of restricting the amount of oil, NGLs and natural gas that we produce. Failure to comply with these laws and regulations
may result in the assessment of administrative, civil and/or criminal fines and penalties and liability for non-compliance, costs of corrective action, cleanup or restoration,
compensation for personal injury, property damage or other losses, and the imposition of injunctive or declaratory relief restricting or limiting our operations. Under certain
environmental laws and regulations, we could be subject to strict or joint and several liability for the removal or remediation of previously released materials or property
contamination.
Restrictions on our ability to obtain, use, manage or dispose of water may have an adverse effect on our operations.
Water is an essential component of our operations. Approximately 95% of the fluids we produce are brackish waters, not suitable for agricultural use, that need to be
managed, recycled or disposed of, and we treat and re-use substantial volumes of this water for activities such as waterflooding, steamflooding, pressure management, well
completion and stimulation, including hydraulic fracturing. Although we have been able to use recycled and produced water from our operations for a substantial portion of our
water needs and to provide water to local agricultural users in certain basins, we also use supplied water from various local and regional sources. Some of our fields are more
dependent on supplied water to support operations like pressure maintenance or steam injection. Due to severe drought in California, some local and regional water districts and
the state government have begun implementing regulations that restrict water usage and increase the cost of water.
Existing regulations restrict our ability and increase our cost to manage and dispose of wastewater. The federal Clean Water Act ("CWA") and similar state laws impose
restrictions and strict controls on the discharge of produced waters and waste where such discharges could affect surface or ground waters. We must obtain permits or waivers
for certain discharges into waters and wetlands and for construction activities that may affect regulated water resources. For example, our operating costs have increased due
to policy changes in December 2013 by California state and regional water quality agencies that restrict or prohibit discharges that were formerly permitted. These regulations
and attendant liabilities relating to wastewater disposal may increase our costs of operations. Future federal, state, local and other regulations could impose additional
restrictions and costs on our ability to obtain and use water for our operations.
Our AMI Agreement may adversely affect our ability to operate outside of California.
In connection with the spin-off, we intend to enter into an AMI Agreement, which provides Occidental with the right to acquire a         % interest in and rights with respect
to certain oil and gas properties we acquire in the United States, other than oil and gas properties in the state of California, for five years following the completion of the spin-off.
Our ability to own and operate oil and gas properties outside the state of California may be limited for the five-year term of the AMI Agreement to the extent that doing so would
violate the terms of this agreement. If we were to change our current strategy of focusing exclusively on opportunities in California, the AMI Agreement could adversely affect
our ability to pursue opportunities outside of California during the five years following the spin-off. See "Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company—AMI
Agreement."
33
Table of Contents
We may not drill our identified sites at the times we scheduled or at all and sites we decide to drill may not yield crude oil or natural gas in economically
producible quantities.
We have specifically identified and scheduled drilling locations over the next several years. These drilling locations represent a significant part of our growth strategy. Our
ability to profitably drill and develop these locations depends on a number of variables, including crude oil and natural gas prices, the availability of capital, costs, drilling
results, regulatory approvals, available transportation capacity and other factors. If future drilling results in these projects do not establish sufficient reserves to achieve an
economic return, we may curtail drilling or development of these projects. We view the risk profile for our exploration drilling locations and our prospective resource drilling
locations as being higher than for our other drilling locations due to relatively less available geologic and production data and drilling history, in particular with respect to our
prospective resource locations, which are in unproven geologic plays. We make assumptions about the consistency and accuracy of data when we identify these locations that
may prove inaccurate. We cannot guarantee that these prospective drilling locations or any other drilling locations we have identified will ever be drilled or if we will be able to
produce crude oil or natural gas from these drilling locations. In addition, some of our leases could expire if we do not establish production in the leased acreage. The combined
net acreage expiring in the next three years represents 12% of our total net undeveloped acreage at December 31, 2013. Our actual drilling activities may materially differ from
those presently identified.
Concerns about climate change and other air quality issues may affect our operations or results.
Climate change, the costs that may be associated with its effects and the regulation of greenhouse gases ("GHGs") may affect our business in many ways, including
increasing the costs to provide our products and services, and reducing demand for, and consumption of, our products and services. In addition, legislative and regulatory
responses to climate change may increase our operating costs. In 2006, California adopted Assembly Bill ("AB") 32, known as the "California Global Warming Solutions Act of
2006," which establishes a statewide cap on GHG emissions, including on the oil and natural gas production industry, and a "cap-and-trade" program. In December 2010, the
California Air Resources Board adopted regulations to implement AB 32 that commenced on January 1, 2012, and require us to obtain GHG emissions allowances
corresponding to our reported GHG emissions. In 2013, we incurred approximately $34 million of costs for GHG emissions allowances in California. We estimate costs for GHG
emissions allowances in 2014 to be consistent with 2013, at approximately $34 million.
Federal and state regulatory agencies can impose administrative, civil and/or criminal penalties for non-compliance with air permits or other requirements of the federal
Clean Air Act ("CAA") and associated state laws and regulations. In addition, California air quality laws and regulations are in many instances more stringent than comparable
federal laws and regulations. Regulatory requirements relating to air emissions are particularly stringent in Southern and Central California, where most of our operations are
located. As these requirements become more stringent, we cannot assure you that we will continue to be able to implement them in a cost-effective manner. Also, as a result
of existing and future air quality initiatives, we could face risks of increased costs and taxes, an inability to execute projects and reduced demand for our products and
services.
Risks related to our acquisition activities could negatively impact our financial condition and results of operations.
Our acquisition activities carry risks that we may: (i) not fully realize anticipated benefits due to less-than-expected reserves or production or changed circumstances,
such as the deterioration of gas prices in recent years; (ii) bear unexpected integration costs or experience other integration difficulties; (iii) experience share price declines
based on the market's evaluation of the activity or (iv) assume liabilities that are greater than anticipated.
In connection with our acquisitions, we are often only able to perform limited due diligence. Successful acquisitions of oil and gas properties require an assessment of a
number of factors, including
34
Table of Contents
estimates of recoverable reserves, the timing for recovering the reserves, exploration potential, future commodity prices, operating costs and potential environmental, regulatory
and other liabilities. Such assessments are inexact and incomplete, and we may be unable to make these assessments with a high degree of accuracy.
There may be threatened, contemplated, asserted or other claims against the acquired assets related to environmental, title, regulatory, tax, contract, litigation or other
matters of which we are unaware or for which we are unable to obtain indemnity.
Also, we may issue our securities in connection with acquisitions. The amount of common stock issued in connection with an acquisition could constitute a material
portion of our then outstanding common stock, which could significantly dilute existing shareholders and depress our share price.
We may incur substantial losses and be subject to substantial liability claims as a result of catastrophic events. We may not be insured for, or our insurance may
be inadequate to protect us against, these risks.
We are not fully insured against all risks. Our oil and gas exploration and production activities, including well stimulation and completion activities, are subject to operating
risks associated with drilling for and producing oil and gas, such as well blowouts, fires, explosions, releases or discharges of hazardous or toxic materials and industrial
accidents. Other catastrophic events such as earthquakes, floods, mudslides, droughts, terrorist attacks and other events that cause operations to cease or be curtailed may
negatively affect our business and the communities in which we operate. We may be unable to obtain, or may elect not to obtain, insurance for certain risks if we believe that
the cost of available insurance is excessive relative to the risks presented.
Cyber attacks could significantly affect us.
Cyber attacks on businesses have escalated in recent years. We rely on electronic systems and networks to control and manage our operations. If we were to experience
an attack and our security measures failed, the potential consequences to our business and the communities in which we operate could be significant.
Operational issues could restrict access to markets for the commodities we produce.
Our ability to market our production of oil, gas and NGLs depends on a number of factors, including the proximity of production fields to pipelines and terminal facilities,
competition for capacity on such facilities and the ability of such facilities to gather, transport or process our commodities. If our access to markets for commodities we
produce is restricted, our costs could increase and our expected production growth may be impaired.
Risks Related to the Spin-Off
We may not realize the anticipated benefits from our separation from Occidental.
We may not realize the benefits that we anticipate from our separation from Occidental. These benefits include the following:
•
•
•
•
enhancing our ability to grow by reinvesting substantially all of our cash flow in our business;
enhancing growth and efficiency by enabling our management team to focus its attention on the development and execution of our business in a single state;
enhancing our focus on, and accelerating our technical expertise in, specific reservoirs and fields in California; and
enhancing our market recognition with investors because of our status as an industry leader in California.
35
Table of Contents
We may not achieve the anticipated benefits from our separation for a variety of reasons. For example, the process of separating our business from Occidental and
operating as an independent public company may distract our management from focusing on our business and strategic priorities. We may not generate sufficient cash flow to
fund our growth plans and to generate acceptable returns. Moreover, even with equity compensation tied to our business, we may not be able to attract and retain employees
as desired. We also may not fully realize the anticipated benefits from our separation if any of the other matters identified as risks in this "Risk Factors" section were to occur.
The combined value of Occidental and our shares after the spin-off may not equal or exceed the value of Occidental shares prior to the spin-off.
We cannot assure you that the combined trading prices of Occidental's common stock and our common stock after the spin-off, as adjusted for any changes in the
combined capitalization of these companies, will be equal to or greater than the trading price of Occidental common stock prior to the spin-off. Until the market has fully
evaluated the business of Occidental without the California business, the price at which Occidental common stock trades may fluctuate significantly. Similarly, until the market
has fully evaluated our company, the price at which our common stock trades may fluctuate significantly.
Our historical and pro forma financial information may not be representative of the results we would have achieved as a stand-alone public company and may not
be a reliable indicator of our future results.
The historical and pro forma financial information included in this information statement has been derived from Occidental's accounting records and may not reflect what
our financial position, results of operations or cash flows would have been had we been an independent, stand-alone entity during the periods presented or those that we will
achieve in the future. Occidental did not account for us, and we were not operated, as a separate, stand-alone company or as a separate segment for the historical periods
presented. The costs and expenses reflected in our historical financial information include an allocation for certain corporate functions historically provided by Occidental,
including expense allocations for: (1) executive oversight, accounting, procurement, engineering, drilling, exploration, finance, internal audit, legal, risk management, tax,
treasury, information technology, government relations, investor relations, public relations, financial reporting, human resources, marketing, ethics and compliance, and certain
other shared services; (2) certain employee benefits and incentives; and (3) share-based compensation, that may be different from the comparable expenses that we would
have incurred had we operated as a stand-alone company. We have allocated these expenses in our historical financial information on the basis of direct usage when
identifiable, with the remainder allocated based on estimated time spent by Occidental personnel, headcount or our relative size compared to Occidental and its subsidiaries. In
addition, we have attempted to include recurring costs of operating as a stand-alone company in our pro forma financial statements, although only the additional costs we have
determined to be factually supportable are included as pro forma adjustments. We expect the costs of operating as a stand-alone public company, other than the debt-related
costs, will be comparable to the costs reported in the historical combined financial statements. These estimates may not prove to be accurate. Our capital expenditure
requirements, including acquisitions, historically have been satisfied as part of the companywide cash management practices of Occidental. Following the spin-off, we will no
longer have access to Occidental's working capital, and we may need to obtain additional financing from banks, through public offerings or private placements of debt or equity
securities or other arrangements if our cash flow from operations is not sufficient to fund our capital expenditure requirements.
In addition, if we fail to implement the requirements with respect to our internal accounting and audit functions, our ability to report our operating results on a timely and
accurate basis could be impaired and we might be subject to sanctions or investigation by regulatory authorities, such as the SEC or the NYSE. Any such action could harm
our reputation and the confidence of investors in our company. For additional information, see "Selected Historical Combined Financial Data," "Unaudited Pro Forma Combined
Financial Data," "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
36
Table of Contents
Operations" and our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this information statement.
A large number of our shares are or will be eligible for future sale, which may cause the market price for our common stock to decline.
Upon completion of the spin-off, we will have an aggregate of approximately            shares of our common stock outstanding. All of those shares (other than those held
by our "affiliates") will be freely tradable without restriction. Shares held by our affiliates, which include our directors and executive officers, can be sold subject to volume,
manner of sale and notice provisions. We estimate that our affected directors and executive officers will beneficially own approximately            shares of our common stock
immediately following the distribution. We are unable to predict whether large amounts of our common stock will be sold in the open market following the spin-off. We are also
unable to predict whether a sufficient number of buyers will be in the market at that time. Occidental stockholders may sell the shares of our common stock they receive in the
distribution for various reasons. For example, such stockholders may not believe our business profile or level of market capitalization as an independent company fits their
investment objectives. A change in the level of analyst coverage following the spin-off could also negatively impact demand for our shares. In addition, following the
distribution, Occidental will retain ownership of up to 19.9% of our common stock. Occidental expects to dispose of all of the Retained Securities by making one or more offers
to exchange such Retained Securities for outstanding shares of Occidental common stock. For each share of Occidental common stock tendered for exchange, the holder of
such Occidental common stock will receive a number of shares of CRC common stock based on an exchange ratio to be determined by Occidental. Any Retained Securities
Occidental does not dispose of through such exchanges will be distributed pro rata to Occidental shareholders no later than 18 months after the spin-off. In connection with the
spin-off, we are entering into a Stockholder's and Registration Rights Agreement with Occidental, pursuant to which we will agree that, upon the request of Occidental, we will
use our best efforts to effect the registration under applicable securities laws of the disposition of shares of common stock retained by Occidental and to cooperate with
Occidental to facilitate its disposition of the Retained Securities through one or more exchanges for Occidental common stock. Any disposition by Occidental, or any other
significant shareholder, of our common stock in the public market, or the perception that such dispositions may occur, could adversely affect prevailing market prices for our
common stock.
In connection with our separation from Occidental, we will indemnify Occidental for certain liabilities, including those related to the operation of our business while
it was still owned by Occidental, and Occidental will indemnify us for certain liabilities, and such indemnities may not be adequate.
Pursuant to the Separation and Distribution Agreement and other agreements with Occidental, Occidental will agree to indemnify us for certain liabilities, and we will agree
to indemnify Occidental for certain liabilities, in each case for uncapped amounts, as discussed further in "Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company." Indemnity
payments that we may be required to provide Occidental may be significant and could negatively impact our business, particularly indemnity payments relating to our actions
that could impact the tax-free nature of the distribution. Third parties could also seek to hold us responsible for any of the liabilities that Occidental has agreed to retain.
Further, there can be no assurance that the indemnity from Occidental will be sufficient to protect us against the full amount of such liabilities, or that Occidental will be able to
fully satisfy its indemnification obligations. Moreover, even if we ultimately succeed in recovering from Occidental any amounts for which we are held liable, we may be
temporarily required to bear these losses ourselves.
Our costs may increase as a result of operating as a stand-alone public company, and our management will be required to devote substantial time to complying
with public company regulations.
Historically, our operations have been fully integrated within Occidental, and we have relied on Occidental to provide certain corporate functions. As a stand-alone public
company, we may incur
37
Table of Contents
additional expenses for executive oversight, accounting, finance, risk management, treasury, tax, financial reporting, internal audit, legal, information technology, governmental
relations, public relations, investor relations, human resources, procurement, engineering, drilling, exploration, ethics and compliance, marketing and certain other services that
we have not incurred historically. As part of Occidental, we have been able to enjoy certain benefits from Occidental's scale and purchasing power. As an independent, publicly
traded company, we will not have similar negotiating leverage.
In addition, after the spin-off, we will become obligated to file with the SEC annual and quarterly information and other reports. We will also be required to ensure that we
have the ability to prepare financial statements that are fully compliant with all SEC reporting requirements on a timely basis. In addition, we will become subject to other
reporting and corporate governance requirements, including certain requirements of the NYSE, and certain provisions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, and the regulations
promulgated thereunder, which will impose significant compliance obligations and costs upon us.
Following the separation, Occidental will provide us with certain transitional services that may not be sufficient to meet our needs. We may have difficulty finding
supplemental or, ultimately, replacement services or be required to pay increased costs to supplement or, ultimately, replace these services.
Certain administrative services required by us for the operation of our business are currently provided by Occidental and its subsidiaries, including, executive oversight,
accounting, procurement, engineering, drilling, exploration, finance, internal audit, legal, risk management, tax, treasury, information technology, government relations, investor
relations, public relations, financial reporting, human resources, ethics and compliance, marketing and certain other shared services. Prior to the completion of the separation,
we will enter into agreements with Occidental related to the separation of our business operations from Occidental, including a Transition Services Agreement. We believe it is
helpful for Occidental to provide transitional assistance for us under the Transition Services Agreement to facilitate the efficient operation of our business as we transition to
becoming a stand-alone public company. While these services are being provided to us by Occidental, our operational flexibility to modify or implement changes with respect to
such services or the amounts we pay for them will be limited. After the expiration or termination of the Transition Services Agreement, we may not be able to replace these
services or enter into appropriate third-party agreements on terms and conditions, including cost, comparable to those that we will receive from Occidental under the Transition
Services Agreement. Although we intend to replace portions of the services currently provided by Occidental, we may encounter difficulties replacing certain services or be
unable to negotiate pricing or other terms as favorable as those we currently have in effect. See "Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company—Transition Services
Agreement."
The agreements between us and Occidental will not be made on an arm's length basis.
The agreements we will enter into with Occidental in connection with the spin-off, including, but not limited to, the Separation and Distribution Agreement, Tax Sharing
Agreement, Employee Matters Agreement, and Transition Services Agreement, will have been negotiated in the context of the spin-off while we were still a wholly-owned
subsidiary of Occidental. Accordingly, during the period in which the terms of those agreements will have been negotiated, we will not have had an independent board of
directors or a management team independent of Occidental. As a result, the terms of those agreements may not reflect terms that would have resulted from arm's-length
negotiations between unaffiliated third parties. The terms relate to, among other things, the allocation of assets, liabilities, rights and other obligations between Occidental and
us. See "Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company" for a description of these obligations and the allocation of liabilities between Occidental and us.
38
Table of Contents
Our Tax Sharing Agreement with Occidental may limit our ability to take certain actions, including strategic transactions, and may require us to indemnify
Occidental for significant tax liabilities.
Under the Tax Sharing Agreement, we will agree to take certain actions or refrain from taking certain actions to ensure that the separation and certain transactions taken
in preparation for, or in connection with, the separation, qualify for tax-free status under the relevant provisions of the Code. We will also make various other covenants in the
Tax Sharing Agreement intended to ensure the tax-free status of the separation. These covenants restrict our ability to sell assets outside the ordinary course of business, to
issue or sell additional common stock or other securities (including securities convertible into our common stock), or to enter into certain other corporate transactions. For
example, for a period of two years after the final disposition of the Retained Securities by Occidental, absent approval by Occidental, we may not enter into any transaction that
would be reasonably likely to cause us to undergo either a 50% or greater change in the ownership of our voting stock or a 50% or greater change in the ownership (measured
by value) of all classes of our stock in transactions considered related to the separation. See "Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company—Tax Sharing Agreement."
Further, under the Tax Sharing Agreement, we are required to indemnify Occidental against certain tax-related liabilities incurred by Occidental (including any of its
subsidiaries) relating to the separation, to the extent caused by our breach of any representations or covenants made in the Tax Sharing Agreement or made in connection with
the private letter ruling or the tax opinion. These liabilities include the substantial tax-related liability (calculated without regard to any net operating loss or other tax attribute of
Occidental) that would result if the distribution of our stock to Occidental stockholders failed to qualify as a tax-free transaction. In addition, we have agreed to pay 50% of any
taxes arising from the separation or related transactions to the extent that the tax is not attributable to the fault of either party.
We could have significant tax liabilities for periods during which Occidental operated our business.
For any tax periods (or portion thereof) in which Occidental owns at least 80% of the total voting power and value of our common stock, we and our subsidiaries will be
included in Occidental's consolidated group for federal income tax purposes. In addition, we or one or more of our U.S. subsidiaries may be included in the combined,
consolidated or unitary tax returns of Occidental or one or more of its subsidiaries for state or local income tax purposes. Under the Tax Sharing Agreement, for each period in
which we or any of our subsidiaries are consolidated or combined with Occidental for purposes of any tax return, and with respect to which such tax return has not yet been
filed, Occidental will prepare a pro forma tax return for us as if we filed our own consolidated, combined or unitary return, except that such pro forma tax return will generally
include current income, deductions, credits and losses from us (with certain exceptions) and will not include any carryovers or carrybacks of losses or credits. We will
reimburse Occidental for any taxes shown on the pro forma tax returns, subject to certain adjustments. In addition, by virtue of Occidental's controlling ownership and the Tax
Sharing Agreement, Occidental will effectively control all of our tax decisions in connection with any consolidated, combined or unitary income tax returns in which we (or any
of our subsidiaries) are included. The Tax Sharing Agreement provides that Occidental will have sole authority to respond to and conduct all tax proceedings (including tax
audits) relating to us, to prepare and file all consolidated, combined or unitary income tax returns in which we are included on our behalf (including the making of any tax
elections), and to determine the reimbursement amounts in connection with any pro forma tax returns. This arrangement may result in conflicts of interest between Occidental
and us. For example, under the Tax Sharing Agreement, Occidental will be able to choose to contest, compromise or settle any adjustment or deficiency proposed by the
relevant taxing authority in a manner that may be beneficial to Occidental and detrimental to us. See "Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company—Tax Sharing
Agreement."
Moreover, notwithstanding the Tax Sharing Agreement, federal law provides that each member of a consolidated group is liable for the group's entire tax obligation. Thus,
to the extent Occidental or other members of Occidental's consolidated group fail to make any federal income tax payments required by law, we could be liable for the shortfall
with respect to periods in which we were a member of Occidental's
39
Table of Contents
consolidated group. Similar principles may apply for state or local income tax purposes where we file combined, consolidated or unitary returns with Occidental or its
subsidiaries for federal, foreign, state or local income tax purposes. Pursuant to the Tax Sharing Agreement, Occidental has agreed to indemnify us for any taxes attributable to
Occidental that we are required to pay as a result of our membership in the Occidental consolidated group during such period.
The amount of tax for which we are liable for taxable periods preceding the spin-off may be impacted by elections Occidental makes on our behalf.
Under the Tax Sharing Agreement, Occidental will have the right to make all elections relevant to the determination of our tax liability for periods while we, or any of our
subsidiaries, are required to file tax returns with Occidental on a consolidated or combined basis or which include pre-spin-off periods. As a result, the amount of tax for which
we are liable for taxable periods preceding the spin-off may be impacted by elections Occidental makes on our behalf.
Occidental, its stockholders, or we could have significant tax liabilities if the separation, and certain transactions in preparation therefore, are not tax-free.
The separation is conditioned on Occidental's receipt of a private letter ruling from the IRS substantially to the effect that certain aspects of the transactions that will be
undertaken in preparation for, or in connection with, the separation will not cause the distribution to be taxable to Occidental or its affiliates. The separation is further
conditioned on Occidental's tax counsel issuing an opinion in form and substance acceptable to Occidental that (i) certain transactions that will be undertaken in preparation for,
or in connection with, the spin-off will not be taxable to Occidental or its affiliates for federal income tax purposes and (ii) the spin-off generally qualifies as a tax-free
transaction under Sections 355, 361 and/or 368(a)(1)(D) of the Code. The private letter ruling and opinion will rely on facts, assumptions, representations and undertakings from
Occidental and us regarding the past and future conduct of the companies' respective businesses and other matters. If any of these facts, assumptions, representations, or
undertakings are, or become, incorrect or not otherwise satisfied, Occidental may not be able to rely on the private letter ruling or the opinion of its tax advisor and could be
subject to significant tax liabilities. In addition, an opinion of counsel is not binding upon the IRS, so, notwithstanding the opinion of Occidental's tax advisor, the IRS could
conclude upon audit that the separation is taxable in full or in part. The IRS may determine that the separation is taxable for other reasons, including as a result of certain
significant changes in the stock ownership of Occidental or us after the separation. If the separation is determined to be taxable for U.S. federal income tax purposes,
Occidental or its stockholders could incur significant income tax liabilities, and we could incur significant liabilities. For a discussion of the potential tax consequences to
Occidental stockholders if the separation is determined to be taxable, see "The Spin-Off—U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Spin-Off." For a description of the
sharing of such liabilities between Occidental and us, see "Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company—Tax Sharing Agreement."
Following the spin-off, several members of our board of directors and management may have actual or potential conflicts of interest because of their ownership of
shares of common stock of Occidental.
Following the spin-off, several members of our board of directors and management will initially own common stock of Occidental or options to purchase common stock of
Occidental or other equity-based awards, in addition to equity interests in us, because of their current or prior relationships with Occidental, which could create, or appear to
create, potential conflicts of interest when our directors and executive officers are faced with decisions that could have different implications for Occidental and us.
The spin-off may expose us to potential liabilities arising out of state and federal fraudulent conveyance laws and legal dividend requirements.
The separation is subject to review under various state and federal fraudulent conveyance laws. Under these laws, if a court in a lawsuit by an unpaid creditor or an entity
vested with the power of such creditor
40
Table of Contents
(including a trustee or debtor-in-possession in a bankruptcy by us or Occidental or any of our respective subsidiaries) were to determine that Occidental or any of its
subsidiaries did not receive fair consideration or reasonably equivalent value for distributing our common stock or taking other action as part of the separation, or that we or any
of our subsidiaries did not receive fair consideration or reasonably equivalent value for incurring indebtedness, including the new debt incurred by us in connection with the
separation, transferring assets or taking other action as part of the separation and, at the time of such action, we, Occidental or any of our respective subsidiaries (i) was
insolvent or would be rendered insolvent, (ii) had reasonably small capital with which to carry on its business and all business in which it intended to engage or (iii) intended to
incur, or believed it would incur, debts beyond its ability to repay such debts as they would mature, then such court could void the separation as a constructive fraudulent
transfer. The court could impose a number of different remedies, including voiding our liens and claims against Occidental, or providing Occidental with a claim for money
damages against us in an amount equal to the difference between the consideration received by Occidental and the fair market value of our company at the time of the
separation.
The measure of insolvency for purposes of the fraudulent conveyance laws will vary depending on which jurisdiction's law is applied. Generally, however, an entity would
be considered insolvent if the present fair saleable value of its assets is less than (i) the amount of its liabilities (including contingent liabilities) or (ii) the amount that will be
required to pay its probable liabilities on its existing debts as they become absolute and mature. No assurance can be given as to what standard a court would apply to
determine insolvency or that a court would determine that we, Occidental or any of our respective subsidiaries were solvent at the time of or after giving effect to the spin-off,
including the distribution of our common stock.
Under the Separation and Distribution Agreement, from and after the separation, each of Occidental and we will be responsible for the debts, liabilities and other
obligations related to the business or businesses which it owns and operates following the consummation of the separation, and each of Occidental and we will assume or
retain certain liabilities for the operation of our respective businesses prior to the spin-off and certain liabilities related to the spin-off. Although we do not expect to be liable for
any such obligations not expressly assumed by us pursuant to the Separation and Distribution Agreement, it is possible that a court would disregard the allocation agreed to
between the parties, and require that we assume responsibility for obligations allocated to Occidental, particularly if Occidental were to refuse or were unable to pay or perform
the subject allocated obligations. See "Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company—Separation and Distribution Agreement."
Risks Related to Our Common Stock
No market currently exists for our common stock. We cannot assure you that an active trading market will develop for our common stock.
Prior to the completion of the separation, there has been no public market for shares of our common stock. We cannot predict the extent to which investor interest in our
company will lead to the development of a trading market on the NYSE or otherwise, or how liquid that market might become. If an active market does not develop, you may
have difficulty selling any shares of our common stock that you receive in the separation.
The market price and trading volume of our common stock may be volatile and you may not be able to resell your shares at or above the initial market price of our
common stock following the spin-off.
The market price of our stock may be influenced by many factors, some of which are beyond our control, including those described above in "—Risks Related to Our
Business" and the following:
the failure of securities analysts to cover our common stock after the separation or changes in financial estimates by analysts;
•
•
our inability to meet the financial estimates of analysts who follow our common stock;
41
Table of Contents
our strategic actions;
our announcements of significant contracts, acquisitions, joint ventures or capital commitments;
general economic and stock market conditions;
changes in conditions or trends in our industry, markets or customers;
future sales of our common stock or other securities; and
•
•
•
•
•
•
investor perceptions of the investment opportunity associated with our common stock relative to other investment alternatives.
As a result of these factors, holders of our common stock may not be able to resell their shares at or above the initial market price following the separation or may not be
able to resell them at all. In addition, price volatility may be greater if trading volume of our common stock is low.
We do not anticipate paying significant dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future. As a result, you will need to sell your shares of common stock to
receive any significant income.
We intend to pay a cash dividend of $0.01 per share per quarter, or $0.04 per share per year. We currently intend to retain the remainder of our future earnings to support
the growth and development of our business and do not anticipate increasing the dividend on our common stock in the foreseeable future. The future payment of any dividends
will be at the sole discretion of our board of directors and will depend on many factors, including our earnings, capital requirements, financial condition, the limitations imposed
by the Delaware General Corporation Law (the "DGCL") and other considerations that our board of directors deems relevant. As a result, to receive significant income, you will
need to sell your shares of common stock. You may not be able to sell your shares of common stock at or above the price you paid for them.
Provisions contained in our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and amended and restated bylaws could discourage a takeover attempt, which may
reduce or eliminate the likelihood of a change of control transaction and, therefore, the ability of our stockholders to sell their shares for a premium.
Provisions contained in our certificate of incorporation and bylaws provide for limitations on the removal and replacement of directors, a classified board through 2018,
limitations on stockholder proposals at meetings of stockholders and limitations on stockholder action by written consent and the inability of stockholders to call special
meetings, could make it more difficult for a third-party to acquire control of our company. Our certificate of incorporation also authorizes our board of directors to issue preferred
stock without stockholder approval. If our board of directors elects to issue preferred stock, it could increase the difficulty for a third-party to acquire us, which may reduce or
eliminate our stockholders' ability to sell their shares of our common stock at a premium. See "Description of Capital Stock—Anti-Takeover Effects of Provisions of our
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, our Amended and Restated Bylaws and Delaware Law."
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation will designate the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware as the sole and exclusive forum for certain types
of actions and proceedings that may be initiated by our stockholders, which could limit our stockholders' ability to obtain an alternative judicial forum for disputes
with us or our directors, officers, employees or agents.
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation will provide that unless we consent in writing to the selection of an alternative forum, the Court of Chancery of the
State of Delaware will, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, be the sole and exclusive forum for:
any derivative action or proceeding brought on our behalf;
•
•
any action asserting a claim of breach of a fiduciary duty owed by any of our directors, officers, employees or agents to us or our shareholders;
42
Table of Contents
any action asserting a claim arising pursuant to any provision of the DGCL, our amended and restated certificate of incorporation or our bylaws; or
•
•
any action asserting a claim that is governed by the internal affairs doctrine, in each such case subject to such Court of Chancery having personal jurisdiction
over the indispensable parties named as defendants therein.
Any person or entity purchasing or otherwise holding any interest in shares of our capital stock will be deemed to have notice of, and consented to, the provisions of our
amended and restated certificate of incorporation described in the preceding sentence. This choice of forum provision may limit a shareholder's ability to bring a claim in a
judicial forum that it finds favorable for disputes with us or our directors, officers, employees or agents, which may discourage such lawsuits against us and such persons.
Alternatively, if a court were to find these provisions of our amended and restated certificate of incorporation inapplicable to, or unenforceable in respect of, one or more of the
specified types of actions or proceedings, we may incur additional costs associated with resolving such matters in other jurisdictions.
Table of Contents
43
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
The information in this information statement includes "forward-looking statements." The factors identified in this cautionary statement are important factors (but not
necessarily all of the important factors) that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statement made by us, or on our behalf.
You can typically identify "forward-looking statements" by the use of forward-looking words such as "aim," "anticipate," "believe," "budget," "continue," "could," "effort,"
"estimate," "expect," "forecast," "goal," "guidance," "intend," "likely," "may," "might," "objective," "outlook," "plan," "potential," "predict," "project," "seek," "should," "target,
"will" or "would" and other similar words. Such statements may include statements regarding our future financial position, budgets, capital expenditures, projected production
growth, projected costs, plans and objectives of management for future operations and possible future strategic transactions. Where any such forward-looking statement
includes a statement of the assumptions or bases underlying such forward-looking statement, we caution that, while we believe such assumptions or bases to be reasonable
and make them in good faith, assumed facts or bases almost always vary from actual results. The differences between assumed facts or bases and actual results can be
material, depending upon the circumstances. When considering forward-looking statements, you should keep in mind the risk factors and other cautionary statements described
under the heading "Risk Factors" included in this information statement.
Any forward-looking statement in which we, or our management, express an expectation or belief as to future results, is made in good faith and believed to have a
reasonable basis. However, there can be no assurance that the statement of expectation or belief will result or be achieved or accomplished. Taking this into account, the
following are identified as important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statement made by, or on behalf of,
our company:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
compliance with regulations or changes in regulations and the ability to get government permits and approvals;
commodity pricing;
risks of drilling;
regulatory initiatives relating to hydraulic fracturing and other well stimulation techniques;
tax law changes;
uncertainties associated with drilling for and producing oil and gas;
competition for oilfield equipment, services, qualified personnel and acquisitions;
risks related to our acquisition activities;
the subjective nature of estimates of proved reserves and related future net cash flows;
vulnerability to economic downturns and adverse developments in our business due to our debt;
insufficiency of our operating cash flow to fund planned capital expenditures;
inability to implement our capital investment program profitably or at all;
•
•
•
•
•
concentration of operations in single geographic area;
the need to impair the value of our oil and natural gas properties;
compliance with laws and regulations, including those pertaining to land use and environmental protection;
restrictions on our ability to obtain, use, manage or dispose of water;
our ability to operate outside of California;
44
Table of Contents
inability to drill identified locations when planned or at all;
concerns about climate change and other air quality issues;
catastrophic events for which we may be uninsured or underinsured;
cyber attacks;
operational issues that restrict market access; and
•
•
•
•
•
•
uncertainties related to the spin-off, the agreements related thereto and the anticipated effects of restructuring or reorganizing our business.
Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date hereof. We undertake no responsibility to publicly
release the result of any revision of our forward-looking statements after the date they are made.
Should one or more of the risks or uncertainties described in this prospectus occur, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, our actual results and plans could
differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statements.
All forward-looking statements, expressed or implied, included in this prospectus are expressly qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement. This cautionary
statement should also be considered in connection with any subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements that we or persons acting on our behalf may issue.
Table of Contents
Background
45
THE SPIN-OFF
As part of a strategic review to streamline and focus operations, Occidental's board of directors reviewed the possibility and advisability of separating its California
business from Occidental's other businesses. On February 14, 2014, Occidental announced that its board of directors had authorized management to pursue the spin-off of its
California business into a standalone, publicly traded company. On                    , 2014, Occidental announced that its board of directors had unanimously approved the spin-off
and the distribution of at least 80.1% of the stock of the new company to Occidental's shareholders as of the record date of                    , 2014. This authorization is subject to
the satisfaction or waiver by Occidental, in its sole discretion, of the conditions described below under "—Conditions to the Spin-Off." Following our spin-off from Occidental, we
will be an independent, publicly owned company.
To complete the spin-off on the Closing Date, Occidental will, following the restructuring transactions, distribute to its stockholders at least 80.1% of the shares of our
common stock. The distribution will occur on the distribution date, which is                    , 2014. Each holder of Occidental common stock will receive            shares of our
common stock for each share of Occidental common stock held by such stockholder at the close of business on                    , 2014, the record date. After completion of the
spin-off, we will own and operate the California business as an independent publicly traded company.
Each holder of Occidental common stock will continue to hold his, her or its shares in Occidental. No vote of Occidental stockholders is required or is being sought in
connection with the spin-off, and Occidental stockholders will not have any appraisal rights in connection with the spin-off.
The distribution of our common stock as described in this information statement is subject to the satisfaction, or waiver by the board of directors of Occidental, of certain
conditions. In addition, Occidental has the right not to complete the spin-off if, at any time prior to the distribution, the board of directors of Occidental determines, in its sole
discretion, that the spin-off is not in the best interests of Occidental or its stockholders or market conditions do not warrant completing the separation at that time. For a more
detailed description, see "—Conditions to the Spin-Off."
Reasons for the Spin-Off
The spin-off is expected to provide each company with a number of material opportunities and benefits, including the following:
•
•
•
•
•
creating two independent businesses that will be competitive industry leaders in their respective areas of operations;
allowing each business to pursue strategies tailored to its needs, including enabling CRC to reinvest substantially all of its cash flow in growing its business;
focusing each management team on the development and execution of its business in its areas of operation;
enabling each business to focus on, and accelerate its technical expertise in, specific reservoirs and fields; and
enhancing each company's market recognition with investors because of its status as an industry leader in its geographic areas of focus.
Manner of Effecting the Spin-Off
The general terms and conditions relating to the spin-off will be set forth in a Separation and Distribution Agreement between us and Occidental. Under the Separation and
Distribution Agreement, the distribution will be effective as of 11:59 p.m., Eastern Time, on                    , 2014, the distribution date.
46
Table of Contents
As a result of the spin-off, on the distribution date, each holder of Occidental common stock will receive            shares of our common stock for each share of Occidental
common stock owned. In order to receive shares of our common stock in the spin-off, an Occidental stockholder must be a stockholder at the close of business of the NYSE
on                    , 2014, the record date.
On the distribution date, Occidental will release the shares of our common stock to our distribution agent to distribute to Occidental stockholders. For Occidental
stockholders of record, our distribution agent will credit their shares of our common stock to book-entry accounts established to hold their shares of our common stock. Our
distribution agent will send these stockholders, including any Occidental stockholder that holds physical share certificates of Occidental common stock and is the registered
holder of such shares of Occidental common stock represented by those certificates on the record date, a statement reflecting their ownership of our common stock. Book-
entry refers to a method of recording stock ownership in records in which no physical certificates are used. Shares of our common stock will be credited by the broker or other
nominee for stockholders who own Occidental common stock through a broker or other nominee. We expect that it will take the distribution agent one to two weeks to
electronically issue shares of our common stock to Occidental stockholders or their bank or brokerage firm by way of direct registration in book-entry form. Trading of our stock
will not be affected by this delay in issuance by the distribution agent. As further discussed below, we will not issue fractional shares of our common stock in the distribution.
Following the spin-off, stockholders whose shares are held in book-entry form may request that their shares of our common stock be transferred to a brokerage or other account
at any time.
Occidental stockholders will not be required to make any payment or surrender or exchange their shares of Occidental common stock or take any other action to receive
their shares of our common stock. No vote of Occidental stockholders is required or sought in connection with the spin-off, including the restructuring transactions, and
Occidental stockholders have no appraisal rights in connection with the spin-off.
Occidental Retained Shares of CRC Common Stock
Occidental expects to dispose of all of the Retained Securities by making one or more offers to exchange such Retained Securities for outstanding shares of Occidental
common stock. For each share of Occidental common stock tendered for exchange, the holder of such Occidental common stock will receive a number of shares of CRC
common stock based on an exchange ratio to be determined by Occidental. Any Retained Securities Occidental does not dispose of through such exchanges will be distributed
pro rata to Occidental shareholders no later than 18 months after the spin-off.
Treatment of Fractional Shares
The distribution agent will not distribute any fractional shares of our common stock to Occidental stockholders. Instead, as soon as practicable on or after the distribution
date, the distribution agent will aggregate fractional shares of our common stock held by holders of record into whole shares, sell them in the open market at the prevailing
market prices and then distribute the aggregate net sale proceeds ratably to Occidental stockholders who would otherwise have been entitled to receive fractional shares of our
common stock. The amount of this payment will depend on the prices at which the distribution agent sells the aggregated fractional shares of our common stock in the open
market shortly after the distribution date. We will be responsible for paying any brokerage fees, which we do not expect to be material. The receipt of cash in lieu of fractional
shares of our common stock will generally result in a taxable gain or loss to the recipient stockholder. Each stockholder entitled to receive cash proceeds from these shares
should consult his, her or its own tax advisor as to the stockholder's particular circumstances. The tax consequences of the distribution are described in more detail under "—
U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Spin-Off."
47
Table of Contents
U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Spin-Off
The following is a summary of the material U.S. federal income tax considerations relating to holders of Occidental common stock as a result of the distribution. This
summary is based on the Code, the Treasury Regulations promulgated thereunder and judicial and administrative interpretations thereof, in each case as in effect and available
as of the date of this information statement and all of which are subject to differing interpretations that may change at any time, possibly with retroactive effect. Any such
change could affect the tax consequences described below.
Except as specifically described below, this summary is limited to holders of Occidental common stock that are U.S. holders (as described below). For purposes of this
summary, a U.S. holder is a beneficial owner of Occidental common stock that is, for U.S. federal income tax purposes:
an individual who is a citizen or resident of the United States;
a corporation (or other entity taxable as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes) created or organized in or under the laws of the United States, any
state thereof or the District of Columbia;
an estate, the income of which is subject to U.S. federal income taxation regardless of its source; or
•
•
•
•
a trust, if (1) a court within the United States is able to exercise primary supervision over its administration and one or more U.S. persons have the authority to
control all of the substantial decisions of such trust or (2) it has a valid election in effect under applicable Treasury regulations to be treated as a U.S. person for
U.S. federal income tax purposes.
A non-U.S. holder is a beneficial owner (other than an entity treated as a partnership or other pass-through entity for U.S. federal income tax purposes) of shares of
Occidental common stock who is not a U.S. holder.
This summary does not discuss all tax considerations that may be relevant to Occidental shareholders in light of their particular circumstances, nor does it address the
consequences to Occidental shareholders subject to special treatment under the U.S. federal income tax laws, such as:
•
•
•
•
•
dealers or traders in securities or currencies;
banks, financial institutions, or insurance companies;
regulated investment companies, real estate investment trusts, or grantor trusts;
former U.S. citizens or long-term residents of the United States;
entities that are tax-exempt for U.S. federal income tax purposes;
•
•
•
•
•
•
traders in securities that elect to use a mark-to-market method of accounting for their securities;
holders who own shares of our common stock as part of a hedging, integrated, or conversion transaction or a straddle or holders deemed to sell shares of our
common stock under the constructive sale provisions of the Code;
holders who acquired our common stock pursuant to the exercise of employee stock options or otherwise as compensation;
U.S. holders whose "functional currency" is not the U.S. dollar;
holders subject to the alternative minimum tax; or
partnerships or other pass-through entities and investors in such entities.
48
Table of Contents
This summary does not address the U.S. federal income tax consequences to Occidental shareholders who do not hold Occidental common stock as capital assets.
Moreover, this summary does not address any state, local or non-U.S. tax consequences or any estate, gift or other non-income tax consequences.
If a partnership (including an entity treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes) holds shares of Occidental common stock, the tax treatment of a
partner in the partnership will generally depend upon the status of the partner and the activities of the partnership. If you are a partner of a partnership holding shares of
Occidental common stock, you should consult your tax advisor.
HOLDERS OF OCCIDENTAL COMMON STOCK SHOULD CONSULT THEIR OWN TAX ADVISORS WITH RESPECT TO THE SPECIFIC U.S. FEDERAL, STATE AND
LOCAL AND NON-U.S. TAX CONSEQUENCES OF THE DISTRIBUTION IN LIGHT OF THEIR PARTICULAR CIRCUMSTANCES AND THE EFFECT OF POSSIBLE
CHANGES IN LAW THAT MIGHT AFFECT THE TAX CONSEQUENCES DESCRIBED HEREIN.
Tax-free Status of the Distribution
Occidental has requested (i) a private letter ruling substantially to the effect that certain aspects of the transactions that will be undertaken in preparation for, or in
connection with, the spin-off will not cause the distribution to be taxable to Occidental or its affiliates and (ii) an opinion from its tax counsel regarding, among other things, that
the spin-off generally qualifies as a tax-free transaction under Sections 355, 361 and/or 368(a)(1)(D) of the Code. Assuming that the distribution qualifies as a tax-free
distribution,
no gain or loss will be recognized by, and no amount will be included in the income of, Occidental stockholders upon their receipt of shares of our common stock
in the distribution;
the basis of an Occidental stockholder in Occidental common stock immediately before the distribution will be allocated between the Occidental common stock
held by such holder and our common stock received by such holder in the distribution, in proportion to their relative fair market values at the time of the
distribution;
the holding period of our common stock received by each Occidental stockholder will include the period during which the stockholder held the Occidental common
stock on which the distribution is made, provided that the Occidental common stock is held as a capital asset on the distribution date;
an Occidental stockholder that receives cash in lieu of a fractional share of our common stock generally should recognize taxable gain or loss equal to the
difference between the amount of cash received for such fractional share of our common stock and the tax basis allocable to such fractional share interests in our
common stock (determined as described above) and such gain will be capital gain or loss if the Occidental common stock on which the distribution is made is
held as a capital asset on the distribution date; and
•
•
•
•
•
no gain or loss will be recognized by Occidental upon the distribution of our common stock.
The private letter ruling and tax opinion of counsel will rely on certain facts, assumptions, representations and undertakings from Occidental and us regarding the past and
future conduct of the companies' respective businesses and other matters. If any of these facts, assumptions, representations, or undertakings are, or become, incorrect or not
otherwise satisfied, Occidental may not be able to rely on the private letter ruling or the opinion of its tax advisor. In addition, an opinion of counsel is not binding on the IRS,
so, notwithstanding the opinion of Occidental's tax advisor, the IRS could conclude upon audit that the distribution is taxable if it disagrees with the conclusions in the opinion
or for other reasons. There can be no assurance that the IRS or the courts will not challenge the qualification of the distribution as a tax-free transaction under Sections 355,
361 and/or 368(a)(1)(D) of the Code or that such challenge would not prevail.
49
Table of Contents
Even if the distribution otherwise qualifies as tax-free, Occidental or its affiliates may recognize taxable gain under Section 355(e) of the Code if there are one or more
acquisitions (including issuances) of either our stock or the stock of Occidental, representing 50% or more, measured by vote or value, of the then-outstanding stock of either
corporation, and the acquisition or acquisitions are deemed to be part of a plan or series of related transactions that include the distribution. Any such acquisition of our stock
within two years before the initial distribution or two years after the final disposition of the Retained Securities (with exceptions, including public trading by less-than 5%
stockholders and certain compensatory stock issuances) generally will be presumed to be part of such a plan unless Occidental can rebut that presumption. If Occidental
recognizes gain under Section 355(e), it would result in a significant U.S. federal income tax liability to Occidental (although the distribution would generally be tax-free to
Occidental stockholders), and, under some circumstances, the Tax Sharing Agreement would require us to indemnify Occidental for such tax liability. See "—Indemnification"
and "Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company—Tax Sharing Agreement."
Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Distribution to U.S. Holders
Distribution of CRC Stock
The discussion above under "—Tax-free Status of the Distribution" applies to U.S. holders if the distribution qualifies as tax-free under Section 355 of the Code.
If the distribution of shares of our common stock does not qualify under Section 355, then each U.S. holder of Occidental receiving shares of our common stock in the
distribution generally would be treated as receiving a distribution in an amount equal to the fair market value of such shares (including fractional shares in lieu of which such
holder receives cash) of our common stock. This generally would result in the following consequences to the U.S. holder:
first, a taxable dividend to the extent of such U.S. holder's pro rata share of Occidental's current and accumulated earnings and profits;
second, any amount that exceeds Occidental's earnings and profits would be treated as a nontaxable return of capital to the extent of such U.S. holder's tax basis
in its shares of Occidental's common stock; and
•
•
•
third, any remaining amount would be taxed as capital gain.
In addition, Occidental would recognize a taxable gain equal to the excess of the fair market value of our common stock distributed over Occidental's adjusted tax basis
in such stock, and, under certain circumstances, the Tax Sharing Agreement would require us to indemnify Occidental for such tax liability. See "—Indemnification" and
"Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company—Tax Sharing Agreement."
Cash in Lieu of Fractional Shares
Assuming the distribution qualifies as a tax-free distribution for U.S. federal income tax purposes, a U.S. holder who receives cash in lieu of our common stock in
connection with the distribution generally will recognize capital gain or loss measured by the difference between the cash received for such fractional share of our common
stock and the holder's tax basis that would be allocated to such fractional share. Any such capital gain would be long term capital gain, assuming that the U.S. holder has held
all of its Occidental common stock for more than one year. If the distribution does not qualify as a tax-free distribution, then the same rule will apply, but the U.S. holder's basis
in the fractional share of our stock will be its fair market value at the time of the distribution.
50
Table of Contents
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding
A U.S. holder that receives a taxable distribution of our common stock or payment of cash in lieu of a fractional share of our common stock made in connection with the
distribution may be subject to information reporting and backup withholding. A U.S. holder may avoid backup withholding if such holder provides proof of an applicable
exemption or a correct taxpayer identification number, and otherwise complies with the requirements of the backup withholding rules. Backup withholding does not constitute an
additional tax, but is merely an advance payment that may be refunded or credited against a holder's U.S. federal income tax liability, provided the required information is timely
supplied to the IRS.
Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Distribution to Non-U.S. Holders
Distribution of CRC Stock
Provided that the distribution qualifies as a tax-free distribution for U.S. federal income tax purposes, non-U.S. holders receiving stock in the distribution will not be
subject to U.S. federal income tax on any gain realized on the receipt of our common stock so long as (1) Occidental's common stock is considered regularly traded on an
established securities market and (2) such non-U.S. holder beneficially owns 5% or less of Occidental's common stock at all times during the shorter of the five-year period
ending on the distribution date or the non-U.S. holder's holding period, taking into account both actual and constructive ownership under the applicable ownership attribution
rules of the Code. Occidental believes that its common stock has been and is regularly traded on an established securities market for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
Any non-U.S. holder that beneficially owns more than 5% of Occidental common stock under the rules described above and receives our common stock will be subject to
U.S. federal income tax on any gain realized with respect to its existing Occidental common stock as a result of the distribution if (1) Occidental is treated as a "United States
real property holding corporation" ("USRPHC") for U.S. federal income tax purposes at any time during the shorter of the five year period ending on the distribution date or the
period during which the non-U.S. holder held such Occidental common stock and (2) we are not a USRPHC immediately following the distribution. In general, either Occidental
or we will be a USRPHC at any relevant time described above if 50% or more of the fair market value of the respective company's assets constitute "United States real
property interests" within the meaning of the Code. We expect to be a USRPHC immediately after the distribution. However, because the determination of whether we are a
USRPHC turns on the relative fair market value of our United States real property interests and our other assets, and because the USRPHC rules are complex, we can give no
assurance that we will be a USRPHC after the distribution. Any non-U.S. holder that beneficially owns more than 5% of Occidental common stock under the rules described
above and receives our common stock will not be subject to U.S. federal income tax on any gain realized with respect to its existing Occidental common stock as a result of
the distribution if (a) we are a USRPHC and (b) such non-U.S. holders meet certain procedural and substantive requirements described in Treasury regulations. Non-U.S.
holders should consult their tax advisors to determine if they are more than 5% beneficial owners of Occidental's common stock, or may be more than 5% owners of our
common stock under the applicable rules.
If the distribution does not qualify as a tax-free distribution for U.S. federal income tax purposes, then each non-U.S. holder receiving shares of our common stock in the
distribution (including fractional shares in lieu of which such holder receives cash) would be subject to U.S. federal income tax at a rate of 30% of the gross amount of any such
distribution that is treated as a dividend, unless:
(1)   such dividend was effectively connected with the conduct of a U.S. trade or business, and, if required by an applicable income tax treaty, is attributable to a
permanent establishment or fixed base maintained by the non-U.S. holder within the United States; or
51
Table of Contents
(2)   the non-U.S. holder is entitled to a reduced tax rate with respect to dividends pursuant to an applicable income tax treaty.
Under the first exception, regular graduated federal income tax rates applicable to U.S. persons would apply to the dividend, and, in the case of a corporate non-U.S.
holder, a branch profits tax may also apply, as described below. Unless one of these exceptions applies and the non-U.S. holder provides Occidental with an appropriate IRS
Form (or Forms) W-8 to claim an exemption from or reduction in the rate of withholding under such exception, Occidental may be required to withhold 30% of any distribution of
our common stock treated as a dividend to satisfy the non-U.S. holder's U.S. federal income tax liability.
A distribution of our common stock that is not tax-free for U.S. federal income tax purposes could also be treated as a nontaxable return of capital or could trigger capital
gain for U.S. federal income tax purposes. A distribution of our common stock that is treated as a nontaxable return of capital is generally not subject to U.S. income tax.
Furthermore, such distribution generally is not subject to U.S. withholding tax so long as the common stock of Occidental is regularly traded on an established securities
market, which Occidental believes to be the case, and the non-U.S. holder does not beneficially own more than 5% of Occidental's common stock at any time during the
shorter of the five year period ending on the distribution date or the period during which the non-U.S. Holder held such Occidental common stock, taking into account the
attribution rules described above. A distribution of our common stock triggering capital gain is generally not subject to U.S. federal income taxation subject to the same
exceptions described below under "—Cash In Lieu of Fractional Shares," and generally is not subject to U.S. withholding tax subject to the same exception described above for
a nontaxable return of capital.
Cash In Lieu of Fractional Shares
Assuming the distribution qualifies as a tax-free distribution, non-U.S. holders generally will not be subject to regular U.S. federal income or withholding tax on gain
realized on the receipt of cash in lieu of fractional shares of our common stock received in the distribution, unless:
(1)   the gain is effectively connected with a United States trade or business of the non-U.S. holder and, if required by an applicable income tax treaty, is
attributable to a permanent establishment or fixed base maintained by the non-U.S. holder within the United States;
(2)   the non-U.S. holder is a nonresident alien individual who is present in the United States for a period or periods aggregating 183 days or more during the taxable
year in which the distribution occurs and certain other conditions are met; or
(3)   we are treated as a USRPHC immediately after the distribution, and (i) our common stock is not regularly traded on an established securities market (which we
do not believe will be the case), or (ii) if our common stock were regularly traded on an established securities market, the non-U.S. holder beneficially owned more than
5% of our common stock under the rules described above.
If one of the above clauses (1) through (3) applies, the non-U.S. holder generally will recognize capital gain or loss measured by the difference between the cash received
for the fractional share of our common stock and the holder's tax basis that would be allocated to such fractional share. Gains realized by a non-U.S. holder described in
clause (1) above that are effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business, and, if required by an applicable income tax treaty, are attributable to a permanent
establishment or a fixed base maintained by the non-U.S. holder within the United States generally will be taxed on a net income basis at the graduated rates that are
applicable to U.S. persons. In the case of a non-U.S. holder that is a corporation, such income may also be subject to the U.S. federal branch profits tax, which generally is
imposed on a foreign corporation upon the deemed repatriation from the United States of effectively connected earnings and profits, currently at a 30% rate, unless the rate is
reduced or eliminated by an applicable income tax treaty and the non-U.S. holder is a qualified resident of the treaty country. Gains realized by a non-U.S. holder described in
clause (2) above generally will be subject to a 30% tax
52
Table of Contents
from the receipt of cash in lieu of fractional shares (or a lower treaty rate, if applicable), with such gains eligible to be offset by certain U.S.-source capital losses recognized in
the same taxable year of the distribution. Non-U.S. holders that meet the circumstances in clause (3) should consult their tax advisors regarding the determination of the
amount of gain (if any) that would be subject to U.S. federal income tax. If the distribution does not qualify as a tax-free distribution, then the same rule will apply, but the non-
U.S. holder's basis in the fractional share of our stock will be its fair market value at the time of the distribution.
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding
Payments made to non-U.S. holders in the distribution may be subject to information reporting and backup withholding. Non-U.S. holders generally may avoid backup
withholding by furnishing a properly executed IRS Form W-8BEN (or other applicable IRS Form W-8) certifying the non-U.S. holder's non-U.S. status or by otherwise
establishing an exemption. Backup withholding is not an additional tax. Rather, non-U.S. holders may use amounts withheld as a credit against their U.S. federal income tax
liability or may claim a refund of any excess amounts withheld by timely and duly filing a claim for refund with the IRS.
Information Reporting for Significant Stockholders
Current Treasury regulations require a "significant" stockholder (one who immediately before the distribution owns 5% or more (by vote or value) of the total outstanding
Occidental common stock) who receives our common stock pursuant to the distribution to attach to such stockholder's U.S. federal income tax return for the year in which the
distribution occurs a detailed statement setting forth such data as may be appropriate in order to show the applicability to the distribution of Section 355 of the Code.
Indemnification
Under the Tax Sharing Agreement, we have agreed to indemnify Occidental from liability for any taxes arising from the spin-off to the extent attributable to a breach by us
(or any of our subsidiaries) of any of our representations or covenants in the Tax Sharing Agreement or made in connection with the private letter ruling or opinion of counsel.
We also have agreed to pay 50% of any taxes arising from the spin-off or related transactions to the extent that the tax is not attributable to the fault of either party. See
"Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company—Tax Sharing Agreement."
Results of the Spin-Off
After the spin-off, we will be an independent, publicly traded company. Immediately following the spin-off, we expect to have approximately        registered holders of
shares of our common stock and approximately        shares of our common stock outstanding, based on the number of stockholders and outstanding shares of Occidental
common stock expected as of the record date. These figures assume no exercise of outstanding options or issuance of other stock awards and exclude shares of Occidental
common stock held directly or indirectly by Occidental, if any. The actual number of shares to be distributed will be determined on the record date and will reflect any exercise
of Occidental options or issuance of other stock awards between the date the Occidental board of directors declares the dividend for the distribution and the record date for the
distribution.
For information regarding options to purchase shares of our common stock or issuance of other stock awards that will be outstanding after the distribution, see
"Capitalization," "Management" and "Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company—Employee Matters Agreement."
53
Table of Contents
Before our separation from Occidental, we and Occidental will enter into a Separation and Distribution Agreement and several other agreements to effect the spin-off.
These agreements will provide for the allocation between us and Occidental of Occidental's assets, liabilities and obligations, and we will generally be allocated those assets,
liabilities and obligations relating to the California business. These agreements will also govern certain interactions between us and Occidental after the separation (including
with respect to employee matters, tax matters and intellectual property matters). We and Occidental will also enter into a Transition Services Agreement that will provide for,
among other matters, assistance to us or Occidental as needed. For a more detailed description of these agreements, see "Arrangements Between Occidental and Our
Company."
Trading Prior to the Distribution Date
It is anticipated that, on or shortly before the record date and continuing up to and including the distribution date, there will be a "when-issued" market in our common
stock. When-issued trading refers to a sale or purchase made conditionally because the security has been authorized but not yet issued. The when-issued trading market will
be a market for shares of our common stock that will be distributed to Occidental stockholders on the distribution date. Any Occidental stockholder that owns shares of
Occidental common stock at the close of business on the record date will be entitled to shares of our common stock distributed in the spin-off. Occidental stockholders may
trade this entitlement to shares of our common stock, without the shares of Occidental common stock they own, on the when-issued market. On the first trading day following
the distribution date, we expect when-issued trading with respect to our common stock will end and "regular-way" trading will begin. See "Trading Market."
Following the distribution date, we expect shares of our common stock to be listed on the NYSE under the ticker symbol "CRC." We will announce the when-issued ticker
symbol when and if it becomes available.
It is also anticipated that, on or shortly before the record date and continuing up to and including the distribution date, there will be two markets in Occidental common
stock: a "regular-way" market and an "ex-distribution" market. Shares of Occidental common stock that trade on the regular-way market will trade with an entitlement to shares
of our common stock distributed pursuant to the distribution. Shares that trade on the ex-distribution market will trade without an entitlement to shares of our common stock
distributed pursuant to the distribution. Therefore, if shares of Occidental common stock are sold in the regular-way market up to and including the distribution date, the selling
stockholder's right to receive shares of our common stock in the distribution will be sold as well. However, if Occidental stockholders own shares of Occidental common stock
at the close of business on the record date and sell those shares on the ex-distribution market up to and including the distribution date, the selling stockholders will still receive
the shares of our common stock that they would otherwise receive pursuant to the distribution. See "Trading Market."
Treatment of Long-Term Incentive Awards for Current and Former Employees
We currently anticipate that equity-based and long-term incentive compensation awards from Occidental held by employees who will be employed by us and our
subsidiaries following the spin-off ("transferred employees") will generally be converted into awards with respect to our common stock under our equity and long-term incentive
compensation programs, with the number of such awards determined based upon the relative trading prices of our common stock and Occidental common stock in a manner
intended to preserve the value of such awards. Generally, the corresponding award granted under our long-term incentive plan will be similar to the award the transferred
employee held under Occidental's long-term incentive plan, except that restricted stock units and cash-based long-term incentive awards will be converted instead into awards
of restricted shares of our common stock. In addition, the converted awards will cease to be subject to the prior-established performance-based vesting requirements and will
Table of Contents
54
instead vest based upon the same service-based vesting requirements and such performance-based vesting requirements, if any, as are determined by the Occidental
Compensation Committee as of the spin-off.
Equity-based and long-term incentive compensation awards from Occidental that are held by employees who will stay with Occidental will remain outstanding pursuant to
the applicable plans maintained by Occidental, with corresponding adjustments made to the number of shares of Occidental common stock subject to such awards and the
reference price of such awards based upon the relative pre-spin-off and post-spin-off trading prices of Occidental common stock in a manner intended to preserve the value of
such awards.
The treatment of certain phantom unit awards held by current and former employees of us and Occidental has not yet been finally determined.
Conditions to the Spin-Off
Occidental expects that the spin-off will be effective as of 11:59 p.m., Eastern Time, on                    , 2014, the distribution date, provided that the following conditions
shall have been satisfied or waived by Occidental in its sole discretion:
the SEC will have declared effective our registration statement on Form 10, of which this information statement is a part, under the Exchange Act; no stop order
suspending the effectiveness of the registration statement shall be in effect; and no proceedings for such purpose shall be pending before or threatened by the
SEC;
any required actions and filings with regard to state securities and blue sky laws of the U.S. (and any comparable laws under any foreign jurisdictions) will have
been taken and, where applicable, have become effective or been accepted;
our common stock will have been authorized for listing on the NYSE, or another national securities exchange approved by Occidental, subject to official notice of
issuance;
Occidental shall have received a private letter ruling from the IRS to the effect that certain aspects of the transactions that will be undertaken in preparation for, or
in connection with, the spin-off will not cause the distribution to be taxable to Occidental or its affiliates, and such private letter ruling shall not have been revoked
or modified in any material respect;
Occidental shall have received an opinion of its tax counsel, in form and substance acceptable to Occidental and which shall remain in full force and effect, that
(i) certain transactions that will be undertaken in preparation for, or in connection with, the spin-off will not be taxable to Occidental or its affiliates for federal
income tax purposes and (ii) the spin-off generally qualifies as a tax-free transaction under Sections 355, 361 and/or 368(a)(1)(D) of the Code;
no order, injunction, decree or regulation issued by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction or other legal restraint or prohibition preventing consummation of
the distribution will be in effect;
the completion of our new financing arrangements;
no other events or developments shall have occurred or exist that, in the judgment of the board of directors of Occidental, in its sole discretion, makes it
inadvisable to effect the distribution or other transactions contemplated by the Separation and Distribution Agreement;
each of the ancillary agreements contemplated by the Separation and Distribution Agreement shall have been executed by each party thereto; and
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
any government approvals and other material consents necessary to consummate the distribution will have been obtained and remain in full force and effect.
55
Table of Contents
The fulfillment of the foregoing conditions does not create any obligations on Occidental's part to effect the spin-off, and the Occidental board of directors has reserved
the right, in its sole discretion, to abandon, modify or change the terms of the spin-off, including by waiving any conditions to the spin-off or accelerating or delaying the timing
of the consummation of all or part of the distribution, at any time prior to the distribution date.
Reasons for Furnishing this Information Statement
This information statement is being furnished solely to provide information to Occidental stockholders who will receive shares of our common stock in the spin-off. It is
not to be construed as an inducement or encouragement to buy or sell any of our securities. We believe that the information contained in this information statement is accurate
as of the date set forth on the cover. Changes may occur after that date and neither Occidental nor we undertake any obligation to update the information, except to the extent
applicable securities laws require us to do so.
Table of Contents
Market for Our Common Stock
56
TRADING MARKET
There has been no public market for our common stock. An active trading market may not develop or may not be sustained. We anticipate that trading of our common
stock will commence on a "when-issued" basis on or shortly before the record date and continue through the distribution date. When-issued trading refers to a sale or purchase
made conditionally because the security has been authorized but not yet issued. When-issued trades generally settle within four trading days after the distribution date. If you
own shares of Occidental common stock at the close of business on the record date, you will be entitled to shares of our common stock distributed pursuant to the spin-off.
You may trade this entitlement to shares of our common stock, without the shares of Occidental common stock you own, on the when-issued market. On the first trading day
following the distribution date, any when-issued trading with respect to our common stock will end and "regular-way" trading will begin. We intend to list our common stock on
the NYSE under the ticker symbol "CRC." We will announce our when-issued trading symbol when and if it becomes available.
It is also anticipated that, on or shortly before the record date and continuing up to and including the distribution date, there will be two markets in Occidental common
stock: a "regular-way" market and an "ex-distribution" market. Shares of Occidental common stock that trade on the regular-way market will trade with an entitlement to shares
of our common stock distributed pursuant to the distribution. Shares that trade on the ex-distribution market will trade without an entitlement to shares of our common stock
distributed pursuant to the distribution. Therefore, if you sell shares of Occidental common stock in the regular-way market up to and including the distribution date, you will be
selling your right to receive shares of our common stock in the distribution. However, if you own shares of Occidental common stock at the close of business on the record
date and sell those shares on the ex-distribution market up to and including the distribution date, you will still receive the shares of our common stock that you would otherwise
receive pursuant to the distribution.
We cannot predict the prices at which our common stock may trade before the spin-off on a "when-issued" basis or after the spin-off. Those prices will be determined by
the marketplace. Prices at which trading in our common stock occurs may fluctuate significantly. Those prices may be influenced by many factors, including anticipated or
actual fluctuations in our operating results or those of other companies in our industry, investor perception of our company and the energy industry, market fluctuations and
general economic conditions. In addition, the stock market in general has experienced extreme price and volume fluctuations that have affected the performance of many
stocks and that have often been unrelated or disproportionate to the operating performance of these companies. These are just some factors that may adversely affect the
market price of our common stock. See "Risk Factors—Risks Related to Our Common Stock."
Transferability of Shares of Our Common Stock
The shares of our common stock that you will receive in the distribution will be freely transferable, unless you are considered an "affiliate" of ours under Rule 144 under
the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the "Securities Act"). Persons who can be considered our affiliates after the spin-off generally include individuals or entities that
directly, or indirectly through one or more intermediaries, control, are controlled by, or are under common control with, us, and may include certain of our officers and directors.
In addition, individuals who are affiliates of Occidental on the distribution date may be deemed to be affiliates of ours. We estimate that our directors and executive officers,
who may be considered "affiliates," will beneficially own approximately            shares of our common stock immediately following the distribution. Occidental may also be
considered our affiliate because immediately following the distribution Occidental may own as much as 19.9% of CRC's outstanding shares of common stock (estimated to be
equal to approximately            shares of common stock of CRC). See "Security
57
Table of Contents
Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management" included elsewhere in this information statement for more information. As discussed under "Other Related Party
Transactions," we are entering into a Stockholder's and Registration Rights Agreement with Occidental pursuant to which we will be required to use our best efforts to effect the
registration under applicable federal and state securities laws of the shares of our common stock retained by Occidental after the distribution. See "Arrangements Between
Occidental and Our Company—Stockholder's and Registration Rights Agreement" included elsewhere in this information statement. Our affiliates may sell shares of our
common stock received in the distribution only:
under a registration statement that the SEC has declared effective under the Securities Act; or
•
•
under an exemption from registration under the Securities Act, such as the exemption afforded by Rule 144.
In general, under Rule 144 as currently in effect, an affiliate will be entitled to sell, within any three-month period commencing 90 days after the date the registration
statement, of which this information statement is a part, is declared effective, a number of shares of our common stock that does not exceed the greater of:
1.0% of our common stock then outstanding; or
•
•
the average weekly trading volume of our common stock on the NYSE during the four calendar weeks preceding the filing of a notice on Form 144 with respect to
the sale.
Rule 144 also includes notice requirements and restrictions governing the manner of sale. Sales may not be made under Rule 144 unless certain information about us is
publicly available.
In the future, we may adopt new stock option and other equity-based award plans and issue options to purchase shares of our common stock and other stock-based
awards. We currently expect to file a registration statement under the Securities Act to register shares to be issued under these stock plans. Shares issued pursuant to awards
after the effective date of the registration statement, other than shares issued to affiliates, generally will be freely tradable without further registration under the Securities Act.
Except for our common stock distributed in the distribution and the Retained Securities, none of our equity securities will be outstanding on or immediately after the spin-
off and, except for the Stockholder's and Registration Rights Agreement with Occidental with respect to the Retained Securities, there are no registration rights agreements
existing with respect to our common stock.
Table of Contents
58
DIVIDEND POLICY
We intend to pay a cash dividend of $0.01 per share per quarter, or $0.04 per share per year. We currently intend to retain the remainder of our future earnings to support
the growth and development of our business. In addition, we will be authorized to implement a share repurchase program if circumstances warrant. The payment of future cash
dividends, if any, will be at the discretion of our board of directors and will depend upon, among other things, our financial condition, results of operations, capital requirements
and development expenditures, future business prospects and any restrictions imposed by future debt instruments.
The following table sets forth (i) our historical capitalization as of June 30, 2014 and (ii) our adjusted capitalization assuming the distribution, the incurrence of debt and
other matters (as discussed in "The Spin-Off") were effective as of June 30, 2014. The table below should be read in conjunction with "Summary Combined Historical and Pro
Forma Financial Data," "Unaudited Pro Forma Financial Data," "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" and our audited
combined financial statements, unaudited interim combined condensed financial statements and the notes to those statements included elsewhere in this information
statement.
CAPITALIZATION
Debt Outstanding
Short-term debt
Long-term debt
Total debt
Net Investment / Stockholders' Equity
Common stock
Par value
Additional paid-in capital
As of June 30, 2014
Historical
As Adjusted
(Unaudited)
(in millions)
$
—  $
—
—
—
—
—
6,065
6,065
Net Investment/Stockholders' Equity
Total Capitalization
Table of Contents
59
10,274
4,657
$ 10,274  $
10,722
SELECTED HISTORICAL COMBINED FINANCIAL DATA
The following tables set forth selected historical combined financial data for the periods indicated. The historical unaudited combined financial data for the six months
ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 and balance sheet data as of June 30, 2014 have been derived from our unaudited condensed combined financial statements included
elsewhere in this information statement. The unaudited condensed combined financial statements have been prepared on the same basis as our audited combined financial
statements, except as stated in the related notes thereto, and include all normal recurring adjustments that, in the opinion of management, are necessary to present fairly our
financial condition and result of operations for such periods. The results of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 presented below are not necessarily
indicative of results for the entire fiscal year. Our selected historical combined financial data as of December 31, 2013 and 2012 and for the fiscal years ended December 31,
2013, 2012 and 2011 have been derived from our audited historical combined financial statements included elsewhere in this information statement. Our historical combined
financial data as of December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 and for the years ended December 31, 2010 and 2009 have been derived from our unaudited accounting records not
included in this information statement.
The financial statements included elsewhere in this information statement may not necessarily reflect our financial position, results of operations and cash flows as if we
had operated as a stand-alone public company during all periods presented. Accordingly, our historical results should not be relied upon as an indicator of our future
performance.
The following selected historical financial data should be read in conjunction with "Capitalization," "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations," "Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company" and our historical financial statements and related notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this
information statement.
Statement of Income Data:
Net sales, including to related parties
Income before taxes
Net income
Balance Sheet Data:
Property, plant and equipment, net
Net investment
Statement of Cash Flows Data:
Net cash provided by operating activities
Capital expenditures
Payments for purchases of assets and businesses, and other
Table of Contents
60
Six Months
Ended
June 30,
2014
2013
$ 2,262  $ 2,098 
703 
  $
  $
422
782  $
469  $
As of
June 30,
2014
2013
2012
2011
2010
As of December 31,
(in millions)
$ 14,434  $ 14,008  $ 13,499  $ 11,778  $ 8,823
  $ 10,274  $ 9,989  $ 9,860  $ 8,624  $ 6,557
Six Months
2014
$ 1,234
  $ (1,003
  $
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA COMBINED FINANCIAL DATA
The unaudited pro forma combined financial statements presented below have been derived from our historical combined financial statements included elsewhere in this
information statement. While the historical combined financial statements reflect the past financial results of the California business, these pro forma statements give effect to
the separation of those operations into a standalone, publicly traded company in the spin-off.
The pro forma adjustments, including related tax effects, to reflect the spin-off include the following:
the receipt of $6.065 billion from the issuance of new debt, before deducting fees and costs, as well as the interest expense related to such debt;
the distribution of approximately $6.0 billion to Occidental from the net proceeds from our new debt;
the issuance of approximately       million shares of our common stock; and
•
•
•
•
the trade receivables CRC would carry as it starts marketing its own products and the assumption of certain liabilities in connection with the spin-off.
The separation and distribution, tax sharing, transaction services, employee matters and other related agreements have not been finalized, and the pro forma financial
statements will be revised in future amendments to reflect any effects of those agreements, to the extent material.
The unaudited pro forma combined statements of income for the year ended December 31, 2013 and the six months ended June 30, 2014 have been prepared as though
the spin-off occurred as of January 1, 2013. The unaudited pro forma combined balance sheet at June 30, 2014 has been prepared as though the spin-off occurred on June 30,
2014. The pro forma adjustments are based on available information and assumptions that we believe are reasonable; however, such adjustments are subject to change based
on the final terms of the spin-off and the related separation and distribution agreements, as well as our expected debt offering. Additionally, such adjustments are estimates and
may not prove to be accurate.
Management has attempted to include recurring costs of operating as a stand-alone company, including executive oversight, accounting, procurement, engineering,
drilling, exploration, marketing, finance, internal audit, legal, risk management, tax, treasury, information technology, government relations, investor relations, public relations,
financial reporting, human resources, ethics and compliance, and certain other shared services related to being a stand-alone company. Only costs we have determined to be
factually supportable are included as pro forma adjustments, including the items described above. We expect the costs of operating as a stand-alone public company, other
than debt-related costs, will be generally comparable to the costs reported in the historical combined financial statements. Additionally, such costs are estimates and there
could be additional incremental costs not reflected in the unaudited pro forma combined financial statements. Subject to the terms of the Separation and Distribution
Agreement, nonrecurring third-party costs and expenses related to the separation, other than the debt-related costs, and incurred prior to the separation date will generally be
paid by Occidental. We expect such nonrecurring amounts to include costs to separate and/or duplicate information technology systems, outside legal and accounting fees,
and similar costs.
The financial information presented below is not necessarily indicative of our future performance or what our financial position and results of operations would have been
had we operated as a stand-alone public company during the periods presented, or had the transactions reflected in the pro forma adjustments actually occurred as of the dates
assumed. The unaudited pro forma combined financial data are for illustrative purposes only. The unaudited pro forma combined financial data constitute forward-looking
information and are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated. See "Forward-Looking Statements" in
this information statement.
The unaudited pro forma combined financial data should be read in conjunction with "Summary Combined Historical and Pro Forma Financial Data," "Management's
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" and our audited combined financial statements, unaudited interim combined condensed financial
statements and the related notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this information statement.
61
Table of Contents
Revenues:
Net sales to related parties
Net sales to third parties
Other income
Costs and expenses:
Production costs
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Taxes other than on income
Exploration expense
Interest and debt expense, net
Income before income taxes
Provision for income taxes
Net income
Pro forma earnings per share(d):
Basic
Diluted
Pro forma shares outstanding(d):
Basic
Diluted
Table of Contents
Revenues and other income:
Net sales to related parties
Net sales to third parties
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Statements of Income
Six Months Ended June 30, 2014
62
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Statements of Income
Year Ended December 31, 2013
Pro Forma
Adjustments
Pro Forma
Historical
(in millions, except per share amounts)
$
2,206  $
56 
 
(1)
$
2,261
578 
166 
582 
107 
46 
—
1,479
782 
(313)
469  $
(2,206) (a)   $
 
2,206  (a)
—
—
— 
 
— 
 
— 
 
— 
— 
 
146  (b)
146
(146)
58  (c)
(88)
$
$
  $
— 
2,262 
(1)
2,261
578 
166 
582 
107 
46 
146
1,625
636 
(255)
381
Pro Forma
Adjustments
Historical
(in millions, except per share amounts)
$
4,174  $
(4,174) (a)   $
—
Pro Forma
Net sales to third parties
Other income
Costs and expenses:
Production costs
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Taxes other than on income
Exploration expense
Interest and debt expense, net
Income before income taxes
Provision for income taxes
Net income
Pro forma earnings per share(d):
Basic
Diluted
Pro forma shares outstanding(d):
Basic
Diluted
Table of Contents
Current assets:
Cash and cash equivalents
Trade receivables, net
Inventories
Other current assets
Total current assets
Property, plant and equipment, net
Other assets
Total assets
Current liabilities:
Accounts payable
Accrued liabilities
Total current liabilities
Long-term debt, net
Deferred income taxes
Deferred credits and other liabilities
Net Investment/Stockholders' Equity:
Common stock
Additional paid-in capital
Net investment
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
$
111
(1)
4,284
1,066 
326 
1,144 
185 
116 
—
2,837
1,447 
 
(578)
869  $
4,174  (a)
—
—
— 
 
— 
 
— 
 
— 
— 
 
292  (b)
292
(292)  
 
116  (c)
4,285 
(1)
4,284
1,066 
326 
1,144 
185 
116 
292
3,129
1,155 
(462)
(176)
$
693
$
  $
Pro Forma
Adjustments    
(in millions)
Pro Forma
$
—  $
21 
 
 
72 
185
—  (e)   $
401  (f)
 
 
— 
4  (f)
63
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Balance Sheets
As of June 30, 2014
Historical
— 
422 
72 
189
683
14,434 
99
278
14,434 
34
405
— 
 
65  (e)
$ 14,746  $
470
$ 15,216
$
504  $
175
— 
 
12  (f)
$
679
— 
 
3,293 
 
500 
 
  
 
— 
 
 
— 
  10,296
12
(6) (f)
16  (f)
6,065  (e)  
 
 
 
—  (g)  
—  (h)  
(6,000) (e)
383  (f)
(22)
—
504 
187
691
6,065 
3,287 
516 
  
— 
— 
4,679
(22)
Total net investment/stockholders' equity
Total liabilities and net investment/stockholder's equity
Table of Contents
64
10,274
(5,617)
4,657
$ 14,746  $
470
$ 15,216
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial Statements
(a)   After the spin-off, we do not expect to have sales to Occidental. The adjustment reflects the reclassification of "net sales to related parties" to "net sales to third
parties."
(b)   Reflects the following adjustments to interest and debt expense resulting from the assumed incurrence of $6.065 billion of indebtedness in connection with the spin-
off:
Interest expense on $6.065 billion of newly incurred indebtedness
Amortization of debt issuance costs
Commitment fee on revolving credit facility
Total pro forma adjustment
Six Months
Ended
June 30,
2014
Year Ended
December 31,
2013
(in millions)
137  $
4 
5
146  $
273 
9 
10
292
$
$
Pro forma interest expense was calculated based on an assumed blended interest rate of 4.5% using market rates on an assumed borrowing amount of $6.065 billion.
Interest expense also includes estimated amortization on approximately $65 million of debt issuance costs related to our anticipated debt, including the revolving credit facility.
Such costs are amortized over the terms of the associated debt. Interest expense also includes an estimated 0.5% commitment fee on the anticipated new $2.0 billion
revolving credit facility. Actual interest expense may be higher or lower depending on fluctuations in interest rates. A one percent change in interest rates would result in an
$11 million change in annual interest expense.
(c)   Represents the tax effect of pro forma adjustments to income before income taxes using a statutory tax rate of 40% for both the six months ended June 30, 2014
and the year ended December 31, 2013. Our effective tax rate could be different (either higher or lower) depending on activities subsequent to the spin-off.
(d)   The calculation of pro forma basic earnings per share and shares outstanding is based on the number of shares of Occidental common stock outstanding as of
                , 2014, adjusted for the distribution ratio of one share of our common stock for every                shares of Occidental common stock outstanding. The calculation of
pro forma diluted earnings per share and shares outstanding for the periods presented is based on the number of shares of Occidental common stock outstanding and diluted
shares of common stock outstanding as of                 , 2014, adjusted for the same distribution ratio. This calculation may not be indicative of the participating or dilutive effect
that will actually result from the replacement of Occidental stock-based awards held by our employees or the grant of new stock-based awards. The number of participating or
dilutive shares of our common stock that will result from Occidental stock-based awards held by our employees will not be determined until after the distribution date for the
spin-off.
(e)   Represents the financing transactions, the dividend to be paid to Occidental and their effects on cash, as follows (in millions):
Cash received from borrowings
Debt issuance costs
Dividend to Occidental
Cash pro forma adjustment
Table of Contents
65
(f)    Represents the following adjustments to the respective balance sheet line items (in millions):
Trade receivables, net
Other current assets
Accrued liabilities
Deferred income taxes
Deferred credits and other liabilities
$ 6,065 
(65)
 
(6,000)
$
—
$ 401 
 
4 
(12)
 
 
6 
(16)
$ 383
The adjustment to trade receivables represents the receivables CRC would carry as it starts marketing its own products as a stand-alone company. Historically,
Occidental marketed CRC's products and collected the proceeds. As a result, the historical financial statements do not reflect any receivables. The adjustments to accrued
liabilities and deferred credits and other liabilities represent employee-related liabilities that we will assume from Occidental for certain employees and executives who will
transfer to CRC. For additional information, see "Arrangements between Occidental and Our Company." The adjustments to other current assets and deferred income taxes
represent the tax effects of temporary differences related to the liability adjustments reflected above.
(g)   Represents the issuance of approximately                shares of our common stock at a par value of $0.01 per share.
(h)   Represents the elimination of Occidental's net investment in us and adjustments to additional paid-in capital resulting from the following (in millions):
Reclassification of Occidental Petroleum Corporation's net investment in us
New liabilities recorded on our books (see note (f))
Distributions to Occidental (see note (e))
Total additional paid-in capital
Table of Contents
66
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF
FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
$
$
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (MD&A) should be read in conjunction with the information under the headings "Risk
Factors," "Selected Historical Combined Financial Data," "Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial Data" and "Business," as well as the audited combined financial
statements, unaudited interim combined condensed financial statements and the related notes thereto, all appearing elsewhere in this information statement.
Except when the context otherwise requires or where otherwise indicated, (1) all references to "CRC," the "Company," "we," "us" and "our" refer to California Resources
Corporation and its subsidiaries or, as the context requires, the California business, (2) all references to the "California business" refer to Occidental's California oil and gas
exploration and production operations and related assets, liabilities and obligations, which we will assume in connection with the spin-off, and (3) all references to "Occidental"
refer to Occidental Petroleum Corporation, our parent company, and its subsidiaries, other than us.
This MD&A contains forward-looking statements concerning trends or events potentially affecting our business or future performance, including, without limitation,
statements relating to our plans, strategies, objectives, expectations and intentions. The words "aim," "anticipate," "believe," "budget," "continue," "could," "effort," "estimate,"
"expect," "forecast," "goal," "guidance," "intend," "likely," "may," "might," "objective," "outlook," "plan," "potential," "predict," "project," "seek," "should," "target, "will" or
"would" and similar expressions identify forward-looking statements. We do not undertake to update, revise or correct any of the forward-looking information unless required to
do so under the federal securities laws. When considering these forward-looking statements, you should keep in mind the risk factors and other cautionary statements
contained in this information statement. See "Forward-Looking Statements" and "Risk Factors."
The Separation and Spin-off
On February 14, 2014, Occidental announced that its board of directors had authorized management to pursue the spin-off of the California business into a standalone,
publicly traded company. The spin-off is being executed in accordance with a Separation and Distribution Agreement between us and Occidental. The spin-off is intended to be
tax-free to the stockholders of Occidental and to Occidental and us for U.S. federal income tax purposes. Occidental intends to distribute, on a pro rata basis, at least 80.1% of
our common stock to the Occidental stockholders as of the record date for the spin-off. Upon completion of the spin-off, we and Occidental will each be independent, publicly
traded companies and will have separate public ownership, boards of directors and management. The spin-off is, among other things, subject to final approval by Occidental's
board of directors and the satisfaction or waiver by Occidental, in its sole discretion, of certain conditions to the spin-off, including the, receipt of a private letter ruling from the
IRS and an opinion of tax counsel, with respect to the tax-free nature of the spin-off for federal income tax purposes.
We were incorporated in Delaware as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Occidental on April 23, 2014. We will be an independent oil and natural gas exploration and production
company, with operations exclusively in California. See the discussion under the heading "The Spin-Off" included in this information statement for further details.
Basis of Presentation
We are currently a wholly-owned subsidiary of Occidental formed to own and operate the California business. We did not have material assets or liabilities as a separate
corporate entity until the contribution to us by Occidental of the California business. Occidental previously conducted the California business through various wholly-owned
subsidiaries. The combined financial statements included elsewhere in this information statement were prepared in connection with the spin-off and reflect the combined
historical results of operations, financial position and cash flows of the California business, as if we had held the
67
Table of Contents
California business for all historical periods presented. All significant intercompany transactions and accounts within the California business have been eliminated. The assets
and liabilities in the combined financial statements included elsewhere in this information statement have been reflected on a historical basis. The historical results discussed
in this MD&A do not consider the transactions to be effected in connection with the spin-off, which will impact our results of operations, financial position and cash flows.
Factors Affecting Comparability of Our Historical Financial Results of Operations to our Future Financial Results of Operations
The combined statements of income also include expense allocations for certain functions and centrally-located activities historically performed by Occidental. These
functions include executive oversight, accounting, procurement, engineering, drilling, exploration, marketing, internal audit, legal, risk management, finance, tax, treasury,
information technology, government relations, investor relations, public relations, financial reporting, human resources, ethics and compliance, and certain other shared
services. These allocations are based primarily on specific identification of time or activities associated with us, employee headcount or our relative size compared to
Occidental. Our management believes the assumptions underlying the combined financial statements, including the assumptions regarding allocating expenses from
Occidental, are reasonable. However, the combined financial statements may not include all of the actual expenses that would have been incurred, may include duplicative
costs and may not reflect our combined results of operations, financial position and cash flows had we operated as a stand-alone public company during the periods presented.
We have attempted to include recurring costs of operating as a stand-alone company in our pro forma financial statements, although only the additional costs we have
determined to be factually supportable are included as pro forma adjustments, and there could be incremental costs not reflected in the unaudited pro forma combined financial
statements. However, we expect the costs of operating as a stand-alone public company, other than debt-related costs, will be generally comparable to the costs reported in
the historical combined financial statements. These estimates may not prove to be accurate. Actual costs that would have been incurred if we had been a stand-alone public
company would depend on multiple factors, including organizational structure and strategic and operating decisions. Subject to the terms of the Separation and Distribution
Agreement, nonrecurring third-party costs and expenses related to the separation, other than the debt-related costs, and incurred prior to the separation date will generally be
paid by Occidental. We expect such nonrecurring amounts to include costs to separate and/or duplicate information technology systems, outside legal and accounting fees,
and similar costs. See "Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial Data."
We have historically participated in Occidental's corporate treasury management program and have not incurred any debt. Excess cash generated by our business has
been distributed to Occidental, and likewise our cash needs have been provided by Occidental, in the form of an investment. Accordingly, we have not included debt or related
interest expense in our combined financial statements because there was no specifically identifiable debt associated with our operations. We intend to enter into new financing
arrangements in connection with the spin-off. We expect to incur up to $6.065 billion in new debt and make a cash distribution of approximately $6.0 billion to Occidental. As a
result, the capitalization for our business will be different and we will incur cash interest expenses as well as amortization of financing costs.
Business Environment and Industry Outlook
Our operating results and those of the oil and gas industry as a whole are heavily influenced by commodity prices. Oil and gas prices and differentials may fluctuate
significantly, generally as a result of changes in supply and demand and other market-related uncertainties. These and other factors make it impossible to predict realized
prices reliably. We respond to economic conditions primarily by adjusting our capital expenditures to be in line with current economic conditions, including adjusting the size
and allocation of our capital program. We have only occasionally hedged our commodity price risk and do not expect to have a significant hedging program in the future. A
significant portion of our oil production is
68
Table of Contents
typically linked to international waterborne-based prices that in the recent past have been at a premium to in-land U.S. crude prices such as West Texas Intermediate ("WTI")
for comparable grades. We believe that the limited crude transportation infrastructure from other parts of the country to California will allow us to continue to realize strong
margins as a result. The following table presents the average daily WTI, Brent and NYMEX gas prices for 2013, 2012 and 2011:
WTI oil ($/Bbl)
Brent oil ($/Bbl)
NYMEX gas ($/Mcf)
2012
2013
2011
$ 97.97  $ 94.21  $ 95.12 
  $ 108.76  $ 111.70  $ 110.90 
4.11 
  $
3.66  $
2.81  $
The following table presents our average realized prices as a percentage of WTI and NYMEX for 2013, 2012 and 2011:
Oil as a percentage of average WTI
NGLs as a percentage of average WTI
Gas as a percentage of NYMEX
2013   2012   2011  
  106%   110%   109%
 
74%
  102%   105%   105%
51%
56%
Oil prices will continue to be affected by (i) global supply and demand, which are generally a function of global economic conditions, inventory levels, production
disruptions, technological advances, regional market conditions and the actions of OPEC, other significant producers and governments; (ii) transportation capacity and cost in
producing areas; (iii) currency exchange rates; and (iv) the effect of changes in these variables on market perceptions.
Prices for natural gas liquids ("NGLs") are related to the supply and demand for the components of products making up these liquids. Some of them more typically
correlate to the price of oil while others are affected by gas prices as well as the demand for certain chemical products for which they are used as feedstock. In addition,
infrastructure constraints magnify the pricing volatility from region to region.
Gas prices and differentials are strongly affected by local supply and demand fundamentals, as well as availability of transportation capacity from producing areas.
Our earnings are also affected by the performance of our processing and power generation assets. We process our wet gas to extract NGLs and other gas byproducts,
and deliver dry gas to pipelines and sell NGLs. The efficiency with which we extract liquids from the wet gas stream affects our operating results. In addition, a portion of the
power produced by our Elk Hills power plant is used for certain of our operations while a majority of the output is sold to third parties.
Seasonality
Seasonality is not a primary driver of changes in our quarterly earnings during the year.
Operations
We conduct our operations based on our subsurface mineral rights, land leases and other contractual arrangements. We believe we are the largest private oil and natural
gas mineral acreage holder in California, with interests in approximately 2.3 million net acres, approximately 60% of which we hold in fee. Our oil and gas leases have a primary
term ranging from one to ten years, which is extended through the end of production once it commences. We also own a network of strategically placed infrastructure assets,
including three gas plants, oil and gas gathering systems, a power plant and other related assets to maximize the value generated from our production.
Our share of production and reserves from operations in Long Beach, California are subject to contractual arrangements similar to production-sharing contracts and are in
effect through the economic
69
Table of Contents
life of the assets. Under such contracts, we record a share of production and reserves to recover all capital and production costs and an additional share for profit. These
contractual arrangements obligate us to fund all capital and production costs and have established base production volumes for each period. The contracts do not differentiate
between capital and production costs. In accordance with the terms of these contracts, our portion of the production represents: (1) volumes to recover our partners' share of
capital and production costs we incur on their behalf and all costs associated with base production, (2) volumes for our defined share of base production and (3) volumes for our
defined share of production in excess of amounts related to base production each period. We recover our share of capital and production costs, and generate returns, through
our defined share of production from base and incremental production in (2) and (3) above. These contracts run through the end of the economic lives of the related assets.
These contracts do not transfer any right of ownership to us and reserves reported from these arrangements are based on our economic interest as defined in the contracts.
Our share of production and reserves from these contracts decreases when product prices rise and increases when prices decline. Overall, our net economic benefit from these
contracts is greater when product prices are higher. Production under these contracts represented 19% of our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2013.
The following table sets forth our production volumes of oil, NGLs and natural gas per day for the six-month periods ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 and each of the three
years in the period ended December 31, 2013.
Oil (MBbl/d)
San Joaquin Basin
Los Angeles Basin
Ventura Basin
Sacramento Basin
Total
NGLs (MBbl/d)
Six months
ended
June 30,
2014
2013
Year ended
December 31,
2013
2012
62 
 
28 
 
 
6 
  —
57 
 
25 
 
 
6 
  —
58 
 
26 
 
 
6 
  —
58 
 
24 
 
 
6 
  —
2011  
  
 
56 
 
19 
 
 
5 
  —
96
88
90
88
80
NGLs (MBbl/d)
San Joaquin Basin
Los Angeles Basin
Ventura Basin
Sacramento Basin
Total
Natural gas (MMcf/d)
San Joaquin Basin
Los Angeles Basin
Ventura Basin
Sacramento Basin
Total
Total Production (MBoe/d)(a)
Note:
(a)
17 
  — 
 
1 
  —
19 
  — 
 
1 
  —
19 
  — 
 
1 
  —
16 
  — 
 
1 
  —
14 
  — 
 
1 
  —
18
20
20
17
15
177 
  — 
12 
 
 
54
185 
  — 
12 
 
 
65
182 
2 
 
11 
 
 
65
204 
3 
 
12 
 
 
37
220 
 
1 
12 
 
 
27
243
262
260
256
260
155
152
154
148
138
MBbl/d refers to thousands of barrels per day; MMcf/d refers to millions of cubic feet per day; MBoe/d refers to thousands of barrels of oil equivalent per day.
Natural gas volumes have been converted to Boe based on energy content of six Mcf of gas to one barrel of oil. Barrels of oil equivalence does not necessarily result in
price equivalence. The price of natural gas on a barrel of oil equivalent basis is currently substantially lower than the corresponding price for oil and has been similarly
lower for a number of years. For example, in 2013, the average prices of WTI oil and NYMEX natural gas were $97.97 per barrel and $3.66 per Mcf, respectively,
resulting in an oil-to-gas ratio of over 25 to 1.
Table of Contents
The following table sets forth the average realized prices for our products:
70
Oil Prices ($ per Bbl)
NGLs Prices ($ per Bbl)
Gas Prices ($ per Mcf)
Income Taxes
Six months ended
2013
2014
June 30,
Year ended December 31,
$ 103.43  $ 105.21  $ 104.16  $ 104.02  $ 103.80 
  $ 54.86  $ 47.90  $ 50.43  $ 52.76  $ 70.03 
4.31 
  $
4.67  $
3.82  $
3.73  $
2.94  $
2012
2011
2013
The deferred tax liabilities, net of deferred tax assets of approximately $500 million, were approximately $3.1 billion at December 31, 2013. The current portion of total
deferred tax assets was $23 million as of December 31, 2013, which was reported in other current assets. We expect to realize the recorded deferred tax assets through future
operating income and reversal of temporary differences.
The following table sets forth the calculation of our effective income tax rate:
Six months
Pre-tax income
Income tax expense
Net income
Effective tax rate
Income Statement Analysis
Net sales (including related parties)
Other income
Production costs
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Asset impairments and related items
Taxes other than on income
ended
June 30,
2013
2013
2014
Year ended December 31,
$ 782  $ 703  $ 1,447  $ 1,181  $ 1,641 
(670)
(in millions)
(482)
(313)
(281)
(578)
2012
2011
$ 469  $ 422  $
869  $
699  $
971
41%
40%
40%
40%
41%
Six months
2012
2013
(in millions)
Years ended December 31,
ended June 30,
2014
2013
$ 2,262  $ 2,098  $ 4,285  $ 4,072  $ 3,938 
(4)
 
(1,074)
 
 
(287)
(675)
(1)  
(1,066)  
(326)  
(1,144)
(1,314)  
(296)  
(926)
(1)  
(578)  
(166)  
(582)
(527)  
(154)  
(565)
2011
—
1
—
—
—
(41)
—
Taxes other than on income
Exploration expense
Provision for income taxes
Net income
EBITDAX(1)
(1)
(107)  
(46)  
(313)
(109)  
(40)  
(281)
(185)  
(116)  
(578)
(167)  
(148)  
(482)
469
422
869
699
(143)
(114)
(670)
971
$ 1,410  $ 1,308  $ 2,707  $ 2,255  $ 2,430
We define EBITDAX as earnings before interest expense; income taxes; depreciation, depletion and amortization; and exploration expense. Our management believes
EBITDAX provides useful information in assessing our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows and is widely used by the industry and investment
community. The amounts included in the calculation of EBITDAX were computed in accordance with GAAP. This measure is provided in addition to, and not as an
alternative for income and liquidity measures calculated in accordance with GAAP, and
71
Table of Contents
should be read in conjunction with the information contained in our financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP.
The following table presents a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure of EBITDAX to the GAAP financial measure of net income:
Net income
Interest expense
Provision for income taxes
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Exploration expense
EBITDAX
Six Months
Ended
June 30,
2014
2013
Year Ended December 31,
2013
2011
2012
(in millions)
469  $
—  $
313  $
582  $
46  $
869  $
422  $
—  $
—  $
281  $
578  $
565  $ 1,144  $
40  $
116  $
699  $
—  $
482  $
926  $
148  $
971 
— 
670 
675 
114
$
  $
  $
  $
  $
$ 1,410  $ 1,308  $ 2,707  $ 2,255  $ 2,430
Six Months Ended June 30, 2014 vs. June 30, 2013
Net sales increased 8%, or $164 million, for the six months ended June 30, 2014, compared to the same period of 2013. Of this increase, $144 million was attributable to
higher oil volumes and $41 million and $27 million were attributable to higher realized prices for gas and NGLs, respectively. The increase was partially offset by decreases of
$23 million and $16 million, respectively, attributable to lower NGLs and gas volumes, and $20 million of lower realized oil prices. Our daily oil production increased by 8,000
barrels while our daily NGLs and natural gas production decreased by 2,000 barrels and 19 MMcf (or 3,000 Boe), respectively. The increase in oil production primarily reflected
our strategy to increase our overall capital expenditure program with a focus on oil drilling while reducing drilling capital for natural gas in light of higher oil prices and lower gas
prices in recent years.
Production costs for the six months ended June 30, 2014 increased 10%, or $51 million, compared to the same period of 2013, mainly due to $41 million in higher costs
for natural gas used in our steamflood operations and $7 million in higher energy costs.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 8%, or $12 million, for the six months ended June 30, 2014, compared to the same period of 2013, predominantly
due to higher employee related costs.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization ("DD&A") expense increased 3% or $17 million for the six months ended June 30, 2014, compared to the same period of 2013,
and reflected additional capital investments.
Taxes other than on income for the six months ended June 30, 2014 were comparable to the same period of 2013.
Exploration expense increased by $6 million, or 15%, for the six months ended 2014, compared to the same period of 2013, due to higher dry hole expenses of $8 million.
Provision for income taxes increased by $32 million, or 11%, due to the effect of higher pre-tax income of $79 million.
Year Ended December 31, 2013 vs. 2012
Net sales increased 5%, or $213 million, in 2013, compared to 2012. Of this increase, $47 million was attributable to higher oil and gas volumes, $77 million was
attributable to higher oil and gas prices, $63 million was attributable to higher volumes for NGLs and $41 million was attributable to higher power
72
Table of Contents
sales. The increase was partially offset by $15 million attributable to lower prices for NGLs. Our daily liquids production increased by 5,000 Boe while our daily natural gas
production increased by 4 MMcf, or less than 1,000 Boe. The increase in liquids production primarily reflected our strategy to increase our overall capital expenditure program
with a focus on oil drilling while reducing drilling capital for natural gas in light of higher oil prices and lower gas prices in recent years. The slight increase in our natural gas
production reflected increased production from acquisitions made in 2012 and associated gas produced from oil drilling, partially offset by lower gas production due to reduced
investment in natural gas drilling in 2013.
Production costs decreased by $248 million to $18.99 per Boe in 2013, compared to $24.34 per Boe for 2012, almost entirely due to a wide range of operational efficiency
initiatives implemented in late 2012, including activities such as high-grading and more efficient utilization of service rigs, improved job scheduling, more efficient liquids usage
and handling, optimization of field supervision and contractor usage, and reduced consumption of purchased fuel, power and field rental equipment.
Selling, general and administrative and other operating expenses increased 10%, or $30 million, in 2013, compared to 2012, mostly due to higher compensation and
employee related costs of approximately $25 million, in particular higher headcount and equity compensation in part due to the higher price of Occidental's stock.
DD&A expense increased by $218 million. Of this increase, $44 million was attributable to higher volumes and $174 million was attributable to a $3.23 per Boe increase in
the DD&A rate, which was a result of additional capital investments throughout our asset base. In recent years, we have been systematically increasing our investments in IOR
and EOR recovery assets and facilities. Significant investment on the front end of these projects is necessary, which has caused an increase in our DD&A rate.
A significant majority of the $41 million in "Asset Impairments and other related items" in 2012 was related to the impairment of uneconomic properties in various areas, in
particular gas properties.
Taxes other than on income increased 11%, or $18 million, in 2013, compared to 2012, primarily due to a $32 million increase in California greenhouse gas costs, which
we began incurring at the beginning of 2013, partially offset by lower property taxes of $14 million.
Exploration expense decreased 22%, or $32 million, in 2013, compared to 2012, due to higher success rates resulting in lower dry hole expense of $78 million in the San
Joaquin and Los Angeles basins, partially offset by higher dry hole expense of $14 million in the Ventura basin and higher expense of $30 million for seismic, geological and
geophysical and lease rentals.
Provision for income taxes increased by $96 million due to the effect of higher pre-tax income of $266 million, partially offset by a 1% lower effective tax rate.
Year Ended December 31, 2012 vs. 2011
Net sales increased 3%, or $134 million, in 2012 compared to 2011. Of this increase, $325 million was attributable to higher oil volumes, $7 million was attributable to
higher oil prices and $40 million was attributable to higher NGL volumes. The increase was partially offset by $124 million attributable to lower gas prices, $6 million attributable
to lower gas volumes, $94 million attributable to lower NGL prices and $14 million attributable to lower power sales. Our daily liquids production increased by 10,000 Boe, while
our daily natural gas production decreased by 4 MMcf, or less than 1,000 Boe. The increase in production volumes from 2011 to 2012, in particular the growth in our liquids
production, was a result of production from acreage acquired in 2011 and increased capital expenditures in 2012 compared to 2011.
Production costs in 2012 increased 22%, or $240 million, compared to 2011, mainly due to $92 million of higher downhole maintenance and $125 million of increased field
support costs.
73
Table of Contents
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 3%, or $9 million, in 2012, compared to 2011, mainly due to higher employee related costs.
DD&A expense increased by $251 million. Of this increase, $190 million was attributable to a $3.77 per Boe increase in the DD&A rate, reflecting additional capital
investments, largely in the San Joaquin and Sacramento basin operations, and $61 million was attributable to asset acquisitions and higher volumes.
A significant majority of the $41 million in "Asset Impairments and other related items" in 2012 was related to the impairment of uneconomic properties in various areas, in
particular gas properties.
Taxes other than on income increased 17%, or $24 million, in 2012, compared to 2011, almost entirely due to higher property taxes.
Exploration expense increased by 30%, or $34 million, in 2012 due to higher dry hole expense of $29 million in the Los Angeles basin and $23 million in the Sacramento
basin and higher lease rentals of $5 million as compared to 2011, partially offset by lower seismic and geological and geophysical expenses of $23 million.
Provision for income taxes decreased by $188 million in 2012, compared to 2011, due to the effect of $460 million in lower pre-tax income.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity and capital resources to fund our capital programs have historically been cash flows from operations. In the past, we have distributed our
cash flows in excess of our capital expenditures to Occidental. However, we have occasionally required funding from Occidental to execute large acquisitions, as was the case
in 2012 and 2011. Since 2012, we have not received, and following the spin-off we will not receive, any capital contributions from Occidental. We believe our future needs for
capital expenditures and acquisitions will be met by cash generated from operations, and borrowings or issuances of securities when necessary. Operating cash flows are
largely dependent on oil and gas prices, sales volumes and costs.
We have historically participated in Occidental's corporate treasury management program and have not incurred any debt. Prior to the spin-off, we expect to issue senior
notes with maturities extending from five to ten years and incur term debt extending five years. Almost all of the proceeds of our initial debt incurrence will be used to make a
one-time cash distribution to Occidental. We expect our debt structure to also include a new revolving credit facility for operational needs and letters of credit. We expect the
covenants of the revolving credit facility, term debt and senior notes to be consistent with that obtained by other commercial borrowers with similar credit ratings, and to cover
matters such as default of debt covenants, non-payment of principal or interest, fees and change of control.
We expect the term debt and revolving credit facility to bear interest at LIBOR plus a margin and the senior notes at fixed or variable rates, all of which will depend on
market conditions and our credit rating.
74
Table of Contents
Cash Flow Analysis
Net cash flows provided by operating activities
Net cash flows used in investing activities
Net cash flows (used in) provided by financing activities
EBITDAX(1)
(1)
Six months
2013
(in millions)
Years ended December 31,
ended June 30,
2014
2013
$ 1,234  $ 1,177  $ 2,476  $ 2,223  $ 2,456 
  $ (1,038) $ (768) $ (1,713) $ (2,755) $ (3,565)
  $
532  $ 1,106 
  $ 1,410  $ 1,308  $ 2,707  $ 2,255  $ 2,430
(196) $ (409) $
(763) $
2012
2011
We define EBITDAX as earnings before interest expense; income taxes; depreciation, depletion and amortization; and exploration expense. Our management believes
EBITDAX provides useful information in assessing our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows and is widely used by the industry and investment
community. The amounts included in the calculation of EBITDAX were computed in accordance with GAAP. This measure is provided in addition to, and not as an
alternative for income and liquidity measures calculated in accordance with GAAP, and should be read in conjunction with the information contained in our financial
statements prepared in accordance with GAAP.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure of EBITDAX to the GAAP measure of net cash provided by operating activities:
Net cash provided by operating activities
Interest expense
Cash income taxes
Cash exploration expenses
Changes in operating assets and liabilities
Asset impairments and related items
Other, net
EBITDAX
Six Months
2012
Ended June 30,
2014
2013
Year Ended December 31,
2013
2011
$ 1,234  $ 1,177  $ 2,476  $ 2,223  $ 2,456 
— 
 
 
84 
40 
 
(123)
 
— 
 
(27)
(102)  
— 
 
(29)
(121)  
 
20 
202 
 
(41)  
(28)
— 
 
135 
 
14 
 
48 
— 
 
(21)
— 
 
155 
16 
 
(13)  
— 
 
(27)
— 
318 
44
—
EBITDAX
$ 1,410  $ 1,308  $ 2,707  $ 2,255  $ 2,430
Six months ended June 30, 2014 vs. June 30, 2013
Our net cash provided by operating activities increased by $57 million from $1,177 million in 2013 to $1,234 million in 2014 consistent with the $47 million increase in our
net income over the same period. The increase in operating cash flows also reflected higher non-cash items such as deferred taxes of $52 million and DD&A of $17 million,
partially offset by a decrease in working capital of $61 million.
Our cash flow used in investing activities increased by $270 million for the six months ended June 30, 2014 to $1,038 million, compared to the same period of 2013. The
increase mainly consisted of $266 million of higher capital expenditures for development and exploration activities, in line with our strategy of increasing our focus on oil drilling.
Our cash flow used in financing activities decreased by $213 million for the six months ended June 30, 2014, compared to the same period of 2013, reflecting lower
excess cash flow distributed to Occidental.
75
Table of Contents
Year Ended December 31, 2013 vs. 2012
Our operating cash flows in 2013 increased by approximately $250 million compared to 2012. The increase reflected lower operating expenses of $250 million resulting
from cost efficiencies and $210 million higher revenues due to higher oil and gas prices and volumes. Other significant items affecting operating cash flows consisted of higher
tax payments of $440 million and other costs of $70 million in 2013, as well as $300 million in positive working capital changes.
Our cash flow used in investing activities decreased by approximately $1.0 billion in 2013 to $1.7 billion, compared to 2012. We reduced our capital expenditures in 2013
by approximately $660 million primarily due to approximately 20% lower drilling costs and lower capital needs for the Elk Hills Cryogenic gas plant, which was completed during
2012. Further, our 2013 acquisitions of $50 million were approximately $380 million lower than the 2012 acquisition amount.
Cash used for financing activities in 2013 reflected excess cash flow distributed to Occidental. Cash provided by financing activities in 2012 reflected contributions from
Occidental primarily to fund our acquisitions.
Year Ended December 31, 2012 vs. 2011
Our operating cash flows in 2012 decreased by approximately $230 million compared to 2011. The decrease reflected $240 million of higher operating expenses in 2012,
lower revenues of approximately $225 million from lower gas and NGLs prices and $15 million of higher other costs, offset by higher revenues of approximately $325 million due
to increased oil volumes, $40 million of higher NGLs volumes and lower tax payments of $205 million. Additionally, working capital changes used an additional $320 million in
2012 compared to 2011.
Our cash flow used in investing activities decreased by $810 million from 2011 to 2012. We increased our capital expenditures by $170 million to $2.3 billion in 2012 from
$2.2 billion in 2011. Capital expenditures for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011 included expenditures for development and exploration activities of approximately
$2.2 billion and $1.9 billion, respectively, as well as infrastructure investments of approximately $150 million and $300 million, mostly for the Elk Hills Cryogenic gas plant
which was completed in 2012. The increase in our year-over-year capital expenditures was primarily to fund the growth in the San Joaquin and Ventura basins. In addition, our
2012 acquisition activity fell by approximately $1.0 billion to $400 million in 2012, as compared to $1.4 billion in 2011.
Our cash flows from financing activities decreased by $574 million from 2011 to 2012, reflecting a year-over-year decrease in cash funding from Occidental due to lower
acquisition activity in 2012.
Acquisitions
During the year ended December 31, 2013, we paid approximately $50 million to acquire certain oil and gas properties in California. An acquisition in the San Joaquin
basin also included an obligation to spend at least $250 million on exploration and development activities over a period of five years from the date of acquisition. We currently
plan to spend significantly more than this amount in capital in the next five years. Any deficiency in meeting this capital spending obligation would need to be paid in cash at
the end of the five-year period.
During the year ended December 31, 2012, we paid approximately $380 million for oil and gas properties including $275 million for certain producing and non-producing
assets in the Sacramento basin and undeveloped acreage in the San Joaquin basin.
During the year ended December 31, 2011, we acquired approximately $1.4 billion of various oil and gas assets. We paid $720 million for producing and non-producing
assets within the San Joaquin basin. We
76
Table of Contents
also acquired producing and non-producing assets in the Los Angeles Basin for $330 million and certain assets in the Sacramento basin for $190 million.
2014 Capital Expenditures
We have a 2014 capital budget of $2.1 billion for projects targeting investments in the San Joaquin, Los Angeles and Ventura basins, as compared to $1.7 billion in 2013.
We allocated approximately $340 million of our 2014 capital budget to primary recovery projects, approximately $790 million to waterfloods and approximately $340 million to
steamfloods. Approximately $545 million of our 2014 capital budget will be deployed to develop resources from unconventional plays. Virtually all of our 2014 capital budget will
be directed towards oil-weighted production consistent with 2013. In addition, we expect to continue an active exploration program in California and have allocated
approximately $95 million of the 2014 capital budget for exploration spending. Assuming current market conditions and drilling success rates comparable to our historical
performance, we expect to fund our entire 2014 capital program with cash flow from our operations.
Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements
We have no material off-balance-sheet arrangements other than those noted below.
Leases
We, or certain of our subsidiaries, have entered into various operating lease agreements, mainly for field equipment, office space and office equipment. We lease assets
when leasing offers greater operating flexibility. Lease payments are generally expensed as part of production costs or selling, general and administrative expenses. For more
information, see "Contractual Obligations."
Contractual Obligations
The table below summarizes and cross-references our contractual obligations. This summary indicates on- and off-balance-sheet obligations as of December 31, 2013.
There were no material changes to the amounts between December 31, 2013 and June 30, 2014.
Contractual Obligations(a)
 
On-Balance Sheet
Long-term liabilities(b)
Total
2014
2015 and 2016   2017 and 2018
Payments Due by Year
(in millions)
Long-term liabilities(b)
Off-Balance Sheet
Operating leases
Purchase obligations(c)
$ 117  $ —  $
33 
  653
9 
  247
7  $
  
 
 
11 
123
141  $
$ 803  $ 256  $
Total
(a)
(b)
(c)
Includes contractual obligations entered into by us or our subsidiaries or by an Occidental subsidiary on behalf of us or our subsidiaries (which obligation will be assumed
by us as of our separation from Occidental).
Includes obligations under postretirement benefit and deferred compensation plans, as well as certain accrued liabilities.
Amounts include payments, which will become due under long-term agreements to purchase goods and services used in the normal course of business to secure drilling
rigs and services. Long-term purchase contracts are discounted using our estimated borrowing rate.
77
Table of Contents
Lawsuits, Claims and Contingencies
In the normal course of business, we or certain of our subsidiaries are involved in lawsuits, claims and other contingencies that seek, among other things, compensation
for alleged personal injury, breach of contract, property damage or other losses, punitive damages, civil penalties, or injunctive or declaratory relief. We accrue reserves for
currently outstanding lawsuits, claims and proceedings when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the liability can be reasonably estimated. Reserve balances at
June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013 and 2012 were not material to our balance sheets. We also evaluate the amount of reasonably possible losses that we could incur as a
result of these matters. We believe that reasonably possible losses that we could incur in excess of reserves accrued on the balance sheet would not be material to our
financial position or results of operations.
We will indemnify Occidental under the Tax Sharing Agreement for taxes incurred as a result of the failure of the spin-off or certain transactions undertaken in preparation
for, or in connection with, the spin-off, to qualify as tax-free transactions under the relevant provisions of the Code, to the extent caused by our breach of any representations or
covenants made in the Tax Sharing Agreement or made in connection with the private letter ruling or the tax opinion or by any other action taken by us. We also have agreed to
pay 50% of any taxes arising from the spin-off or related transactions to the extent that the tax is not attributable to the fault of either party. See "Arrangements Between
Occidental and Our Company—Tax Sharing Agreement." In addition, under the Separation and Distribution Agreement, we will also indemnify Occidental and its remaining
subsidiaries against claims and liabilities relating to the past operation of our business. See "Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company."
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The process of preparing financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to select appropriate accounting policies
and to make informed estimates and judgments regarding certain items and transactions. Changes in facts and circumstances or discovery of new information may result in
revised estimates and judgments, and actual results may differ from these estimates upon settlement. We consider the following to be our most critical accounting policies and
estimates that involve management's judgment and that could result in a material impact on the financial statements due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment.
Oil and Gas Properties
The carrying value of our property, plant and equipment ("PP&E") represents the cost incurred to acquire or develop the asset, including any asset retirement obligations,
net of accumulated DD&A and any impairment charges. For assets acquired, initial PP&E cost is based on fair values at the acquisition date.
We use the successful efforts method to account for our oil and gas properties. Under this method, we capitalize costs of acquiring properties, costs of drilling successful
exploration wells and development costs. The costs of exploratory wells are initially capitalized pending a determination of whether we find proved reserves. If we find proved
reserves, the costs of exploratory wells remain capitalized. Otherwise, we charge the costs of the related wells to expense. In some cases, we cannot determine whether we
have found proved reserves at the completion of exploration drilling, and must conduct additional testing and evaluation of the wells. We generally expense the costs of such
exploratory wells if we do not determine we have found proved reserves within a 12-month period after drilling is complete.
We determine depreciation and depletion of oil and gas producing properties by the unit-of-production method. We amortize acquisition costs over total proved reserves,
and capitalized development and successful exploration costs over proved developed reserves.
78
Table of Contents
Proved oil and gas reserves and production are used as the basis for recording depreciation and depletion of oil and gas producing properties. Proved reserves are those
quantities of oil and gas which, by analysis of geoscience and engineering data, can be estimated with reasonable certainty to be economically producible—from a given date
forward, from known reservoirs, and under existing economic conditions, operating methods, and government regulations—regardless of whether deterministic or probabilistic
methods are used for the estimation. We have no proved oil and gas reserves for which the determination of economic producibility is subject to the completion of major
additional capital expenditures.
Several factors could change our proved oil and gas reserves. For example, we receive a share of production from arrangements similar to production-sharing contracts to
recover costs and generally an additional share for profit. Our share of production and reserves from these contracts decreases when product prices rise and increases when
prices decline. Overall, our net economic benefit from these contracts is greater at higher product prices. In other cases, particularly with long-lived properties, lower product
prices may lead to a situation where production of a portion of proved reserves becomes uneconomical. For such properties, higher product prices typically result in additional
reserves becoming economical. Estimation of future production and development costs is also subject to change partially due to factors beyond our control, such as energy
costs and inflation or deflation of oil field service costs. These factors, in turn, could lead to changes in the quantity of proved reserves. Additional factors that could result in a
change of proved reserves include production decline rates and operating performance differing from those estimated when the proved reserves were initially recorded.
Additionally, we perform impairment tests with respect to our proved properties when product prices decline other than temporarily, reserve estimates change significantly,
other significant events occur or management's plans change with respect to these properties in a manner that may impact our ability to realize the recorded asset amounts.
Impairment tests incorporate a number of assumptions involving expectations of undiscounted future cash flows, which can change significantly over time. These assumptions
include estimates of future product prices, which we base on forward price curves and, when applicable, contractual prices, estimates of oil and gas reserves and estimates of
future expected operating and development costs.
The most significant ongoing financial statement effect from a change in our oil and gas reserves or impairment of our proved properties would be to the DD&A rate. For
example, a 5% increase or decrease in the amount of oil and gas reserves would change the DD&A rate by approximately $1.15 per Bbl, which would increase or decrease pre-
tax income by approximately $65 million annually based on production rates for the year ended December 31, 2013.
A portion of the carrying value of our oil and gas properties is attributable to unproved properties. At December 31, 2013, the net capitalized costs attributable to unproved
properties were approximately $900 million. While exploration and development work progresses, the unproved amounts are not subject to DD&A until they are classified as
proved properties. However, if the exploration and development work were to be unsuccessful, or management decided not to pursue development of these properties as a
result of lower commodity prices, higher development and operating costs, contractual conditions or other factors, the capitalized costs of the related properties would be
expensed. The timing of any writedowns of these unproved properties, if warranted, depends upon management's plans, the nature, timing and extent of future exploration and
development activities and their results. We believe our current plans and exploration and development efforts will allow us to realize the unproved property balance.
We perform impairment tests on our infrastructure assets whenever events or changes in circumstances lead to a reduction in the estimated useful lives or estimated
future cash flows that would indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable, or when management's plans change with respect to those assets.
79
Table of Contents
Fair Value Measurements
We have categorized our assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value in a three-level fair value hierarchy, based on the inputs to the valuation techniques: Level 1
—using quoted prices in active markets for the assets or liabilities; Level 2—using observable inputs other than quoted prices for the assets or liabilities; and Level 3—using
unobservable inputs. Transfers between levels, if any, are recognized at the end of each reporting period. We primarily apply the market approach for recurring fair value
measurement, maximize our use of observable inputs and minimize use of unobservable inputs. We generally use an income approach to measure fair value when observable
inputs are unavailable. This approach utilizes management's judgments regarding expectations of projected cash flows and discounts those cash flows using risk-adjusted
discount rate.
Other Loss Contingencies
In the normal course of business, we are involved in lawsuits, claims and other environmental and legal proceedings and audits. We accrue reserves for these matters
when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the liability can be reasonably estimated. In addition, we disclose, if material, in aggregate, our exposure to loss in
excess of the amount recorded on the balance sheet for these matters if it is reasonably possible that an additional material loss may be incurred. We review our loss
contingencies on an ongoing basis.
Loss contingencies are based on judgments made by management with respect to the likely outcome of these matters and are adjusted as appropriate. Management's
judgments could change based on new information, changes in, or interpretations of, laws or regulations, changes in management's plans or intentions, opinions regarding the
outcome of legal proceedings, or other factors. See "—Lawsuits, Claims and Contingencies" for additional information.
Significant Accounting and Disclosure Changes
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued rules related to revenue recognition. Under the new rules, an entity will recognize revenue when
it transfers promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects what it expects to receive in exchange for the goods or services. The rules will also require
more detailed disclosures of the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers. The rules are effective for interim and
annual periods beginning after December 15, 2016 and early application is not permitted. While we are evaluating any potential impact of these new rules, we currently believe
the effect of the new rules will not have a material impact on our financial statements.
In April 2014, the FASB issued rules changing the requirements for reporting discontinued operations to where only the disposals of components of an entity that
represent a strategic shift that has (or will have) a major effect on an entity's operations and financial results will be reported as discontinued operations in the financial
statements. These rules are effective for the annual periods beginning on or after December 15, 2014. They are not expected to have a material impact on our financial
statements upon adoption and will require assessment on an ongoing basis.
In July 2013, the FASB issued rules requiring net, rather than gross, presentation of a deferred tax asset for a net operating loss or other tax credit and any related liability
for unrecognized tax benefits. These rules became effective on January 1, 2014, and did not have a material impact on our financial statements.
80
Table of Contents
Qualitative and Quantitative Disclosures about Market Risk
Commodity Price Risk
General
Our results are sensitive to fluctuations in oil, NGLs and gas prices. Price changes at current levels of production affect our pre-tax annual income by approximately
$29 million for a $1 per Bbl change in oil prices and $8 million for a $1 per Bbl change in NGLs prices. If gas prices varied by $0.50 per Mcf, it would have an estimated annual
effect on our pre-tax income of approximately $32 million. These price-change sensitivities include the impact on income of volume changes under arrangements similar to
production-sharing contracts. If production levels change in the future, the sensitivity of our results to prices also will change.
Cash-Flow Hedges
We have only occasionally hedged our commodity price risk and we do not expect to do so in the foreseeable future. However, we entered into financial swap agreements
in November 2012 for the sale of 50 MMcf/d of our gas production beginning in January 2013 through March 2014. These agreements qualified as cash-flow hedges and
represented approximately 5% of our 2013 total production on a Boe basis. The weighted-average strike price of these swaps was $4.30.
Credit Risk
Our credit risk relates primarily to trade receivables. Credit exposure for each customer is monitored for outstanding balances and current activity.
As of December 31, 2013, the substantial majority of the credit exposures related to our business was with investment grade counterparties. We believe exposure to
credit-related losses related to our business at December 31, 2013 was not material and losses associated with credit risk have been insignificant for all years presented.
Concentration of Credit Risk
Substantially all of our products have historically been sold through Occidental's marketing subsidiaries. For the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011, sales
through Occidental subsidiaries accounted for approximately 97%, 97% and 98% of our net sales, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011,
ConocoPhillips/Phillips 66 Company and Tesoro Refining & Marketing Company LLC each accounted for more than 10% of our net sales and collectively accounted for 42%,
46% and 44%, respectively. No other customer accounted for more than 10% of our net sales during these periods. If a major customer decided to stop purchasing our
products, we do not believe the effect on our operating results and financial condition would be material.
Interest Rate Risk
Historically, we had no interest rate risk exposure as we have not historically had debt balances. Following the spin-off, any borrowings under our new revolving credit
facility could be at a variable interest rate and could expose us to the risk of increasing interest rates.
Table of Contents
Our Company and Vision
81
BUSINESS
Following the spin-off from Occidental, we will be an independent oil and natural gas exploration and production company focused on high-growth, high-return conventional
and unconventional assets, which are conducted exclusively in California. California is one of the most prolific oil and natural gas producing regions in the world and is the third
largest oil producing state in the nation. It has five of the 12 largest fields in the lower 48 states based on estimated proved reserves as of 2009, and our portfolio includes
interests in four of these fields. We are the largest producer in California on a gross operated basis and we believe we have established the largest privately-held mineral
acreage position in the state, consisting of approximately 2.3 million net acres spanning the state's four major oil and gas basins. We have developed a sizable inventory of
over 17,500 identified drilling locations and, as an independent company, we intend to exploit our significant portfolio of conventional and unconventional opportunities to
generate double-digit production growth over the longer-term. We produced approximately 154,000 Boe/d net in 2013 and, as of December 31, 2013, we had proved reserves of
744 MMBoe, with approximately 69% proved developed and 72% proved oil reserves and an aggregate PV-10 value of $14.0 billion. For an explanation of the non-GAAP
financial measure PV-10 and a reconciliation of PV-10 to Standardized Measure, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, see "Summary—Summary Combined
Historical Operating and Reserve Data—Non-GAAP Financial Measure and Reconciliations."
California oil and gas development began in 1876, and oil-in-place estimates have generally increased throughout the ensuing decades, with over 29 billion Bbls of oil and
40 Tcf of natural gas produced and over 53,000 currently active producing wells as of December 31, 2013 (according to DOGGR). We began our operations in California in the
1950s and have accumulated extensive, proprietary knowledge and experience in developing this world-class resource base. Over the past decade, we have also built an
exceptional 3D seismic library, which covers over 4,250 square miles, representing approximately 90% of the 3D seismic data available for California, and we have developed
unique and proprietary stratigraphic and structural models of the subsurface geology and hydrocarbon potential in each of the four basins in which we operate. As a result of our
long, successful operating history, our extensive exploration programs, our exceptional 3D seismic library and proprietary subsurface geologic models, we have tested and
successfully implemented in recent years various exploration, drilling, completion and enhanced recovery technologies to enhance and increase recoveries, growth and returns
from our portfolio.
We believe that over the last several decades the oil and gas industry has focused significantly less effort on utilizing modern development and exploration processes and
technologies in California relative to other prolific U.S. basins. We believe this is largely due to other oil companies' limited capital spending in California, focus on shallow zone
thermal projects or investments in other assets in their global portfolios. As an independent company focused exclusively on California, we expect to drive strong production
growth through increased application of modern technologies and increased capital spending on development of the significant potential in our portfolio.
Our large acreage position contains numerous growth opportunities due to its varied geologic characteristics and multiple stacked pay reservoirs that, in most cases, are
thousands of feet thick. We have a significant portfolio of unconventional growth opportunities, with approximately 4,500 identified drilling locations targeting unconventional
reservoirs primarily in the San Joaquin basin. Unconventional reservoirs have low permeability and require enhanced stimulation and extraction techniques. Unconventional
reservoirs include both shale and low-permeability sandstone reservoirs. Over the last few years, we have increased our production by exploiting seven discrete stacked pay
horizons within the Monterey formation, primarily within the upper Monterey. We continue to drill unconventional wells within these intervals and are also applying the knowledge
acquired from these successes to the Kreyenhagen and the Moreno shales, which we believe offer significant development opportunities as well. We also intend to pursue
development opportunities in the lower Monterey shale, which contains a variety of reservoir lithologies and is the principal hydrocarbon source rock within the overall Monterey
82
Table of Contents
formation. The lower Monterey has a more limited production history than the upper Monterey, and therefore limited knowledge exists regarding its potential. However, we
believe it will be productive over time. Over the last five years, we have drilled and completed over 570 development wells in unconventional reservoirs, primarily in the upper
Monterey formation, with a nearly 100% commercial success rate.
We also have a large portfolio of lower-risk, high-growth conventional opportunities in each of California's four major oil and gas basins with approximately 71% of our
proved reserves associated with conventional opportunities. Conventional reservoirs are capable of natural flow. We have a proven track record of successful exploration and
development using primary, waterflood and steamflood recovery methods. In 2014, we anticipate that approximately 70% of our capital expenditures will target conventional
development, primarily low-risk waterflood and steamflood projects that we expect to generate significant near-term production and cash flow growth. For example, our Lost
Hills and Kern Front steamflood projects and our Huntington field waterflood project are expected to deliver combined production growth of over 35% compounded annually
through 2016 from their combined 2013 production of 15,000 Boe/d.
The following table summarizes certain information concerning our acreage and drilling activities (as of December 31, 2013, unless otherwise stated):
Acreage
(in millions)
Gross   Net
Producing
Wells,
gross
Average
Working
Interest
(%)
Gross
Gross
Acreage
Held in
Fee (%)
1.8 
<0.1 
0.3 
0.6
1.5 
 
  <0.1 
0.3 
 
0.5
2.7
2.3
59%  
73%  
77%  
36%
56%
5,764 
1,382 
780 
729
8,655
90%  
95%  
98%  
100%
92%
San Joaquin basin(4)
Los Angeles basin(5)
Ventura basin
Sacramento basin
Total
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Our total identified drilling locations include 2,141 gross (2,024 net) locations associated with proved undeveloped reserves as of December 31, 2013 and 2,344 gross (2,251 net) injector well locations associated
with our waterflood and steamflood projects. Our total identified drilling locations excludes 6,400 gross (5,300 net) prospective resource drilling locations. Please see "—Our Reserves and Production Information—
Determination of Identified Drilling Locations" for more information regarding the processes and criteria through which we identified our drilling locations. Of our total identified drilling locations, we believe
approximately 75% are attributable to acreage owned or held by production.
Includes 207 injection wells expected to be drilled in connection with our waterflood and steamflood projects.
Includes drilling and completion expenditures of $173 million associated with injection wells. Our 2014 capital budget of $2.1 billion also includes spending on support equipment, facilities, workovers and
exploration.
Excluding Elk Hills, our average working interest in the San Joaquin basin is 97%.
We currently hold approximately 27,173 gross (20,817 net) acres in the Los Angeles basin. Our Los Angeles basin operations are concentrated with pad drilling.
We currently have 26 drilling rigs employed in California with 17 drilling in the San Joaquin basin, 8 in the Los Angeles basin, and 1 rig in the Ventura basin. During the
first half of the year, we drilled over 700 gross development wells with roughly 583 in San Joaquin basin, 114 in the Los Angeles basin, 11 in Ventura basin and 3 in
Sacramento basin. We expect our pace of drilling to improve slightly in the second half of the year as we receive additional permits and will add an additional rig in the San
Joaquin basin during the 3rd quarter.
In 2013, oil represented 58% of our net production. We expect the percentage of oil production to continue to increase over time and favorably impact our overall margins
as we anticipate directing virtually all of our capital expenditures towards oil-weighted opportunities in 2014 and beyond to the extent the current oil to gas price relationship
continues. Approximately 42% of our 2013 production was generated from our growth-oriented fields through a combination of unconventional and conventional primary,
waterflood and steamflood projects with attractive returns. The remaining 58% was generated by our world-class Elk Hills and Wilmington fields, each of which is ranked in the
top 20 onshore fields in the
83
Table of Contents
lower 48 states based on 2009 proved reserves. Over the last three years, we grew our total production 6% on a compound annual basis, from 138 MBoe/d in 2011 to 154
MBoe/d in 2013, while the proportionate share of liquids production grew from 69% to 71%. We intend to accelerate our production growth by significantly increasing our capital
investments and focusing on higher-growth opportunities in our extensive drilling inventory. Our 2014 capital budget of $2.1 billion represents an increase of approximately 26%
over the $1.7 billion we spent in 2013. After the spin-off, we intend to reinvest substantially all of our operating cash flow in our capital program for the foreseeable future as we
will no longer be required to distribute cash to Occidental. We expect to increase our production by 6-9% on a compound annual basis in 2015 and 2016 with a 15% compound
annual increase in our oil production for the same period. Over 90% of our expected production for this period is from currently producing fields where we have existing or
permitted capacity in our production facilities.
As we develop our sizable inventory of over 17,500 identified drilling locations, the majority of which are vertical drilling locations with thousands of feet of stacked pay,
and utilize horizontal drilling techniques, we expect that our inventory of drilling locations will increase. As a result, we believe our total annual production growth will increase to
over 10% after 2016, as we continue to reinvest our cash flow from operations in our capital program and accelerate our unconventional development program.
The table below summarizes our proved reserves as of December 31, 2013, and production for the six months ended June 30, 2014 in each of California's four major oil
and gas basins.
San Joaquin basin
Los Angeles basin
Ventura basin
Sacramento basin
Total operations
(1)
Oil
(MMBbl)
331 
156 
45 
—
532
Calculated as total proved reserves as of December 31, 2013 divided by annualized Average Net Daily Production for the six months ended June 30, 2014.
Our Operations
Our Areas of Operation
California is one of the most prolific oil and natural gas producing regions in the world and is the third largest oil producing state in the nation. It has five of the 12 largest
fields in the lower 48 states based on proved reserves as of 2009, and our portfolio includes interests in four of these fields. California is also the nation's largest state
economy, with significant energy demands that exceed local supply. California imports approximately 62% of its oil, mostly from foreign locations, and 90% of its natural gas.
Because of limited crude transportation infrastructure from other parts of the country to California, the California market is generally isolated from the rest of the nation, which
allows California producers to typically receive a premium to WTI-based prices. Our operations span the four major oil and gas basins in California and include 130 fields with
8,655 gross active wellbores as of December 31, 2013. We believe we are the largest private oil and natural gas mineral acreage holder in California, with interests in
approximately 2.3 million net acres, and the largest land owner in each of the states' four major oil and gas basins. Approximately 60% of our total mineral interest position is
held in fee. A majority of our interests are in producing properties located in reservoirs characterized by what we believe to be long-lived production profiles with repeatable
development opportunities. These reservoirs generally have been developed over a long period of time, typically decades. Observing the performance of these fields over many
years has helped us develop a greater understanding of production and reservoir characteristics and, we believe, makes our future performance more predictable.
Table of Contents
84
*
Production is for the six months ended June 30, 2014. Proved reserves are as of December 31, 2013. Our total gross identified drilling locations are as of December 31,
2013. Please see "—Our Reserves and Production Information—Determination of Identified Drilling Locations" for more information regarding the processes and criteria
through which we identified all of our drilling locations.
85
Table of Contents
Across all of our California operations, we drilled 779 wells in 2013, of which 83% were producers. Our 2013 drilling capital was $1.0 billion. Our 2013 total capital of
$1.7 billion also included spending on support equipment, facilities, workovers and exploration. Our capital program added 89 MMBoe of proved reserves in 2013 representing a
159% reserve replacement ratio, calculated by using the proved reserves additions for 2013 divided by our 2013 production of 56 MMBoe.
San Joaquin Basin
Approximately 69% of our estimated proved reserves as of December 31, 2013 and approximately 70% of our average daily net production for the six months ended
June 30, 2014 were located in the San Joaquin basin. We actively operate and develop 42 fields in this basin consisting of conventional primary, IOR, EOR and unconventional
project types. We currently hold approximately 1.5 million net acres in the San Joaquin basin, approximately 63% of which we hold in fee.
According to DOGGR, approximately 74% of California's daily oil production for 2013 was produced in the San Joaquin basin. Commercial petroleum development began
in the basin in the 1800s when asphalt deposits were mined and shallow wells were hand dug and drilled in the Coalinga, McKittrick and Kern River areas. Rapid discovery of
many of the largest oil accumulations followed during the next several decades, including the Elk Hills field. We have been redeveloping this field and building our expertise to
use in other fields across the state. According to the U.S. Geological Survey, the San Joaquin basin contains three of the 10 largest fields in the United States. Most
discovered oil accumulations occur in Eocene-age through Pleistocene-age sedimentary sections. Source rocks are organic-rich shales from the Monterey, Kreyenhagen and
Tumey formations.
In the 1960s, introduction of thermal techniques resulted in substantial new additions to reserves in heavy oil fields. We have been successfully developing steamfloods
in our Kern Front operations, which are located next to the giant Kern River field and in the northwest portion of the Lost Hills field. Starting in the 1980s, reserves additions
have continued in the Monterey formation on the west side of the basin and in our new conventional field discoveries. As shown in the stratigraphic column below, the basin
contains multiple stacked formations throughout its areal extent, and we believe that the San Joaquin basin provides an appealing inventory of existing field re-development
opportunities, as well as new play discovery and unconventional play potential. The complex stratigraphy and structure in the San Joaquin basin has allowed continuing
discoveries of stratigraphic and structural traps. We believe our extensive 3D seismic library, which covers over 2,625 square miles in the San Joaquin basin, including 35% of
our San Joaquin acreage, will give us a competitive advantage in exploring this basin.
We have established a large ownership interest in several of the largest existing oil fields in San Joaquin basin, including Elk Hills, our largest producing field, as well as
the Buena Vista and Kettleman North Dome fields.
Elk Hills
Elk Hills is our world-class onshore asset located 20 miles west of Bakersfield. The field, covering 75 square miles, was discovered in 1911 and has produced over 1.6
BBoe, making it the 8th most productive field in the United States. Production from Elk Hills' over 3,000 active wells contributes over 40% of California's gas production and 5%
of oil production. At Elk Hills, we operate large and efficient gas processing facilities with a combined capacity of 540 MMcf/d. The gas plant facilities are located adjacent to a
550 megawatt combined-cycle power plant and a 46 megawatt cogeneration plant that not only supply sufficient electricity to operate the field, but also, in the case of the Elk
Hills power plant, sells excess power to the grid. Please see "—Our Infrastructure" for more information regarding the gas processing facilities and our Elk Hills power plant.
Our operations at Elk Hills possess a state-of-the-art central control facility, remote automation control on over 95% of wells and consolidated production facilities for
economies of scale, all of which result in high operational efficiencies.
86
Table of Contents
Due to the nature of the multiple stacked pay zones at Elk Hills, we typically deploy a portion of our annual capital to execute well workovers, such as adding additional
uphole pay zones, performing stimulation treatments or increasing lift capacity, resulting in incremental production and reserves and mitigating production decline. In 2013, we
produced 68,000 Boe/d from our Elk Hills properties, or approximately 44% of our total production, including 46,000 Boe/d of unconventional production from the Monterey
shale. In 2013, this property contributed cash flow from operations, after capital spending, of approximately $500 million.
Los Angeles Basin
Approximately 21% of our estimated proved reserves as of December 31, 2013 and approximately 18% of our average daily net production for the six months ended
June 30, 2014 were located in the Los Angeles basin. We actively operate and develop 10 fields in this urban, coastal basin consisting of conventional primary, IOR, EOR and
unconventional project types. We have a leading acreage position within the Los Angeles basin and over 50% of the basin's production comes from the fields we operate. We
currently hold 27,173 gross (20,817 net) acres in the Los Angeles basin.
The Los Angeles basin is a northwest-trending plain about 50 miles long and 20 miles wide on the coast of southern California containing Miocene through Pleistocene
sediments. The Los Angeles basin has great structural relief and complexity in relation to its geologic youth and small size and is noted for its prolific oil production. The
basin's small areal extent, prolific source rocks, thick sandstone reservoirs and large anticlinal traps are considered a nearly ideal petroleum system. As a result, the Los
Angeles basin has one of the highest concentrations per acre of crude oil in the world. Sixty-eight oil fields have been named in an area of about 450 square miles. These
accumulations of fine-grained sediments with high organic content, interlayered with coarser grained sands, contributed to the formation of large deposits of oil, including the
Wilmington field where we have significant operations as described further below. Other large active oil fields include the Long Beach field, the Huntington field and the Torrance
field. Most of the significant discoveries in the Los Angeles basin date back to the 1920s. A majority of the numerous fields in the basin have either been abandoned or had
production greatly scaled back since the early part of the 1990s. Existing fields range in depth from around 2,000 to 10,000 feet. As shown in the stratigraphic chart below, the
basin contains multiple stacked formations throughout its depths, and we believe that the Los Angeles basin provides an appealing inventory of existing field re-development
opportunities as well as new play discovery potential.
Wilmington Oil Field
The Wilmington field is our world-class coastal asset located in the Long Beach harbor. The field was discovered in 1932 and has produced over 2.9 BBoe from over
8,000 wells, making it one of the top five most productive fields in the United States. During the year ended December 31, 2013, we produced approximately 35,000 Boe/d
gross, or approximately 90% of the total Wilmington field daily production for that year, where we operate on behalf of the state of California and the city of Long Beach. Most of
our Wilmington production is covered under a set of production-sharing contracts under which we recover all capital and operating costs and our share of profits from
production. Please see "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations—Operations" for more information regarding these
production-sharing contracts. The field is developed by applying waterflood methods of oil recovery. Waterfloods are low-cost operations that extend the productive life of a
reservoir beyond the economic life expected for primary development. Over 90% of the water injected into the reservoir is produced from the field. We currently operate
approximately 1,200 producing wells and approximately 700 water injection wells in the Wilmington field. There are five major stacked oil producing zones in the field, ranging in
depth from 2,000 to 10,000 feet. We have identified over 1,000 future drilling locations that we plan to develop over the next five years. For a more detailed description of these
waterfloods, please see "—Conventional Reservoir Recovery Methods—Waterfloods." In 2013, this property contributed cash flow from operations, after capital spending, of
$25 million.
87
Table of Contents
Ventura Basin
Approximately 7% of our estimated proved reserves as of December 31, 2013 and approximately 6% of our average daily net production for the six months ended
June 30, 2014 were located in the Ventura basin. We actively operate and develop 25 fields (nearly 40% of the fields) in this basin consisting of conventional primary, IOR,
EOR and unconventional project types. We currently hold approximately 0.3 million net acres in the Ventura basin, approximately 83% of which we hold in fee.
The Ventura basin contains a Cretaceous-age to Pleistocene-age, mostly marine, sedimentary section in a major fold and thrust belt that began developing during the late
Pliocene. The Ventura basin is the onshore part of the main structural feature and its offshore extension is the modern Santa Barbara basin. All of the sedimentary section is
productive at various locations, and most reservoirs are sandstones with favorable porosity and permeability. In general, most traps are anticlinal, modified to some degree by
faults and with significant stratigraphic trapping. As shown in the stratigraphic column below, the basin contains multiple stacked formations throughout its depths, and we
believe that the Ventura basin provides an appealing inventory of existing field re-development opportunities, as well as new play discovery and unconventional play potential.
The first fields discovered in the Ventura basin were near the Ojai field in the town of Santa Paula in 1861. Since then, approximately 100 oil and gas fields have been
discovered. Multiple source rocks are present with Miocene-age (Monterey and Rincon formations) and Eocene-age (Anita and Cozy Dell formations) sediments. Complex
stratigraphy and structural geology enhance the exploration potential in the basin. Only limited use of modern drilling and completion techniques and limited seismic surveys
have occurred since the late 1960s, with virtually no exploration drilling. In 2013, we completed the acquisition of, and are currently processing, the first ever 3D seismic survey
in the Ventura basin. We believe this 3D seismic data gives us a competitive advantage in exploring this basin.
Sacramento Basin
Approximately 3% of our estimated proved reserves as of December 31, 2013 and approximately 6% of our average daily net production for the six months ended
June 30, 2014 were located in the Sacramento basin. We actively operate and develop 53 fields in this basin primarily consisting of dry gas production. We currently hold
approximately 0.5 million net acres in the Sacramento basin, approximately 36% of which we hold in fee. We believe our significant acreage position in the Sacramento basin
gives us the option for future development and rapid production growth in an attractive gas price environment. We produced approximately 84% of the produced gas in the
Sacramento basin during 2013.
The Sacramento basin is a deep, elongated northwest-trending basin located in northern California covering around 12,000 square miles and forming the northern part of
California's Central Valley. It contains a thick sequence of sedimentary rocks that range in age from lower Cretaceous to Neogene sediments in an area that is approximately
200 miles long and 45 miles wide. Producing reservoirs range from upper Cretaceous-age to Pliocene-age. The main reservoirs are the Cretaceous Starkey, Winters, Forbes,
Kione, and the Eocene Domengine sands. Exploration in the basin started in 1918 and was focused on seeps and topographic highs. In the 1970s, the use of multifold 2D
seismic led to large discoveries in the basin. The acquisition of 3D seismic surveys in the mid-1990s helped define trapping mechanisms and reservoir geometries. The
Sacramento basin has been extensively explored for petroleum resources, and more than 10 Tcf of natural gas have been produced.
Stratigraphic Chart of San Joaquin, Los Angeles, Ventura and Sacramento Basins
California is home to several basins characterized by extensive production history, long reserve life and multiple producing horizons. As shown in the table below, the
state's four major oil and gas basins contain multiple stacked formations throughout their depths that include both conventional and unconventional opportunities. Our current
operations in these four basins are focused on the formations
88
Table of Contents
highlighted below, however, we believe the stacked reservoirs within our asset base provide exposure to additional upside potential in several emerging resource plays.
Our Business Strategy
We plan to maximize shareholder returns by accelerating production growth profitably through the development of our high-growth unconventional assets and low-risk
conventional assets. The principal elements of our business strategy include the following:
•
Accelerate development of high-growth unconventional drilling opportunities.  Over the longer term, we expect substantial production growth to come from
unconventional reservoirs such as tight sandstones and shales. We hold mineral interests in approximately 1.1 million net acres with unconventional potential and
have identified 4,682 drilling locations on this acreage. As a result of our increased focus on these reservoirs over the past few years, more than one-third of our
production now comes from unconventional assets, an increase of approximately 160% since the acquisition of our Elk Hills field properties in 1998. As of
December 31, 2013, we had proved reserves of 217 MMBoe associated with our unconventional properties, of which approximately 30% was proved undeveloped.
We have been building a growing technical understanding of these reservoirs through our successful development of portions of our acreage. For example, we
have developed seven discrete, productive intervals within the Monterey formation, primarily within the upper Monterey, with a nearly 100% commercial success
rate on our development wells. We are now applying the knowledge acquired from these successes to operations in other unconventional
Table of Contents
89
•
•
•
reservoirs, such as the Kreyenhagen and Moreno shale formations, which we believe offer significant development opportunities due to similar reservoir
characteristics with multiple potentially productive zones in each well bore.
Drive significant production growth from high-return, low-risk conventional assets.  In the near term, we intend to increase our capital spending and
generate significant production and cash flow growth from proven IOR methods, such as waterflooding, and EOR methods, such as steamflooding. The oil and
gas industry has observed that primary recovery methods typically produce less than 10% of the oil volume initially in place and that subsequent waterfloods and
steamfloods typically increase recovery to a range of 20% to 60%. Our Lost Hills and Kern Front steamflood projects and our Huntington field waterflood project
are expected to deliver combined production growth of over 35% compounded annually through 2016 and together account for approximately 60% of our projected
6-9% annual production growth through 2016. We believe these projects are substantially derisked as they are currently producing and we have existing or
permitted capacity in our production facilities sufficient to develop these projects through 2016. We have significant additional low-risk conventional opportunities
like these with over 13,009 identified drilling locations, 52% of which are associated with IOR and EOR projects. The remaining 48% are associated with primary
recovery methods, many of which we expect will develop into IOR and EOR projects in the future.
Aggressively apply modern technologies to enhance production growth.  Over the last several decades, the oil and gas industry has focused significantly
less effort on utilizing modern development and exploration processes and technologies in California relative to other prolific U.S. basins. We believe this is
largely due to other oil companies' limited capital spending in California, focus on shallow zone thermal projects or investments in other assets within their global
portfolios. As an independent company focused exclusively on California, we intend to make significant use of modern technologies in drilling and completing
wells, which we expect will substantially increase both our cost-efficiency and production growth over time. We are well positioned to execute on this strategy as
we have developed an extensive 3D seismic library, which covers over 4,250 square miles, representing approximately 90% of the 3D seismic data available for
California, and have tested and successfully implemented various exploration, drilling, completion and IOR and EOR technologies in the state. As a result of our
long, successful operating history, our geographically broad exploration drilling programs and exceptional 3D seismic library, we believe we have developed a
leading understanding of the geology, petroleum systems and hydrocarbon potential in the basins in which we operate. Our unique and proprietary stratigraphic
and structural models of the subsurface geology allow us to recognize new development and exploration areas in each of our basins, and identify the applicable
modern drilling and completion technologies needed to enhance recoveries and returns. For example, we recently applied rigorous seismic, stratigraphic and
reservoir analyses to discover unconventional resources in a new field in the Monterey zone in the San Joaquin basin. This area was previously tested from the
1940s to the 1970s with six wells drilled by major oil companies, but hydrocarbon resources were not recognized until our 2012 discovery, following our seismic
evaluation and application of our unique and proprietary subsurface models. We have already increased production five-fold to over 1,400 Bbls/d from first quarter
production in 2012 and have identified an additional 150 drilling locations in the field.
Generate strong cash flows through a focus on high-margin crude oil in order to internally fund our capital budget. We intend to focus on increasing
cost-efficiency and developing profitable opportunities in our portfolio in order to achieve self-funded growth in any foreseeable market or regulatory environment.
We intend to reinvest substantially all of our operating cash flow in our capital program for the foreseeable future as we will no longer be required to distribute cash
to Occidental. In 2013, we generated cash flow from operations of approximately $763 million after capital spending of approximately $1.7 billion. We believe we
will continue to generate a substantial
90
Table of Contents
amount of free cash flow in 2014 after planned capital spending of $2.1 billion. Almost all our 2014 capital budget will be focused on oil producing projects and we
expect this emphasis to continue in a high oil price environment. As of December 31, 2013, crude oil represented 72% and 58%, respectively, of our total
reserves and production which positions us well to grow our oil production. In addition, we believe we have significant potential upside in a more favorable natural
gas price environment, particularly with respect to our Sacramento basin acreage, where we had identified 1,008 gross (864 net) drilling locations as of
December 31, 2013. Given our large acreage position and drilling inventory across both oil and natural gas opportunities, we expect to generate strong production
and cash flow growth in different commodity price environments.
We sell all of our crude oil into the California refining markets at prices we believe are among the most favorable in the United States. California refiners typically
purchase crude oil at international waterborne-based prices at a premium to WTI-based prices. For example, our 2013 realized price averaged across all grades of
crude oil reflected a 6% premium to WTI index prices. We believe that the limited crude transportation infrastructure from other parts of the country to California
will allow us to continue to realize strong cash margins as a result. The figure below shows our operating cash margin per Boe for 2013 of approximately $50/Bbl
or 65% of our average realized price.
*
Other costs includes other operating expenses and taxes other than on income and excludes exploration expense.
•
Proactive and collaborative approach to safety, environmental protection and community relations. We are committed to developing our assets in a
manner that safeguards people and protects the environment. We seek to proactively engage with regulatory agencies, communities, other stakeholders and our
workforce to pursue mutually beneficial outcomes. To further implement this strategy and commitment, we have recently appointed a senior manager whose
primary duty is to collaborate with the regulatory agencies and other stakeholders to address their concerns and obtain required approvals in a timely fashion. One
recent example of our proactive approach is our development of a regional water mapping tool based on existing public data from the San Joaquin Valley, which
we have shared with state and local agencies. Our multidisciplinary team worked with regulatory agencies to integrate those data sets with computer modeling
and field validation, which allowed us to obtain new well stimulation permits for a key operating area at Elk Hills. This strategy also applies directly to our
protection of the environments in which we operate. For example, we actively promote biodiversity, having set aside approximately 8,000 acres of certified habitat
conservation areas at our Elk Hills and Long Beach field operations. To reduce our use of fresh water, we employ water recycling and treatment extensively in our
operations, such as our use of reclaimed municipal wastewater in Long Beach for pressure maintenance and waterflooding.
91
Table of Contents
As a result of these water management projects, our oil and gas operations supply more fresh water than we use, providing the surplus to agriculture. We believe
our commitment to safety and the environment and our proactive and collaborative approach benefit both the company and our stakeholders and enhance our
ability to obtain required approvals for our development and exploration projects.
•
Significantly increase our successful exploration program.  We intend to significantly increase our investment in exploration over the next several years,
focusing on both unconventional and conventional opportunities, primarily in areas that we believe can be quickly developed, such as those adjacent to our
existing properties. In addition, we plan to explore and test new unconventional resource areas, which, if successful, could result in significant longer-term
production growth. We believe our exceptional 3D seismic library, which covers over 4,250 square miles, or 2.7 million acres, including 47% of our current
acreage, and our experience in drilling deep wells, provide us a significant competitive advantage in our exploration program. Our technical staff has analyzed this
extensive 3D seismic data along with modern well-log data, and mapped multiple exploration plays and drilling prospects across our key basins. From 2007 to
2013, we drilled more than 100 exploration wells targeting both conventional and unconventional reservoirs and substantially all of these wells encountered strong
indications of hydrocarbons. Our two most significant exploration discoveries over the past five years were the result of employing our unique and proprietary
stratigraphic and structural models of the subsurface geology, proprietary 3D seismic data and understanding of the petroleum systems and hydrocarbon
potential. They now together contribute approximately 18,000 Boe/d to our production. Our current drilling inventory includes 7,237 gross (5,117 net) exploration
drilling locations that are located in proven formations, the majority of which are located near existing producing fields. Additionally, we have identified 6,400 gross
(5,300 net) prospective resource drilling locations in the lower Monterey, Kreyenhagen, and Moreno resource plays. We expect that these exploration and
prospective resource drilling locations, together with additional prospects within our current large acreage holdings, will drive significant growth in our successful
exploration program for many years.
Our Competitive Strengths
We believe we are well-positioned to successfully execute our business strategies because of the following competitive strengths:
•
•
Largest acreage position in a world-class oil province.  California is one of the most prolific oil and natural gas producing regions in the world and is the third
largest oil producing state in the nation. It has five of the top 12 largest fields in the lower 48 states based on estimated proved reserves as of 2009, and our
portfolio includes interests in four of these fields. We believe we are the largest private oil and natural gas mineral acreage holder in California, with interests in
approximately 2.3 million net acres that contain attractive conventional and unconventional drilling opportunities using primary, IOR and EOR methods. Our large
and diverse acreage position, approximately 60% of which we hold in fee, allows us to prioritize projects by value and risk to achieve strong returns and maintain
strong reserve replacement and production growth rather than drill simply to hold leases. A significant percentage of our opportunities are oil-weighted, with
approximately 90% of our identified drilling locations associated with oil production. For the year ended December 31, 2013, we were the largest producer in the
state on a combined gross operated basis with approximately 188,000 Boe/d of production, 59% of which was oil. As of December 31, 2013, we had total
combined reserves of over 744 MMBoe, of which approximately 72% was oil and 81% was liquids.
Significant growth potential from opportunity-rich drilling portfolio.  Our drilling inventory at December 31, 2013 consisted of 17,691 identified well locations,
including 4,682 gross (4,264 net) unconventional drilling locations and 13,009 gross (10,921 net) conventional drilling locations. We
Table of Contents
92
believe we can achieve significant production growth through the development of unconventional reservoirs. Over the last five years, we have drilled and
completed over 570 unconventional development wells, primarily in the upper Monterey formation, with an almost 100% commercial success rate. Our successful
unconventional drilling program has demonstrated the productive potential of seven stacked pay zones within the Monterey formation, primarily within the upper
Monterey, and we believe that these successes are repeatable in other formations such as the Kreyenhagen formation, which has similar geologic attributes. We
also have a large inventory of conventional development opportunities that will provide low-risk, near-term production growth with attractive returns. We believe
that a significant portion of our production growth over the next two to three years will be driven by IOR and EOR projects, many of which are already being
implemented. Over 90% of our expected 6-9% production growth through 2016 is expected to come from currently producing fields. As we develop our sizable
inventory of drilling locations, the majority of which are vertical drilling locations with thousands of feet of stacked pay, and utilize horizontal drilling techniques,
we expect that we will achieve double-digit production growth over the longer term.
Unique ability to drive high returns and growth in different commodity price environments.  Our current drilling inventory comprises a diversified portfolio of
oil and natural gas locations, which allows us to target drilling projects that are the most economically compelling depending on the prevailing commodity price
outlook. Approximately 90% of our drilling inventory is associated with oil-rich projects, primarily located in the San Joaquin, Los Angeles and Ventura basins, and
the remaining inventory is associated with natural gas properties in the Sacramento, San Joaquin and Ventura basins. We have operating control over 97% of our
properties, enabling us to determine all aspects of our development program, including the selection of specific drilling locations, the timing of the development
and the drilling and completion techniques used. Our retention of operating control coupled with our diversified portfolio provides us with the flexibility to invest our
capital in the highest return projects and control operating costs to drive strong production and cash flow growth in different commodity price environments as well
as to adapt to any changes in regulatory and market conditions. Approximately 26% of our production for the six months ended June 30, 2014 was natural gas. If
conditions change and gas prices become more favorable, we believe that we have the ability to significantly increase our gas production within a few years
through accelerated capital investment in gas projects currently in our portfolio. In addition to our drilling opportunities, we have made significant investments in
infrastructure, including our state-of-the-art Elk Hills cryogenic gas plant and our 550 megawatt Elk Hills power plant, which increase our operational flexibility and
ability to maximize returns in any commodity price environment.
Strong free cash flow and premium margins driven by deficit California energy market.  We sell almost all of our crude oil into the California refining
markets at prices we believe are among the most favorable in the United States. California, the largest state economy in the United States, imports approximately
62% of its oil and approximately 90% of its natural gas. Oil is imported via rail or supertanker. As a result, California refiners have typically purchased crude oil at
international waterborne-based prices that exceed WTI-based prices for comparable grades. Our 2013 realized price averaged across all grades of crude oil
reflected a 6% premium to WTI index prices. We believe that the limited crude transportation infrastructure from other parts of the country to California will allow
us to continue to realize strong cash margins. In addition, we own the fee minerals on approximately 60% of our acreage position. The returns on developed
mineral fee acreage are greatly enhanced because we do not pay royalties and other lease payments. We expect the resulting substantial operating cash flow to
fund our growth while allowing us to maintain ample liquidity.
•
•
•
Proven management and technical teams with extensive experience operating in California.  Our experienced management team and technical staff have a
proven track record of applying the leading technologies and operating methods to develop our assets. The members of our
93
Table of Contents
management and technical teams have an average of over    years' experience in the oil and natural gas industry, with an average of    years focused on
California oil and gas operations. We believe this focused experience gives us an inherent competitive advantage. As a result of our long operating history in the
state, our team of geoscientists and engineers has developed a growing understanding of the geology and can quickly identify and apply suitable recovery
methods, as well as drilling, completion and other relevant technologies, to increase production and reserves. For example, our technical team has extensive
experience developing unconventional opportunities and growing large, world-class fields, such as Elk Hills and Wilmington. Our cumulative production and year
end proven reserves from these fields are twice the proved reserves originally purchased and we continue to find additional reserves in these fields. In addition,
production from unconventional reservoirs within these fields now account for over 50% of our 2013 daily combined production for these fields. We are applying
the expertise gained through re-developing Elk Hills and Wilmington to many of the other fields we operate. In addition, we believe that our team has established a
favorable reputation among regulators and other stakeholders for our commitment to safety and demonstrated sensitivity to the environment. We believe that our
favorable record and reputation with communities and regulators sustains our operations, and gives us an important advantage when we seek to acquire and
develop opportunities throughout California.
Portfolio Management and 2014 Capital Budget
We develop our capital programs by prioritizing rates of return and balancing the short- and long-term growth potential of each of our assets. The diversity of our portfolio
allows us to generate attractive investment opportunities in a variety of operating and commodity price environments. We regularly monitor internal performance and external
factors and adjust our capital program with the objective of achieving the highest total returns on our portfolio of drilling opportunities.
We have a 2014 capital expenditure budget of $2.1 billion for projects targeting investments in the San Joaquin, Los Angeles and Ventura basins, as compared to
$1.7 billion in 2013. Virtually all of our 2014 capital budget is being directed towards oil-weighted production consistent with 2013. Of the total 2014 capital budget,
approximately $1.4 billion is allocated to well drilling and completions, $200 million to workovers, $180 million to surface support equipment to handle higher production,
$100 million to additional steam generation capacity expansion, $95 million to exploration and the rest to maintenance capital, HES projects and other items. As a result of
recent investments in infrastructure, we do not anticipate any substantial spending on new infrastructure during the next several years. We believe the absence of such
significant expenditures should support strong cash flows. The table below sets forth the expected allocation of our 2014 capital expenditure budget as compared to the
allocation of our 2013 capital expenditures and actual 2014 capital expenditures through June 30, 2014.
2014 Capital
Expenditures through
June 30, 2014
2013 Capital
Expenditures
Total 2014 Capital
Expenditure Budget  
(in millions)
 
157  $
 
298 
219
342  $
 
787 
343
674
272 
57
1,472
543 
95
266 
480 
375
1,121
457 
91
Conventional:
Primary recovery
Waterfloods
Steamfloods
Total conventional
Unconventional
Exploration
Total
$
Total
$
1,003  $
2,110  $
1,669
Assuming current market conditions and a drilling success rate comparable to our historical performance, we believe we will be able to fund our entire 2014 capital
program with our cash flow from
94
Table of Contents
operations. We have a significant inventory of high-quality drilling locations to support higher spending. We expect our 2015 capital budget to increase further from 2014 levels
to a range of $2.3 billion to $2.5 billion as we reinvest substantially all of our increased cash flow in our capital program.
Conventional Reservoir Recovery Methods
We determine the development method to use based on reservoir characteristics, reserves potential and expected returns. We seek to optimize the potential of our
conventional assets by progressively using primary recovery methods, which may include some well stimulation techniques, IOR methods such as waterflooding and EOR
methods like steamflooding, using both vertical and horizontal drilling. All of these techniques are proven technologies we have used extensively in California.
Primary Recovery
Primary recovery methods are the first techniques we use to develop a reservoir. These methods consist of drilling and producing wells without supplementing the natural
reservoir energy. Our successful exploration program continues to provide us with primary recovery opportunities in new reservoirs or through extensions of existing fields. In
2013, 22% of our production came from primary production in conventional reservoirs. We continued to expand our conventional primary recovery programs in 2013, and with
our 2014 development plans, we expect this growth pattern to continue. We are planning to drill 113 wells in 2014 that will be produced using conventional primary recovery
methods. Our conventional development programs set up future opportunities to convert these reservoirs to waterfloods or steamfloods after their primary production phase.
Waterfloods
Waterflooding works by repressurizing a reservoir through water injection and displacing or "sweeping" oil to producing wellbores. Waterfloods are low-cost operations with
attractive margins and returns in the current price environment. These operations typically have low and predictable production declines and allow us to extend the productive
life of a reservoir and significantly increase our incremental recovery after primary depletion. We use waterfloods extensively in the San Joaquin, Los Angeles and Ventura
basins where they have allowed us to reduce production decline or modestly grow our production from mature fields such as Elk Hills and Wilmington. Since 2011, we have
achieved 32% production growth from waterflood projects and we expect this growth pattern to continue. We spent $480 million on waterfloods in 2013, drilling 196 wells
including 146 producing wells. We plan to increase our capital spending on waterfloods in 2014 by 64% to $787 million and to drill 309 wells.
Our Long Beach and Tidelands properties in the Wilmington field are two of our largest waterflood operations, representing 14% and 5%, respectively, of our revenues for
the year ended December 31, 2013.
Long Beach Unit
Upon acquiring the right to serve as operating contractor to the City of Long Beach in April 2000, we implemented a development drilling program to expand operations in
this mature reservoir. Since April 2000, we have drilled 434 oil producing wells and 200 water injecting wells at a cost of $930 million. An additional $193 million was invested in
facilities repairs and upgrades to support incremental production and injection. Our cumulative production and year end proved reserves from the unit is over twice the proved
reserves originally purchased and we continue to find additional reserves. As of December 31, 2013, we have identified over 500 development drilling locations.
Tidelands
Recognizing the success of our Long Beach Unit waterflood efforts, we executed new contracts with the State of California and City of Long Beach to facilitate the
development of Tidelands properties.
95
Table of Contents
These agreements are similar to our contractual arrangement in the Long Beach Unit and support development drilling in this mature property. In the ten years preceding
execution of these new contracts, drilling on the Tidelands properties was limited to replacing failed wells or relocating wells to accommodate projects of the Port of Long
Beach. As a result of executing these new contractual arrangements, we began development drilling on the Tidelands property in January 2011. Since January 2011, we have
drilled 125 oil production wells and 50 water injection wells at a cost of $254 million. An additional $102 million was invested in facilities repairs and upgrades to support
incremental production and injection. Tidelands gross oil production has increased by more than 50% from 6,400 Bbls/d in January 2010 to 9,800 Bbls/d today. As of
December 31, 2013, over 400 development drilling projects have been identified to further develop the Tidelands waterflood.
Steamfloods
Steamfloods work by lowering the viscosity of the oil, causing it to flow more easily to wells. Our steamflood properties have seen some of the highest growth in our
portfolio over the last year. We have steamflood projects in the San Joaquin and Ventura basins where we produce heavy oil, primarily in Kern County and in fields such as
Kern Front and Lost Hills with demonstrated steamflood results. We have gradually increased our capital allocated to steamfloods over the years and expect to continue doing
so for as long as the current oil versus gas price spread continues. Our steamfloods are highly profitable in this price environment, allowing us to use inexpensive gas to
generate steam, which is then injected into the reservoir to produce oil. Full development of these steamfloods is a multi-year endeavor that involves upfront infrastructure
construction for steam and water processing facilities and follow-on development drilling. These steam projects are generally shallower in depth (300-2,500 ft) than our other
programs and the wells are relatively inexpensive to drill. Therefore, we can normally implement a drilling program quickly with attractive rates of return. We spent $375 million
on steamfloods in 2013, drilling 387 wells, including 304 producing wells. We expect our total capital spending on steamfloods for 2014 to be slightly lower than 2013, although
our total drilling capital expenditures are expected to be slightly higher in 2014, with 614 wells expected to be drilled in 2014 as compared to 387 wells in 2013. In 2013, our total
production from steamfloods was 25,000 Boe/d gross and we injected an average of 95,000 BS/d gross in our operated fields. We expect to nearly triple our 2013 injection rate
by around 2020. We have already made significant infrastructure investments to support the bulk of this planned expansion.
Our Kern Front property is an example of an ongoing successful steamflood project with steamflood expansion occurring laterally across the field. As part of our multi-
year development program, we drilled 197 new wells on our Kern Front steamflood in 2013 for $77 million. We have also invested in new steam generators to increase current
steam capacity to 115,000 BS/d from 70,000 BS/d at the beginning of 2013. Gross production response increased by 1,900 Bbls/d, or 23%, in 2013. It can take 12 to
18 months following the drilling of a producing well and initiation of a steamflood before the producing wells begin to fully respond. We anticipate additional, steady steamflood
expansion to continue for several more years at Kern Front resulting in nearly doubled levels of injection by about 2020. Our Kern Front steamflood represented 7% of our
revenues for the year ended December 31, 2013 and we expect it will be a significant contributor to operating cash flow going forward.
Unconventional Reservoir Potential
We believe our undeveloped unconventional acreage has the potential to provide significant long-term production growth. In total we hold mineral interests in
approximately 1.1 million net acres with unconventional potential and have identified 4,682 gross (4,264 net) unconventional drilling locations on this acreage. Over the last five
years, we have drilled and completed over 570 unconventional development wells, primarily in the upper Monterey formation, with a nearly 100% commercial success rate. As
a result of focusing more on these reservoirs over the past few years, approximately 39% of our 2013 production was from unconventional reservoirs, an increase of
approximately 160% since the acquisition of our Elk
96
Table of Contents
Hills field properties in 1998. As of December 31, 2013, we had proved reserves of 217 MMBoe associated with our unconventional properties, with approximately 30% proved
undeveloped.
Approximately 3,812 of our unconventional drilling locations are located on our acreage in the Monterey formation in the San Joaquin, Los Angeles and Ventura basins.
The geology of the Monterey formation is highly complex and not uniform due to localized and varied faulting and changes in structure and rock characteristics. The potential of
our Monterey and our other potential unconventional acreage is difficult to estimate because of these variations in the underlying geology and the relative lack of readily
available information about the geology in the public domain. We believe, however, that our own work on unconventional acreage in California, including the study of subsurface
geology, well log and seismic data, and observed production results gave us a better understanding of the geology and hydrocarbon potential than had we relied solely on
publicly available data.
The Monterey formation is divided into upper and lower intervals. The overwhelming majority of the Monterey shale production to date, both onshore and offshore, has
been from the upper Monterey. We have successfully produced from seven discrete stacked pay horizons within the Monterey formation, primarily within the upper Monterey,
using modern drilling techniques. The intervals we have produced include the N, A/B, C/D, PG, McDonald, Devilwater and Gould. In 2013, we produced over 50,000 Boe/d from
unconventional reservoirs of the upper Monterey shale. In the upper Monterey we plan to expand the productive area and will continually strive to increase recoveries by
applying reduced well spacing and both vertical and horizontal well geometries. To date, production from our unconventional reservoirs has been by primary mechanisms,
resulting in recoveries typically below 10%. In the future, we plan to test the application of IOR and EOR methods to increase the recovery factor for these reservoirs.
We are applying the knowledge acquired from our successes in the upper Monterey to other shales in the San Joaquin basin such as the Kreyenhagen and Moreno
formations. The Kreyenhagen and Moreno formations are hydrocarbon source rocks that have generated oil and gas, and we believe they offer similar development
opportunities to the upper Monterey due to their multiple stacked pay reservoirs.
The lower Monterey is not as thick as the upper Monterey but contains a variety of reservoir lithologies. This is the principal hydrocarbon source rock within the overall
Monterey formation but has a more limited production history than the upper Monterey, and therefore limited knowledge exists regarding its potential. We are applying our
knowledge and experience from the upper Monterey to the lower Monterey, which we believe will be productive over time.
In the upper Monterey, we plan to expand the productive area and will continually strive to increase recoveries by applying reduced well spacing and both vertical and
horizontal well geometries. To date, production from our unconventional reservoirs has been by primary mechanisms, resulting in recoveries typically below 10%. In the future,
we plan to test the application of IOR and EOR methods to increase the recovery factor for these reservoirs.
The table below compares certain characteristics of our unconventional reservoir targets to those of other prolific North American shale plays.
Play
Upper Monterey(1)
Lower Monterey(1)
Kreyenhagen(1)
Moreno(1)
Bakken
Barnett
Eagle Ford
(1)
Depth
(ft)
3,500' - 12,000' 
9,000' - 16,000' 
8,000' - 16,000' 
8,000' - 16,000' 
3,000' - 11,000' 
5,400' - 9,500' 
5,000' - 12,000'
Thickness
(gross ft)
250' - 3,500' 
200' - 500' 
200' - 350' 
200' - 300' 
6' - 145' 
100' - 500' 
100' - 250'
Porosity
(%)
5 - 30 
5 - 12 
5 - 15 
5 - 10 
2 - 12 
4.0 - 9.6 
3.4 - 14.6
Reservoir characteristics were internally generated based on regional 2D seismic data, 3D seismic data, open hole and mud log data, cores and other reservoir
engineering data.
97
Table of Contents
While we have not yet developed sufficient information to reliably predict success rates across our entire portfolio, our continued investment in unconventional projects is
allowing us to develop a pattern of success across these different reservoirs in addition to improving our overall cycle time from project identification to development. As a
result of our increased understanding of these reservoirs, we believe we will be able to better direct our capital to higher success projects allowing us to strategically increase
our investment levels on unconventional drilling. We expanded our unconventional programs in 2013, and plan to continue this expansion by drilling 150 wells in 2014, all of
which will target oil. With continued successful development and expansion, we believe that the unconventional production from these assets will become a significant portion
of our production.
Exploration Program
We intend to continue our active exploration program in both conventional and unconventional plays where discoveries can quickly be developed into producing fields. We
believe our experienced technical staff, leading acreage position and extensive 3D seismic library, covering over 4,250 square miles, or 2.7 million acres, including 47% of our
acreage, results in a strong competitive advantage. Our interpretation of this seismic data, covering a large portion of our prospective acreage, and our extensive knowledge of
California geology and producing fields has resulted in a large inventory of exploratory projects. Our current drilling inventory includes 7,237 gross (5,117 net) exploration drilling
locations that are located in proven formations, the majority of which are located near existing producing fields. Additionally, we have identified 6,400 gross (5,300 net)
prospective resource drilling locations in the lower Monterey, Kreyenhagen, and Moreno resource plays.
From 2007 to 2013, we drilled more than 100 exploration wells targeting both conventional and unconventional reservoirs. These projects were primarily in hydrocarbon-
rich areas in and around discovered oil and gas fields. As a result, substantially all of our exploration wells encountered strong indications of hydrocarbons. Approximately 70%
of these wells produced hydrocarbons and approximately 50% of those wells were converted to commercial production. We believe that many of the remaining exploration wells
that produced hydrocarbons could also be converted to commercial production and potentially development projects, although we are currently pursuing higher return projects in
lieu of developing these wells.
In 2014, we expect to spend approximately 5% of our total capital, or $95 million, on exploration projects with a continued focus on prospects that can generate near-term
returns. Slightly more than half of this amount will target unconventional reservoirs. We expect exploration capital in the future to be focused in the San Joaquin, Ventura and
Sacramento basins, and weighted toward programs where we have a proven track record of success. In addition, our program also includes exploration prospects in several
high-potential resource plays, where we are the largest holder of unconventional acreage in the state. Success in these plays could generate significant longer-term production
growth. We currently expect the portion of our exploration budget targeting such projects to increase following the spin-off.
Our Infrastructure
Our recent investments in infrastructure downstream of the wellhead have been instrumental in maximizing both the efficiencies of our production and the returns from our
assets. As a result, we possess a portfolio of facilities that complements our operations and provides a strategic advantage for us in California. For example, our Elk Hills
cryogenic gas plant is the largest gas processing complex in California, with capacity of 200 MMScf/d of wellhead gas. This modern plant, constructed in 2012, along with our
other facilities, provides us with an aggregate processing capacity of over 540 MMScf/d with adequate redundancy to maximize uptime. These facilities enable us to optimize
the amount of NGLs separated from the unprocessed wellhead gas stream and achieve higher overall realized prices for our production. We also own and operate a system of
gas processing facilities in the Ventura Basin that is capable of processing equity wellhead gas from the surrounding areas. We continue to identify
98
Table of Contents
opportunities to add incremental gas processing capacity in close proximity to our natural gas producing areas in order to maximize production efficiencies. Our gas processing
facilities are interconnected via pipelines to nearby third-party rail and trucking facilities, with access to certain North American NGLs markets. In addition, we have truck rack
facilities coupled with a battery of pressurized storage tanks at our Elk Hills gas processing facility for NGLs sales to third parties.
We are a large consumer of electricity, particularly with respect to our EOR waterflood and steamflood operations. We source all of our electricity needs at our Elk Hills
operations, which run at about 120 megawatts, through our wholly-owned 550 megawatt combined cycle power plant located adjacent to our Elk Hills processing facilities, and
sell the excess. This power plant provides low cost electricity for field operations and steam that further minimizes overall field operating costs. We also operate a 46 megawatt
cogeneration facility at Elk Hills that provides resource diversity and additional reliability to support field operations. Within our Long Beach operations, we operate a 45
megawatt power generating facility that provides almost 40% of the Long Beach operation's electricity requirements, reducing operating costs.
To facilitate access to attractive markets, we own an extensive network of over 20,000 miles of oil and gas gathering lines. Virtually all of our natural gas production in
California is connected via these facilities, which interconnect with the major third party natural gas pipeline systems. As a result of these connections, we have the ability to
access multiple delivery points to improve the prices we obtain for our natural gas production.
As a result of recent investments in infrastructure, we do not anticipate any substantial infrastructure spending during the next several years. We believe the absence of
such significant expenditures should support strong cash flows.
Marketing Arrangements
We market our crude oil, natural gas, NGLs, and electricity in accordance with standard energy industry practices. Currently, we market our production through a
subsidiary of Occidental but, after the spin-off, we will market through our own subsidiary.
Crude Oil.    Substantially all of our crude oil production is connected to California markets via our crude oil gathering pipelines. We generally do not transport, refine or
process the crude oil we produce and do not have any long-term crude oil transportation arrangements in place. California is heavily reliant on imported sources of energy, with
approximately 62% of oil consumed during 2013 imported from outside the state, mostly from foreign locations. We sell almost all of our crude oil into the California refining
markets, which we believe are among the most favorable in the U.S. Since California imports a significant percentage of its crude oil requirements, California refiners typically
purchase crude oil at international waterborne-based prices that exceed WTI-based prices for comparable grades. For example, crude prices at the California Buena Vista Hills
hub were, on average, an 8% premium to WTI in 2013. This price is then adjusted for differentials based upon delivery location and quality. Currently, we do not have any crude
oil sales contracts with a term extending past 2015. Our 2013 realized price averaged across all grades of crude oil reflected a 6% premium to WTI index prices.
Natural Gas.    Because California imports approximately 90% of the natural gas consumed in the state, we do not have any significant interstate natural gas
transportation commitments. We do have intrastate transportation capacity where necessary to access markets. These contracts are required to facilitate deliveries. We sell
virtually all of our natural gas production under individually negotiated contracts using market-based pricing on a monthly or shorter basis.
NGLs.    We process substantially all of our NGLs through our processing plants, which facilitate access to third party delivery points near the Elk Hills field. We do not
have long-term or long-haul
99
Table of Contents
interstate NGLs transportation agreements. We sell virtually all of our NGLs to third parties using market-based pricing. Our NGLs sales are generally pursuant to one-year
contracts that are renewed annually.
Electricity.    While part of the electric output of our generation facilities is utilized within our production facilities to reduce field operating costs, a significant portion is
sold into the California market. Excess electric output and associated electric products are marketed to third parties and offered daily into the California electric market to be
dispatched based on pricing and grid requirements.
Our Principal Customers
We sell our crude oil, natural gas and NGLs production principally to California refineries and marketers and other purchasers that have access to transportation and
storage facilities. Our marketing of crude oil, natural gas and NGLs can be affected by factors that are beyond our control, and which cannot be accurately predicted.
For the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011, ConocoPhillips/Phillips 66 Company and Tesoro Refining & Marketing Company LLC each accounted for more
than 10% of our revenue and collectively accounted for 42%, 46% and 44%, respectively. No other customer accounted for more than 10% of our revenue during these periods.
If a major customer decided to stop purchasing our products, we do not believe the effect on our operating results and financial condition would be material.
Our Reserves and Production Information
Reserve Data
The information with respect to our estimated reserves presented below has been prepared in accordance with the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Reserves Presentation
Proved oil, NGLs and natural gas reserves were estimated using the unweighted arithmetic average of the first-day-of-the-month price for each month within the year,
unless prices were defined by contractual arrangements. Oil, NGLs and natural gas prices used for this purpose were based on posted benchmark prices and adjusted for price
differentials including gravity, quality and transportation costs. For the 2013 disclosures, the calculated average WTI oil price was $96.94 per Bbl. The calculated average
NYMEX gas price for 2013 disclosures was $3.65 per MMBtu. The realized prices used for the 2013 disclosures were $102.67 per Bbl for oil $50.53 per Bbl for NGLs and $3.84
per Mcf for natural gas.
The following table summarizes our estimated proved reserves and related PV-10 at December 31, 2013. Reserves are stated net of applicable royalties. Estimated
reserves include our economic interests under arrangements similar to production-sharing contracts relating to the Wilmington field in Long
100
Table of Contents
Beach. For a more detailed description of these contractual arrangements, see "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation—
Operations."
At December 31, 2013
San Joaquin
Los Angeles
Basin
Basin
Ventura
Basin
Sacramento
Basin
Proved developed reserves:
Oil (MMBbl)
NGLs (MMBbl)
Natural Gas (Bcf)
Total (MMBoe)(1)(2)
Proved undeveloped reserves:
Oil (MMBbl)
NGLs (MMBbl)
Natural Gas (Bcf)
225 
47 
459
349
106 
21 
210
109 
— 
11
111
47 
— 
6
29 
2 
25
35
16 
2 
10
Total
 
  
  363 
 
49 
  611
— 
— 
116
19
514
— 
— 
1
169 
 
23 
  227
Total (MMBoe)(2)
Total proved reserves:
Oil (MMBbl)
NGLs (MMBbl)
Natural Gas (Bcf)
Total (MMBoe)(2)
(1)
(2)
162
331 
68 
669
511
48
156 
— 
17
159
20
45 
4 
35
55
—
230
— 
— 
117
532 
 
72 
  838
19
744
Approximately 11% of proved developed oil reserves, 2% of proved developed NGLs reserves, 8% of proved developed natural gas reserves and 9% of total proved
developed reserves are non-producing.
Natural gas volumes have been converted to Boe based on energy content of six Mcf of gas to one Bbl of oil. Barrels of oil equivalence does not necessarily result in
price equivalence. The price of natural gas on a barrel of oil equivalent basis is currently substantially lower than the corresponding price for oil and has been similarly
lower for a number of years. For example, in 2013, the average prices of WTI oil and NYMEX natural gas were $97.97 per Bbl and $3.66 per Mcf, respectively, resulting
in an oil-to-gas ratio of over 25 to 1.
PV-10 and Standardized Measure
PV-10 of proved reserves (in millions)(1)
Standardized measure (in millions)
(1)
At December 31,
$
  $
2013
14,018 
9,223
PV-10 is a non-GAAP financial measure and represents the year-end present value of estimated future cash inflows from proved oil and gas reserves, less future
development and production costs, discounted at 10% per annum to reflect the timing of future cash flows and using SEC prescribed pricing assumptions for the period.
PV-10 differs from Standardized Measure because Standardized Measure includes the effects of future income taxes on future income. Neither PV-10 nor Standardized
Measure should be construed as the fair value of our oil and gas reserves. PV-10 and Standardized Measure are used by the industry and by our management as an
asset value measure to compare against our past reserve bases and the reserve bases of other business entities because the pricing, cost environment and discount
assumptions are prescribed by the SEC and are comparable. PV-10 further facilitates the comparisons to other companies as it is not dependent on the taxpaying status
of the entity.
101
Table of Contents
Proved Reserve Additions
Our total proved reserve additions from all sources were 86 MMBoe in 2013. All of these reserve additions were the result of our development program. We added 89
MMBoe from improved recovery, slightly offset by 3 MMBoe of negative revisions. The total additions to our proved reserves during the year ended December 31, 2013 were as
follows:
Improved recovery:
Oil (MMBbl)
NGLs (MMBbl)
Natural Gas (Bcf)
Total (MMBoe)
Extensions and discoveries:
Oil (MMBbl)
NGLs (MMBbl)
Natural Gas (Bcf)
Total (MMBoe)
Revisions of previous estimates:
Oil (MMBbl)
NGLs (MMBbl)
Natural Gas (Bcf)
San Joaquin
Los Angeles
Basin
Basin
Ventura
Basin
Sacramento
Basin
Total
49 
4 
47
61
— 
— 
—
—
(8)  
13 
 
(4)
24 
— 
3
25
— 
— 
—
—
3 
— 
 
(4)
3 
— 
2
3
— 
— 
—
—
(3)  
— 
 
(1)
— 
— 
—
—
— 
— 
—
76 
4 
52
89
— 
  — 
  —
—
—
— 
— 
 
(38)
(8)
13 
(47)
Total (MMBoe)
Total proved reserve additions:
Oil (MMBbl)
NGLs (MMBbl)
Natural Gas (Bcf)
Total (MMBoe)
4
41 
17 
43
65
2
(3)
27 
— 
 
(1)
27
— 
— 
1
—
(6)
— 
— 
 
(38)
(6)
(3)
68 
17 
5
86
Our ability to add reserves, other than through purchases, depends on the success of improved recovery, extension and discovery projects, each of which depends on
reservoir characteristics, technology improvements and oil and gas prices, as well as capital and operating costs. Many of these factors are outside management's control, and
will affect whether the historical sources of proved reserve additions continue to provide reserves at similar levels.
Improved Recovery
In 2013, we added proved reserves of 89 MMBoe from improved recovery through proven IOR and EOR methods, as well as unconventional primary mechanisms. The
improved recovery additions in 2013 were mainly associated with the continued development of properties in the San Joaquin and Los Angeles basins. These properties
comprise both conventional and unconventional projects. The types of conventional IOR and EOR development methods we use can be applied through existing wells, though
additional drilling is frequently required to fully optimize the development configuration. Many of our projects, including unconventional projects, rely on improving permeability to
increase flow in the wells. In addition, some improved recovery comes from drilling infill wells that allow recovery of reserves that would not be recoverable from existing wells.
102
Table of Contents
Revisions of Previous Estimates
Revisions can include upward or downward changes to previous proved reserve estimates due to the evaluation or interpretation of geologic, production decline or
operating performance data. In addition, product price changes affect proved reserves we record. For example, higher prices may increase the economically recoverable
reserves, because the extra margin extends the expected life of the operations. Offsetting this effect, higher prices slightly decrease our share of proved reserves under
arrangements similar to production-sharing contracts at our Long Beach operations because less oil is required to recover costs. Conversely, when prices drop, our share of
proved reserves slightly increases for such arrangements similar to production-sharing contracts and economically recoverable reserves may drop for other operations. In 2013,
revisions of previous estimates were negligible resulting in a decrease of 3 MMBoe to proved reserves.
Reserve estimation rules require that estimated ultimate recoveries be more likely to increase or remain constant than to decrease as changes are made due to increased
availability of technical data. As a result, apart from the effect of product prices, future proved reserve revisions should be positive in aggregate over time rather than negative.
Proved Undeveloped Reserves
In 2013, we had proved undeveloped reserve additions of 72 MMBoe from improved recovery, primarily in the San Joaquin and Los Angeles basins, offset slightly by 6
MMBoe of negative revisions. We also transferred 43 MMBoe of proved undeveloped reserves to the proved developed category as a result of the 2013 development programs,
of which 91% were in the San Joaquin and Los Angeles basins. We spent approximately $700 million in 2013 to convert proved undeveloped reserves to proved developed
reserves. While costs to develop proved undeveloped reserves have generally increased over time, in 2013
103
Table of Contents
drilling costs per barrel decreased by 20% as a result of capital efficiency initiatives. The total changes to our proved undeveloped reserves during the year ended
December 31, 2013 were as follows:
Improved recovery:
Oil (MMBbl)
NGLs (MMBbl)
Natural Gas (Bcf)
Total (MMBoe)
Extensions and discoveries:
Oil (MMBbl)
NGLs (MMBbl)
Natural Gas (Bcf)
Total (MMBoe)
Revisions of previous estimates:
Oil (MMBbl)
NGLs (MMBbl)
Natural Gas (Bcf)
San Joaquin
Los Angeles
Basin
Basin
Ventura
Basin
40 
3 
35
49
— 
— 
—
—
(1)  
 
4 
(15)
20 
— 
2
20
— 
— 
—
—
(2)  
 
— 
—
3 
— 
1
3
— 
— 
—
—
(1)  
 
— 
—
Sacramento
Basin
Total
63 
3 
38
— 
— 
—
—
72
— 
— 
—
— 
  — 
  —
—
—
— 
— 
 
(21)
(4)
4 
(36)
Total (MMBoe)
Transfers to proved developed reserves:
Oil (MMBbl)
NGLs (MMBbl)
Natural Gas (Bcf)
Total (MMBoe)
Proved undeveloped reserve additions, net of transfers:
Oil (MMBbl)
NGLs (MMBbl)
Natural Gas (Bcf)
Total (MMBoe)
Reserves Evaluation and Review Process
—
(24)  
(3)  
(30)
(32)
15 
4
(10)
17
(2)
(1)
(3)
(6)
(7)  
— 
 
(1)
(7)
11 
— 
1
11
(3)  
— 
 
(2)
(3)
(1)  
— 
 
(1)
(1)
— 
— 
 
(4)
(34)
(3)
(37)
(1)
(43)
— 
— 
 
(25)
25 
4 
(35)
(4)
23
Our estimates of proved reserves and associated future net cash flows as of December 31, 2013 were made by Occidental's technical personnel, including personnel that
will work for us after the separation, and are the responsibility of each company's management. The estimation of proved reserves is based on the requirement of reasonable
certainty of economic producibility and management's funding commitments to develop the reserves. This process involves reservoir engineers, geoscientists, planning
engineers and financial analysts. As part of the proved reserves estimation process, all reserve volumes are estimated by a forecast of production rates, operating costs and
capital expenditures. Price differentials between benchmark prices (the unweighted arithmetic average of the first-day-of-the-month price for each month within the year) and
realized prices and specifics of each operating agreement are then used to estimate the net reserves. Production rate forecasts are derived by a number of methods, including
estimates from decline-curve analysis, type-curve analysis, material balance calculations that take into account the volumes of substances replacing the volumes produced
and associated reservoir pressure changes, seismic analysis and computer simulation of the reservoir performance. These field-tested technologies have demonstrated
reasonably certain results with consistency and repeatability in the
104
Table of Contents
formation being evaluated or in an analogous formation. Operating and capital costs are forecast using the current cost environment applied to expectations of future operating
and development activities.
Net proved developed reserves are those volumes that are expected to be recovered through existing wells with existing equipment and operating methods, for which the
incremental cost of any additional required investment is relatively minor. Net proved undeveloped reserves are those volumes that are expected to be recovered from new
wells on undrilled acreage, or from existing wells where a relatively major expenditure is required for recompletion.
The current Senior Vice President, Reserves for Occidental's oil and gas operations was responsible for overseeing the preparation of Occidental's reserve estimates,
including those related to our properties for 2013, and for ensuring the estimates comply with SEC rules and regulations. He also oversaw the internal audit and review of the oil
and gas reserves data. He has over 30 years of experience in the upstream sector of the exploration and production business, and has held various assignments in North
America, Asia and Europe. He is a three-time past Chair of the Society of Petroleum Engineers Oil and Gas Reserves Committee, is an American Association of Petroleum
Geologists ("AAPG") Certified Petroleum Geologist and currently serves on the AAPG Committee on Resource Evaluation. He is a member of the Society of Petroleum
Evaluation Engineers, the Colorado School of Mines Potential Gas Committee and the UNECE Expert Group on Resource Classification. He is also an active member of the
Joint Committee on Reserves Evaluator Training. Additionally, he has Bachelor of Science and Master of Science degrees in geology from Emory University in Atlanta.
Occidental has a Corporate Reserves Review Committee ("Reserves Committee"), consisting of senior corporate officers, who reviewed and approved Occidental's oil and
gas reserves, which included our oil and gas reserves for 2013. The Reserves Committee reports to the Audit Committee of Occidental's board of directors during the year.
Ryder Scott was retained to separately review the oil and gas reserves estimation processes used in 2013 for our properties and to provide the opinion noted below.
Ryder Scott conducted a process review of the methods and analytical procedures used by Occidental's engineering and geological staff to estimate the proved reserves
volumes, prepare the economic evaluations and determine reserves classifications as of December 31, 2013. Ryder Scott reviewed the specific application of such methods
and procedures for selected oil and gas properties considered to be a valid representation of our 2013 year-end total proved reserves portfolio. In 2013, Ryder Scott reviewed
approximately 37% of our proved oil and gas reserves. Since being engaged by Occidental in 2003, Ryder Scott has reviewed the specific application of reserve estimation
methods and procedures for approximately 79% of our proved oil and gas reserves that existed at December 31, 2013. Ryder Scott was retained to provide objective third-party
input on the methods and procedures used to estimate our oil and gas reserves for 2013 and to gather industry information applicable to the reserve estimation and reporting
process for those reserves. Ryder Scott was not engaged to render an opinion as to the reasonableness of our reserves quantities. We filed Ryder Scott's independent report
as an exhibit to this Form 10.
Based on its reviews, including the data, technical processes and interpretations presented with respect to our oil and gas reserves, Ryder Scott concluded that the
overall procedures and methodologies utilized in estimating the proved reserves volumes, documenting the changes in reserves from prior estimates, preparing the economic
evaluations and determining the reserves classifications for the reviewed properties are appropriate for the purpose thereof and comply with current SEC regulations.
Because the separation of CRC from Occidental will occur in late 2014, we will use the established reserves review process described above to estimate 2014 proved
reserves. Following the 2014 reserve estimation, we intend to rely more heavily on independent reserves estimation companies, such as Ryder Scott, to estimate our proved
reserves volumes.
105
Table of Contents
Determination of Identified Drilling Locations
Proven Drilling Locations
Based on our reserves report as of December 31, 2013, we have 2,141 gross (2,024 net) drilling locations attributable to our proved undeveloped reserves. We use
production data and experience gained from our development programs to identify and prioritize this proven drilling inventory. These drilling locations are included in our
inventory only after they have been evaluated technically and are deemed to have a high likelihood of being drilled within a five-year time frame. As a result of rigorous
technical evaluation of geologic and engineering data, it can be estimated with reasonable certainty that reserves from these locations will be commercially recoverable in
accordance with SEC guidelines. Management considers the availability of local infrastructure, drilling support assets, state and local regulations and other factors it deems
relevant in determining such locations.
Unproven Drilling Locations
We have also identified a multi-year inventory of 8,313 gross (8,043 net) drilling locations that are not associated with proved undeveloped reserves but are specifically
identified on a field-by-field basis considering the applicable geologic, engineering and production data. We analyze past field development practices and identify analogous
drilling opportunities taking into consideration historical production performance, estimated drilling and completion costs, spacing and other performance factors. These drilling
locations primarily include (i) infill drilling locations, (ii) additional locations due to field extensions or (iii) potential IOR and EOR project expansions, some of which are currently
in the pilot phase across our properties, but have yet to be moved to the proven category. We believe the assumptions and data used to estimate these drilling locations are
consistent with established industry practices with well spacing selected based on the type of recovery process we are using.
Exploration Drilling Locations
Our portfolio of prospective drilling locations contains 7,237 gross (5,117 net) unrisked exploration drilling locations that are located in proven formations, the majority of
which are located near existing producing fields. We use internally generated information and proprietary models consisting of data from analog plays, 3D seismic data, open
hole and mud log data, cores, and reservoir engineering data to help define the extent of the targeted intervals and the potential ability of such intervals to produce commercial
quantities of hydrocarbons. Information used to identify exploration locations includes both our own proprietary as well as industry data available in the public domain. After
defining the reservoir target area, we identified our exploration drilling locations within the applicable intervals by applying the well spacing we have historically utilized for the
applicable type of recovery process used.
Prospective Resource Drilling Locations
In addition, we have 6,400 gross (5,300 net) unrisked prospective resource drilling locations identified in the lower Monterey, Kreyenhagen, and Moreno resource plays
based on screening criteria that contain geologic and economic considerations and very limited production information. Prospective play areas are defined by geologic data
consisting of well cuttings, hydrocarbon shows, open-hole well logs, geochemical data, available 3D or 2D seismic data and formation pressure data where available.
Information used to identify our prospective locations includes both our own proprietary, as well as industry, data available in the public domain. Prospective resource drilling
locations were based on an assumption of 80-acre spacing per well throughout the prospective area for each resource play.
Well Spacing Determination
Our well spacing determinations in the above categories of identified well locations are based on actual operational spacing within our existing producing fields, which we
believe are reasonable for the particular recovery process employed (i.e., primary, waterflood, EOR). Due to the significant vertical thickness and multiple stacked reservoirs
usually encountered by our drilling wells, typical well spacing is
106
Table of Contents
generally less than 20 acres and often 10 acres or less in the majority of our fields unless specified differently above. These parameters also meet the general well spacing
restrictions imposed on certain oil and gas fields in California.
Drilling Schedule
Our identified drilling locations have been scheduled as part of our current multi-year drilling schedule or are expected to be scheduled in the future. However, we may not
drill our identified sites at the times scheduled or at all. We view the risk profile for our exploration drilling locations and our prospective resource drilling locations as being
higher than for our other drilling locations due to relatively less available geologic and production data and drilling history, in particular with respect to our prospective resource
locations, which are in unproven geologic plays. We make assumptions about the consistency and accuracy of data when we identify these locations that may prove
inaccurate.
Our ability to profitably drill and develop our identified drilling locations depends on a number of variables, including crude oil and natural gas prices, the availability of
capital, costs, drilling results, regulatory approvals, available transportation capacity and other factors. If future drilling results in these projects do not establish sufficient
reserves to achieve an economic return, we may curtail drilling or development of these projects. For a discussion of the risks associated with our drilling program, see "Risk
Factors—Risks Related to Our Business—We may not drill our identified sites at the times we scheduled or at all."
The table below sets forth our total identified drilling locations as of December 31, 2013, excluding our prospective drilling locations from new resource plays.
San Joaquin Basin
Primary Conventional
Waterflood
Steamflood
Unconventional
San Joaquin Basin subtotal
Los Angeles Basin
Primary Conventional
Waterflood
Steamflood
Unconventional
Los Angeles Basin subtotal
Ventura Basin
Primary Conventional
Waterflood
Steamflood
Unconventional
Ventura Basin subtotal
Proven Drilling Locations
Oil and
Natural Gas Wells  
  
 
156 
 
117 
 
758 
 
 
276
Injection Wells  
  
 
— 
 
 
59 
222 
 
 
—
281
— 
132 
— 
—
132
— 
38 
— 
—
38
1,307
— 
287 
— 
—
287
43 
36 
14 
2
95
Sacramento Basin
Primary Conventional
Sacramento Basin subtotal
Total Identified Drilling Locations
Table of Contents
Production, Price and Cost History
1
1
1,690
—
—
451
107
Oil, NGLs and natural gas are commodities; therefore, the price that we receive for our production is largely a function of market supply and demand. Product prices are
affected by a variety of factors, including changes in consumption patterns, global and local (particularly for gas) economic conditions, inventory levels, production disruptions
or threatened disruptions, the actions of OPEC and other oil and natural gas producing countries, currency exchange rates, worldwide drilling and exploration activities, the
effects of conservation, weather, geophysical and technical limitations, refining and processing disruptions, transportation bottlenecks and other matters affecting the supply
and demand dynamics of oil, gas and NGLs, and the effect of changes in market perceptions. We typically have not hedged commodity price risk and do not expect to have a
hedging program in the future.
The following table sets forth information regarding production, realized and benchmark prices, and production costs for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and
2011 and for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013. For additional information on price calculations, see information set forth in "Management's Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations."
Production Data(a):
Oil (MBbl/d)
NGLs (MBbl/d)
Natural gas (MMcf/d)
Average daily combined production (MBoe/d)(b)
Total combined production (MMBoe)(b)
Average realized prices(a):
Oil (per Bbl)
NGLs (per Bbl)
Natural gas (per Mcf)
Average Benchmark prices:
WTI oil ($/Bbl)
NYMEX gas ($/Mcf)
Average costs per Boe:
Production costs(a)
Other operating expenses
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Taxes other than on income
Six Months Ended
June 30,
2014
2013
Year Ended December 31,
2013
2012
2011
96 
18 
243 
155 
28
88 
20 
262 
152 
28
90 
20 
260 
154 
56
88 
17 
256 
148 
54
80 
15 
260 
138 
50
$ 103.43  $ 105.21  $ 104.16  $ 104.02  $ 103.80 
  $ 54.86  $ 47.90  $ 50.43  $ 52.76  $ 70.03 
  $
4.31
4.67  $
3.82  $
3.73  $
2.94  $
$ 100.84  $ 94.30  $ 97.97  $ 94.21  $ 95.12 
  $
4.11
4.60  $
3.68  $
3.66  $
2.81  $
$ 20.59  $ 19.12  $ 18.99  $ 24.34  $ 21.30 
  $
3.89 
  $ 20.73  $ 20.47  $ 20.38  $ 17.15  $ 13.38 
  $
2.84
4.80  $
4.15  $
4.38  $
4.04  $
3.80  $
3.97  $
3.29  $
3.09  $
(a)
The following table sets forth information regarding production, realized prices, and production costs for our Elk Hills and Wilmington fields for the years ended
December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011.
Production data:
Oil (MBbl/d)
NGLs (MBbl/d)
Natural gas (MMcf/d)
Average realized prices:
Oil (MBbl/d)
NGLs (MBbl/d)
Natural gas (MMcf/d)
Production costs per Boe:
$
  $
  $
  $
Table of Contents
(b)
108
Natural gas volumes have been converted to Boe based on energy content of six Mcf of gas to one Bbl of oil. Barrels of oil equivalence does not necessarily result in
price equivalence. The price of natural gas on a barrel of oil equivalent basis is currently substantially lower than the corresponding price for oil and has been similarly
lower for a number of years. For example, in 2013, the average prices of WTI oil and NYMEX natural gas were $97.97 per Bbl and $3.66 per Mcf, respectively, resulting
in an oil-to-gas ratio of over 25 to 1.
The following table sets forth our reserves and production by basin and recovery mechanism.
Average Net Daily
Production(MBoe/d)
Total Proved
Year Ended
Reserves (MMBoe)
Oil (%)
December 31, 2013
San Joaquin basin
Primary Conventional
Waterflood
Steamflood
Unconventional
San Joaquin basin subtotal
Los Angeles basin
Primary Conventional
Waterflood
Steamflood
Unconventional
Los Angeles basin subtotal
Ventura basin
Primary Conventional
Waterflood
Steamflood
Unconventional
Ventura basin subtotal
Sacramento basin
Primary Conventional
Sacramento basin subtotal
Total
Productive Wells
68 
53 
176 
214
511
— 
159 
— 
—
159
25 
26 
2 
2
55
19
19
744
57% 
80% 
100% 
35%
65%
—% 
98% 
—% 
—%
98%
81% 
88% 
100% 
67%
82%
—%
—%
72%
As of December 31, 2013, we had a total of 8,655 gross (7,792 net) producing wells, approximately 90% of which were oil wells. Our average working interests in our
producing wells is approximately 92%. Many of our oil wells produce associated gas and some of our gas wells also produce condensate and NGLs.
109
Table of Contents
The following table sets forth our productive oil and natural gas wells (both producing and capable of production) as of December 31, 2013.
Oil
Gross(a)(b)
Net(a)(c)
Gas
Gross(a)(b)
Net(a)(c)
Numbers in parentheses indicate the number of wells with multiple completions.
The total number of wells in which interests are owned.
(a)
(b)
(c)
The sum of fractional interests.
Acreage
The following table sets forth certain information regarding the total developed and undeveloped acreage in which we owned an interest as of December 31, 2013.
Approximately 60% of our leased acreage was held by production at December 31, 2013.
16 
8 
25 
59
108
1 
25 
— 
—
26
6 
2 
— 
1
9
11
11
154
Developed(1)
Gross(2)
Net(3)
Undeveloped(4)
Gross(2)
Net(3)
(1)
409 
375 
  
1,383 
1,110
(in thousands)
  
63 
60 
  
234 
196
11 
11 
  
16 
10
San Joaquin
Los Angeles
Basin
Basin
Ventura
Basin
Sacramento
Basin
Total
268 
246 
  
365 
288
751 
 
692 
 
 
  
  1,998 
  1,604
Acres spaced or assigned to productive wells.
Total acres in which we hold an interest.
Sum of fractional interests owned based on working interests or interests under arrangements similar to production-sharing contracts.
(2)
(3)
(4)
Acres on which wells have not been drilled or completed to a point that would permit the production of commercial quantities of oil and natural gas, regardless of whether
the acreage contains proved reserves.
Work programs are designed to ensure that the exploration potential of any leased property is fully evaluated before expiration. In some instances, we may elect to
relinquish leased acreage in advance of the contractual expiration date if the evaluation process is complete and there is not a business basis for extension. In cases where
additional time may be required to fully evaluate acreage, we have generally been successful in obtaining extensions. Scheduled lease expirations for undeveloped acreage
over the next three years are not significant and are not expected to have a material adverse impact on us. Historically, we have not dedicated any significant portion of our
capital to prevent lease expirations and do not expect we will need to do so in the future.
110
Table of Contents
Participation in Exploratory and Development Wells Being Drilled
The following table sets forth our participation in exploratory and development wells being drilled as of December 31, 2013.
Exploratory and development wells
Gross
Net
San Joaquin
Los Angeles
Basin
Basin
Ventura
Basin
Sacramento
23 
21
10 
9
— 
—
Basin
Total
33 
30
— 
—
At December 31, 2013, we were participating in 43 waterflood and eight steamflood pressure-maintenance projects. Twenty-five waterflood projects were located in the
Los Angeles basin, 12 in the San Joaquin basin and six in the Ventura basin. All of the significant steamflood projects were located in San Joaquin basin.
Drilling Activity
The following table describes our drilling activity for the periods indicated. The information should not be considered indicative of future performance, nor should it be
assumed that there is necessarily any correlation among the number of productive wells drilled, quantities of reserves found or economic value. Productive wells are those that
produce, or are capable of producing, commercial quantities of hydrocarbons, regardless of whether they produce a reasonable rate of return. Net wells represent the sum of
fractional interests in wells in which we own an interest.
2013
Oil
Exploratory
Development
Natural Gas
Exploratory
Development
Dry
Exploratory
Development
2012
Oil
Exploratory
Development
Natural Gas
Exploratory
Development
Dry
Exploratory
Development
2011
Oil
Exploratory
Development
Natural Gas
Exploratory
Development
Dry
Exploratory
Development
Table of Contents
San Joaquin
Los Angeles
Basin
Basin
Ventura
Basin
Sacramento
Basin
Total
2.0 
543.1 
  
— 
— 
  
5.0 
2.5 
  
  
8.0 
485.7 
  
1.0 
2.5 
  
11.0 
4.0 
  
  
7.0 
472.2 
  
— 
— 
  
10.3 
—
— 
125.7 
  
— 
— 
  
— 
0.9 
  
  
— 
121.4 
  
— 
— 
  
— 
— 
  
  
— 
68.8 
  
— 
— 
  
— 
—
— 
18.8 
  
— 
— 
  
1.0 
— 
  
  
2.0 
63.9 
  
— 
— 
  
— 
— 
  
  
1.0 
43.3 
  
— 
— 
  
— 
—
— 
— 
  
— 
7.7 
  
1.0 
— 
  
  
— 
— 
  
— 
3.0 
  
— 
— 
  
  
— 
— 
  
— 
4.0 
  
— 
—
2.0 
  687.6 
 
  
  — 
7.7 
 
 
  
7.0 
 
3.4 
 
  
 
 
  
  10.0 
  671.0 
 
  
1.0 
 
 
5.5 
 
  
  11.0 
4.0 
 
  
 
 
  
8.0 
 
  584.3 
 
  
  — 
4.0 
 
 
  
  10.3 
  —
111
Since December 31, 2013, we have drilled 711 gross (644 net) wells, 436 of which were completed as producing wells and 118 of which are in various stages of
completion.
Delivery Commitments
We have made commitments to certain refineries and other buyers to deliver oil, natural gas and NGLs. In certain cases, an Occidental subsidiary entered into the
commitment on our behalf and to the extent it exists as of the spin-off we will assume the commitment as of our separation from Occidental. As of December 31, 2013, the
total amount contracted to be delivered is approximately 36 MBbls/d of oil under 60-day contracts, 3 Bcf of natural gas through 2014 and 1 MMBbl of NGLs through 2014. As of
June 30, 2014, the total amount contracted to be delivered is approximately 36 MBbls/d of oil under 60-day contracts, 2 Bcf of natural gas through 2015 and 8 MMBbls of NGLs
through 2015. The price for these deliveries is set at the time of delivery of the product at benchmark prices. We have significantly more production capacity than the amounts
committed and have the ability to secure additional volumes in case of a shortfall. None of the commitments in any given year is expected to have a material impact on our
financial statements.
Title to Properties
As is customary in the oil and natural gas industry, we initially conduct only a cursory review of the title to our properties at the time of acquisition. Prior to the
commencement of drilling operations on those properties, we conduct a more thorough title examination and perform curative work with respect to significant defects. We
generally will not commence drilling operations on a property until we have cured known material title defects on such property. Individual properties may be subject to burdens
that we believe do not materially interfere with the use or affect the value of the properties. Burdens on properties may include customary royalty interests, liens incident to
operating agreements and for current taxes, obligations or duties under applicable laws, development obligations, or net profits interest.
Competition
We have many competitors, some of which are larger and better funded, may be willing to accept greater risks or have special competencies. See "Risk Factors."
Regulation of the Oil and Natural Gas Industry
Our operations are regulated under a wide range of federal, state, local and other laws and regulations. California has regulations governing the conservation of oil and
natural gas, including provisions for the unitization or pooling of natural gas and oil properties, the establishment of maximum allowable rates of production from natural gas and
oil wells and the regulation of well spacing or density. California also regulates methods of drilling and casing wells, plugging and abandonment of wells, the use and restoration
of the surface of properties upon which wells are drilled, sourcing and disposal of water used in the drilling and completion process, the disposal of fluids used and produced in
connection with operations, the prevention and cleanup of pollutants and other matters, and the venting or flaring of natural gas. In addition, the state requires permits for,
among other things, the drilling and stimulation of wells, and requires certain bonding requirements be met in order to drill or operate wells. The effect of these regulations is to
limit the amount of oil and natural gas that we can produce from our wells and to limit the number of wells or the locations at which we can drill, although we can apply for
exceptions to such regulations or to have reductions in well spacing or density. Our competitors in the California oil and natural gas industry are subject to the same regulatory
requirements and restrictions that affect our operations.
112
Table of Contents
Regulation of Environmental, Safety and Health Matters
General
Our operations are subject to numerous federal, state, local, and other laws and regulations governing health and safety, the release or discharge of materials into the
environment or otherwise relating to environmental protection. Generally, these health, safety and environmental laws and regulations may restrict or prohibit certain activities
by us or by our contractors, increase costs or lower demand for or restrict the use of our products and services. Applicable federal safety and environmental laws include, but
are not limited to, the Occupational Safety and Health Act ("OSHA"), the Clean Air Act ("CAA"), the Clean Water Act ("CWA"), the Safe Drinking Water Act ("SDWA"), the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act ("CERCLA") and the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act ("RCRA"), and California imposes
additional laws that are analogous to, and often more stringent than, such federal laws. These laws and regulations:
require various permits and approvals before drilling, workovers, production, underground fluid injection, or solid and hazardous waste disposal commences, or
before facilities are constructed or put into operation;
require the installation of sophisticated safety and pollution control equipment;
restrict the types, quantities, and concentration of various materials, including, without limitation, oil, natural gas and water, that can be released or discharged
into the environment in connection with drilling, production, processing or transportation activities;
limit or prohibit operations on lands lying within coastal, wilderness, wetlands, endangered species habitat, and other protected areas;
establish standards for the closure, abandonment, cleanup or restoration of former operations, such as plugging of abandoned wells;
impose substantial liabilities for unauthorized releases or discharges of regulated materials into the environment;
require comprehensive environmental analyses, recordkeeping and reports with respect to operations affecting federal, state, and private lands or leases;
may expose us to litigation by governmental authorities, special interest groups and other claimants; and
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
may restrict the rate of oil, NGLs and natural gas production below the rate that would otherwise be possible.
Federal, state and local governments frequently revise health, safety and environmental laws and regulations, and any changes that result in delay or more stringent
permitting, materials handling, engineering, disposal, cleanup and restoration requirements for the oil and gas industry could have a significant impact on our capital
expenditures and operating costs. Failure to comply with these laws and regulations may result in the assessment of administrative, civil, and/or criminal fines and penalties
and liability for non-compliance, costs of corrective action, cleanup and restoration, compensation for personal injury, property damage or other losses, and the imposition of
injunctive or declaratory relief. Releases or discharges may occur in the course of our operations, and we cannot be sure that we will not incur significant costs and liabilities as
a result of such releases or discharges, including any third-party claims for damage to property, natural resources, or persons. Although we believe that we substantially comply
with all current applicable environmental laws and regulations and that our continued compliance with existing requirements will not have a material adverse impact on our
financial condition or results of operations, we can make no assurance that future developments, such as increasingly stringent environmental laws or enforcement thereof, will
not cause us to incur material environmental liabilities or costs in the future.
113
Table of Contents
Air Emissions
The CAA and its state analog and regulations restrict the emission of various air pollutants from oil and gas operations through the issuance of permits and the imposition
of various pre-construction, monitoring, and reporting requirements. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA"), California Air Resources Board ("CARB") and regional
air control districts and other local agencies also regulate such emissions through their permitting processes. Each of these agencies has developed, and continues to develop,
stringent regulations governing emissions of air pollutants, which may increase the costs of compliance for our facilities. The control of air emissions from oil and gas
operations is expected to be an ongoing focus of federal, state and local agencies for the foreseeable future.
Producing wells and associated equipment, natural gas plants, compressor stations and electric generating facilities generate volatile organic compounds ("VOCs"),
particulate matter ("PM"), nitrogen oxides ("NOx") and other air pollutants. Some of our producing wells and associated facilities are in counties that potentially are subject to
restrictive emission limitations and permitting requirements for VOCs, PM, NOx and other materials. If we are unable to comply with air pollution regulations or to obtain permits
for emissions associated with our operations, we could be required to forego construction, modification, or certain operations. These regulations may also increase compliance
costs for some facilities we own or operate, and result in administrative, civil and/or criminal penalties for non-compliance. Obtaining permits may delay the development of our
oil, NGLs and natural gas projects, including the construction and operation of facilities.
Water Discharges
The CWA and analogous state laws regulate the discharge of oil and other materials into U.S. and state waters. The scope of the CWA and analogous state laws depends
on the definitions of "waters of the U.S." and "state waters," which have expanded from time to time. EPA and analogous California agencies prohibit the discharge of
pollutants into regulated waters except in accordance with the terms of a permit or waiver. The CWA and associated regulations also prohibit the discharge of dredged and fill
material to regulated waters, including jurisdictional wetlands, without a permit issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Obtaining these permits may delay the
development of oil, NGLs and natural gas projects and associated facilities. Federal and California state regulatory agencies can impose administrative, civil and/or criminal
penalties as well as other enforcement mechanisms for non-compliance. The imposition of new or additional regulations could further limit or prohibit our ability to manage or
dispose of wastewater, including produced water, drilling and completion fluids and other wastes associated with our operations.
The Oil Pollution Act of 1990 ("OPA") and associated regulations subject owners and operators of vessels, onshore facilities, and pipelines, as well as lessees or
permittees of areas in which offshore facilities are located, to strict liability for removal costs and damages arising from an oil spill in U.S. waters. Although there are certain
limits for liabilities that apply under OPA, potential limits on liability do not apply if the spill was caused by gross negligence or willful misconduct, resulted from violation of a
federal safety, construction, or operating regulation or if a party fails to report a spill or to cooperate fully in the cleanup. OPA imposes ongoing requirements on parties
responsible for an oil spill, including the preparation of oil spill response plans and proof of financial responsibility to cover environmental cleanup and restoration costs.
Hazardous Substances and Wastes
CERCLA, or "Superfund", imposes joint and several liability, without regard to fault, for the release of a "hazardous substance" into the environment, on responsible
persons including the current and past owners or operators of the site where the release occurred, and companies that disposed or arranged for the transport or disposal of the
hazardous substance. Under CERCLA and analogous California laws,
114
Table of Contents
responsible persons may be liable for cleanup costs, natural resource damages, and the costs of certain health studies. In addition, third parties may file claims for personal
injury, property damage and other losses allegedly caused by the hazardous substances released into the environment. Although petroleum and crude oil fractions are not
considered hazardous substances, in the course of our operations, we may use materials that, if released, may be treated as hazardous substances under CERCLA. Thus,
governmental agencies or third parties may seek to hold us responsible for all or part of the costs to clean up sites at which such hazardous substances have been deposited.
RCRA and analogous California laws regulate the generation, transportation, treatment, storage, disposal, and cleanup of "hazardous wastes" and the disposal of non-
hazardous wastes. Drilling fluids, produced waters, and other wastes associated with the exploration or production of crude oil, natural gas, or geothermal energy constitute
"solid wastes," which are subject to less stringent provisions than hazardous wastes. RCRA and California law also regulate Naturally Occurring Radioactive Materials
("NORM") generated in operations. Legislation or regulations have been proposed that could reclassify certain oil and natural gas exploration and production wastes as
hazardous wastes, which would subject the reclassified wastes to more stringent handling, disposal and cleanup requirements. Such legislation, if enacted, could affect our
operating costs.
Prior owners may have commenced exploration and production operations on some of our owned or leased property. Although we have utilized operating and disposal
practices that were standard in the industry at the time, hydrocarbons or other materials or wastes may have been released or discharged at the properties owned or leased by
us, or at other locations where such materials or wastes may have been taken for disposal. In addition, a portion of these sites may have been operated by third parties whose
waste management and disposal practices were not under our control. These properties and the wastes disposed thereon may be subject to CERCLA, RCRA, and analogous
state laws. Under such laws, we could be required to remove or remediate contamination (potentially including waste disposed of or groundwater contamination caused by prior
owners or operators), or to perform plugging or closure operations to prevent future contamination.
Regulation of Well Completion and Stimulation
Hydraulic fracturing, acid matrix stimulation and similar techniques are important and common practices we use to stimulate production of oil and gas. Hydraulic fracturing
involves the injection of water, sand and trace chemicals under pressure into underground oil and gas bearing rock formations to create or enlarge fractures and stimulate the
flow of oil and gas into the oil and gas production well. Acid matrix stimulation involves the injection of a low pH solution designed to dissolve the sediments and mud solids
that inhibit the permeability of the oil and gas bearing rock. Although these stimulation techniques have been regulated by DOGGR and safely utilized in California for decades,
numerous federal and state agencies and certain local governments seek to further regulate them.
In February 2014, the EPA asserted regulatory authority over hydraulic fracturing involving diesel additives under the SDWA's Underground Injection Control ("UIC")
Program, and requested comments in May 2014 on a proposal to require disclosure of chemical ingredients in hydraulic fracturing fluids under the Toxic Substances Control
Act. In May 2013, the Bureau of Land Management proposed rules governing hydraulic fracturing on federal and Indian oil and gas leases that would require public disclosure of
chemicals used, confirmation that wells used in hydraulic fracturing operations meet defined construction standards, and development of plans for managing water that flows
back to the surface. In addition, studies by EPA and other federal agencies are underway that focus on environmental aspects of hydraulic fracturing activities, with draft
reports expected for public comment and peer review in late 2014. These studies could spur further regulation. Additional regulations adopted at the federal level could result in
permitting delays and cost increases.
115
Table of Contents
At the state level, California adopted SB 4 in 2013, mandating additional, comprehensive regulation of well stimulation operations. The law requires, among other things,
notification to property owners and tenants in the vicinity of well stimulation operations at least thirty days before the operations start, groundwater testing of an existing well if
requested by such owners or tenants, implementation of water management and groundwater monitoring plans and the adoption of new regulations in 2015 governing well and
casing construction and additional disclosure of well stimulation fluid constituents. In December 2013, the California Department of Conservation issued interim regulations to
implement SB 4 that are currently in effect. The interim rules require approval of Well Stimulation Treatment Notices before starting stimulation treatment, disclosure of the
fluids used and implementation of groundwater monitoring and water management plans. They also govern resident notifications, storage and handling of fluids and well
integrity.
In April 2014, a California Senate committee proposed legislation that would have indefinitely banned hydraulic fracturing and other stimulation activity until the state
examined potential environmental effects. Although the California Senate did not adopt the committee's proposal, similar legislation may be considered in the future. In addition,
some local governments have proposed or adopted ordinances within their jurisdictions that purport to regulate drilling activities in general, or stimulation and completion
activities in particular, or to ban such activities outright. None of the adopted local ordinances is expected to materially impact our current or expected future operations. If new
or more stringent federal, state, or local restrictions relating to the hydraulic fracturing process are adopted in areas where we operate, we could incur potentially significant
added costs, experience delays or curtailment of our exploration or production activities and potentially be precluded from drilling wells.
Safe Drinking Water Act and Underground Injection Control Program
The SDWA, the UIC Program and comparable California programs regulate the disposal, treatment, or release of water produced or used during oil and gas development
and the drilling and operation of water disposal wells and fluid injection wells to enhance recovery of hydrocarbons. Permits are required to drill wells for water disposal or for
fluid injection in EOR, and casing integrity must be periodically monitored to ensure the casing is adequate to prevent fluids from migrating outside of targeted zones. Non-
compliance with regulations or groundwater contamination by oil and natural gas drilling operations may result in fines, penalties, and remediation costs, among other
enforcement mechanisms under the SDWA and analogous California laws. In addition, landowners and other parties may assert claims for personal injury, alternative water
supplies, property damage and other claims. These regulations and attendant liabilities may increase operating costs for some facilities.
Environmental Impact Analysis
Oil and natural gas exploration and production activities on federal lands are subject to the National Environmental Policy Act ("NEPA"). NEPA requires federal agencies,
including the Department of Interior and its Bureau of Land Management, to evaluate major agency actions that may significantly impact the environment. Some of our
exploration and production activities occur on federal leases. NEPA may require the preparation of Environmental Assessments and more detailed Environmental Impact
Statements which may be made available for public review and comment. This process may delay permitting and development of projects, increase costs, and in certain
instances could result in the cancellation of existing federal leases.
Like NEPA, the California Environmental Quality Act ("CEQA") requires consideration of potential significant environmental impacts of any project proposed for agency
approval. CEQA requires the responsible governmental agency to prepare an Environmental Impact Report ("EIR") that is made available for public comment. The responsible
agency also is required to impose measures to mitigate all significant impacts of the proposed action or make a finding of considerations that override the imposition of
identified mitigation measures. The party requesting agency action must pay EIR preparation and
116
Table of Contents
defense costs. The CEQA process may impose additional delays and expense on the process of obtaining new permits and permit renewals.
Endangered Species Act and Migratory Bird Treaty Act
Various federal and state statutes prohibit certain actions that adversely affect endangered or threatened species and their habitats, migratory birds, wetlands and natural
resources. These statutes include the federal Endangered Species Act ("ESA"), the California ESA ("CESA"), the Migratory Bird Treaty Act ("MBTA"), and the CWA. The U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service and the California Department of Fish and Game may designate critical or suitable habitat areas that they believe are necessary for the survival of
threatened or endangered species. Such a designation could materially restrict use of or access to federal, state and private lands and could delay or prohibit oil and gas
development. While some of our operations may be located in areas that are designated as habitats for endangered or threatened species or that may attract migratory birds,
we believe that we are in substantial compliance with the ESA, CESA, MBTA and similar statutes, and we are not aware of any proposed species listings that will materially
affect our operations. However, there could be new designations of previously unidentified endangered or threatened species, or critical or suitable habitat that would affect our
operations.
Abandonment, Decommissioning and Remediation Requirements
Federal, state, and local laws and regulations provide detailed requirements for the abandonment of wells, the closure or decommissioning of production and transportation
facilities and the environmental restoration of sites where operations have ceased. DOGGR is the principal state agency responsible for regulating the abandonment of wells
and associated facilities in California. These regulations can impose significant costs on us related to (i) plugging, abandonment and restoration of facilities; (ii) cleanup costs
and compensation for property damage due to releases or discharges; and (iii) penalties imposed for releases or non-compliance with applicable laws and regulations. As is
customary in the oil and natural gas industry, we typically have contractually assumed, and may assume in the future, certain obligations relating to plugging and abandonment,
cleanup, and other environmental costs in connection with our acquisition of operating interests in oil and gas fields, and these costs can be significant.
Climate Change Legislation and Greenhouse Gas Regulations
A number of federal, state, and regional efforts have emerged that seek to track or reduce emissions of GHGs. EPA has adopted regulations that restrict GHG emissions
under existing provisions of the CAA and rules requiring certain operations, including onshore and offshore oil and natural gas production facilities, to monitor and report GHG
emissions on an annual basis.
In 2006, California adopted AB 32, which established a statewide "cap-and-trade" program for GHG emissions. The program, which commenced in 2012, sets statewide
maximum limits on total GHG emissions and requires the oil and natural gas extraction sector to report GHG emissions. Under the program, the cap will decline annually
through 2020. We are required to obtain allowances or qualifying offset credits for each metric ton of GHGs that we emit. The state grants a portion of the allowance, but we
must make up any shortfall by purchasing additional allowances either from the state or a third party. The availability of allowances will decline over time, and the cost to
acquire such allowances may increase. The cap-and-trade program currently expires in 2020, though pending legislation seeks to extend the program to 2050.
The California cap-and-trade program is scheduled to incorporate transportation fuels beginning in 2015. As planned, petroleum refiners would be responsible for retiring
allowances equivalent to the volume of transportation fuels they market in California. CARB also imposed a "low carbon fuels" standard, which requires refiners to reduce the
carbon content of fuels they market in California by 10% by 2020. These programs may reduce demand for our products or require further controls on, or
117
Table of Contents
modifications to, our operations. Federal and California subsidies and tax incentives for the development and construction of alternative energy-fueled power generation and
transportation also may reduce demand for our products and services.
If we are unable to recover or pass through a significant portion of our costs related to complying with climate change regulation, it could materially affect our operations
and financial condition. To the extent financial markets view climate change and GHG emissions as a financial risk, this could negatively impact our cost of, and access to,
capital. Future legislation or regulations adopted to address climate change could also make our products more or less desirable than competing sources of energy.
Worker Safety
The federal OSHA and analogous California laws regulate the protection of the safety and health of workers. The California Department of Industrial Relations' Division of
Occupational Safety and Health ("Cal/OSHA") requires maintenance of information about hazardous materials used or produced in operations and provision of such information
to employees, state and local government authorities, and the public. Cal/OSHA has adopted and enforces Petroleum Safety Orders that require safety programs, and
protective measures in our operations. Failure to comply with Cal/OSHA requirements can lead to the imposition of administrative, civil and/or criminal penalties as well as
injunctive relief.
Regulation of Transportation and Sales of Natural Gas
Regulations affecting sales
The sales prices of oil, NGLs and natural gas are not presently regulated, but rather are set by the market. We cannot predict, however, whether new legislation to
regulate the price of energy commodities might be proposed, what proposals, if any, might actually be enacted by the United States Congress or the various state legislatures,
and what effect, if any, the proposals might have on the operations of the underlying properties.
Interstate transportation rates for oil, NGLs and other products are regulated by The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission ("FERC"). The price we receive from the sale
of oil, natural gas and NGLs is affected by the cost of transporting those products to market. The FERC has established an indexing system for such transportation, which
allows such pipelines to take an annual inflation-based rate increase. We are not able to predict with any certainty what effect, if any, these regulations will have on us, but,
other factors being equal, the regulations may, over time, tend to increase transportation costs, which may have the effect of reducing wellhead prices for oil and natural gas
liquids.
Market manipulation and market transparency regulations
Under the Energy Policy Act of 2005 ("EP Act 2005"), the FERC possesses regulatory oversight over natural gas markets to prevent market manipulation. The Federal
Trade Commission ("FTC") has similar regulatory oversight of oil markets to prevent market manipulation. The Commodity Futures Trading Commission ("CFTC") also holds
authority to monitor certain segments of the physical and futures energy commodities market pursuant to the Commodity Exchange Act. We are required to observe these anti-
market manipulation laws and related regulations enforced by the FERC, the FTC, and/or the CFTC when we engage in physical purchase and sales or gathering of oil, NGLs
and natural gas and when we engage in related hedging activity. These agencies hold substantial enforcement authority, including the ability to assess civil penalties of up to
$1 million per day per violation, to order disgorgement of profits and to recommend criminal penalties. Should we violate the anti-market manipulation laws and regulations, we
could also be subject to related third-party damage claims by, among others, sellers, royalty owners and taxing authorities.
Table of Contents
118
The FERC has issued market transparency rules for the natural gas that may affect some our operations. The FERC issued a final rule in 2007, as amended by
subsequent orders on rehearing ("Order 704"), which requires wholesale buyers and sellers of more than 2.2 million MMBtu of physical natural gas, including natural gas
producers, gatherers, processors and marketers, to report on May 1 of each year, aggregate volumes of natural gas purchased or sold at wholesale in the prior calendar year to
the extent such transactions utilize, contribute to, or may contribute to the formation of price indices. The FERC has issued a Notice of Inquiry in Docket No. RM13-1-000
seeking comments from the industry regarding whether it should require more detailed information from sellers of natural gas. It is unclear what action, if any, will result and
whether our reporting burden will increase or decrease.
Gathering regulations
Section 1(b) of the federal Natural Gas Act ("NGA") exempts natural gas gathering facilities from the jurisdiction of the FERC. We own certain natural gas pipelines that
we believe meet the traditional tests that FERC has used to establish a pipeline's status as a gatherer not subject to FERC jurisdiction. The distinction between FERC-
regulated transmission facilities and federally unregulated gathering facilities is, however, the subject of substantial, ongoing litigation, so the classification and regulation of our
gathering lines may be subject to change based on future determinations by the FERC, the courts, or Congress.
State regulation of gathering facilities generally includes various safety, environmental and, in some circumstances, "nondiscriminatory take" requirements and in some
instances complaint-based rate regulation. Our gathering operations are also subject to state statutes designed to prohibit discrimination favoring producers or sources of
supply. The regulations may restrict those with whom we contract to gather natural gas. In addition, our natural gas gathering operations could be adversely affected should
they be subject to more stringent application of state or federal regulation of rates and services, though we do not believe that we would be affected by any such action in a
manner materially differently than other companies in our areas of operation.
Regulation of power sales and transmission
The FERC regulates the sale of electricity at wholesale and the transmission of electricity under the Federal Power Act. The FERC's jurisdiction includes, among other
things, authority over the rates, charges and other terms for the sale of electricity at wholesale by public utilities and for transmission services. In most cases, the FERC does
not set rates for the sale of electricity at wholesale by generating companies (such as our subsidiary) that qualify for market-based rate authority, enabling companies to
negotiate rates based on market conditions. In order to be eligible for market-based rate authority, and to maintain exemptions from certain FERC regulations, our subsidiary
must request market based rate authorization from the FERC. With respect to its regulation of the transmission of electricity, the FERC requires transmission providers to
provide open access transmission services, which supports the development of competitive power markets by assuring non-discriminatory access of non-utility generators to
the transmission grid.
Regulation of Pipeline Safety and Maintenance
We are subject to regulation by the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration ("PHMSA") of the Department of Transportation ("DOT"), pursuant to the
Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1968 ("NGPSA") and the Pipeline Safety Improvement Act of 2002 ("PSIA"). The NGPSA regulates safety requirements in the design,
construction, operation and maintenance of gas pipeline facilities, while the PSIA establishes mandatory inspections for all U.S. oil and natural gas transportation pipelines and
some gathering lines in high-consequence areas. The PHMSA has developed regulations implementing the PSIA that require transportation pipeline operators to implement
integrity management programs, including more frequent inspections and other measures to ensure pipeline safety in "high consequence areas," such as high population areas,
areas with sensitive environmental receptors and
119
Table of Contents
commercially navigable waterways. In addition, PHMSA has authorized the California State Fire Marshal and California Public Utilities Commission to enforce federal intrastate
pipeline regulations and inspection requirements in California.
The Pipeline Safety, Regulatory Certainty, and Job Creation Act of 2011, or the Pipeline Safety Act, expanded the DOT's authority under the PSIA and requires the DOT
to evaluate whether integrity management programs should be expanded beyond high consequence areas, authorizes the DOT to promulgate regulations requiring the use of
automatic and remote-controlled shut-off valves for new or replaced pipelines, and requires the DOT to promulgate regulations requiring the use of excess flow values where
feasible. Our natural gas pipelines have continuous inspection and compliance programs designed to keep facilities in compliance with pipeline safety requirements. Although
we do not believe that any regulatory changes will affect us in a way that materially differs from the way they will affect our competitors, any new or amended pipeline safety
regulations at the federal or state level may require us to incur additional capital expenditures and may increase our operating costs.
Employees
As of December 31, 2013, we had approximately 1,600 California employees. Our future success will depend partially on our ability to attract, retain and motivate qualified
personnel. Approximately 86 of our employees are represented by labor unions. We have not experienced any strikes or work stoppages. We utilize the services of independent
contractors to perform various field and other services.
Legal Proceedings
We are party to various legal proceedings and claims in the ordinary course of our business. One of our subsidiaries has settled a previously disclosed matter with the
California Air Resources Board regarding reporting and emissions from four pieces of equipment at its facility in Long Beach, California by paying a penalty of approximately
$254,000 in the second quarter of 2014 without admitting liability.
Two of our subsidiaries have reached a settlement in principle with the Regional Water Quality Control Board for the Central Valley Region of a claim the Board asserted in
the second quarter of 2014 regarding the past use of certain drilling sumps in Kern County, California. Once the settlement is finalized, our subsidiaries would pay a cash
penalty totaling approximately $239,000, and pay the same amount to fund a non-profit organization's community water center as a supplemental environmental project. We
believe the other various legal proceedings and claims we are subject to in the ordinary course of our business will not have a material adverse effect on our consolidated or
combined financial position, results of operations or liquidity.
Table of Contents
Executive Officers
120
MANAGEMENT
The following table sets forth information, as of August 20, 2014, regarding the individuals who are expected to serve as our executive officers following the distribution.
Additional individuals will be appointed prior to the distribution, and we will include information concerning those individuals in an amendment to this information statement. After
the distribution, none of our executive officers will continue to be employees of Occidental.
Name
William E. Albrecht
Todd A. Stevens
Marshall D. "Mark" Smith
Robert A. Barnes
Frank E. Komin
Position(s) with CRC
Executive Chairman of the Board
President and Chief Executive Officer
Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
Executive Vice President—Northern Operations
Executive Vice President—Southern Operations
Age  
  62 
  47 
  54 
  57 
  59
William E. Albrecht was appointed as Executive Chairman of the Board of CRC in July 2014. Mr. Albrecht served as Vice President of Occidental from May 2008 to July
2014 and as President, Oxy Oil & Gas, Americas from January 2012 to July 2014. Mr. Albrecht also served as President—Oxy Oil & Gas, USA from April 2008 to January
2012. During his tenure with Occidental, Mr. Albrecht has had managerial oversight over our upstream assets. Mr. Albrecht has more than 35 years of experience in the
domestic oil and gas industry, having previously served as an executive officer for domestic energy producer EOG Resources, and as a petroleum engineer for Tenneco Oil
Company. Mr. Albrecht holds a Master of Science degree from the University of Southern California and a Bachelor of Science degree from the United States Military
Academy. Mr. Albrecht's extensive managerial and operational experience in the upstream domestic energy business and his specific knowledge of our assets and proactive
engagement with regulatory agencies, communities, and other stakeholders make him a valuable member of our Board of Directors.
Todd A. Stevens was appointed President, Chief Executive Officer and Director of CRC in July 2014. Mr. Stevens served as Vice President—Acquisitions and Corporate
Finance of Occidental from October 2004 to August 2012, as Vice President—California Operations, Oxy Oil & Gas from April 2008 to September 2012, and as Vice President
—Corporate Development of Occidental Petroleum Corporation from August 2012 to July 2014. Mr. Stevens holds a Master of Business Administration degree from the
University of Southern California and a Bachelor of Science degree from the United States Military Academy. Our Board of Directors will benefit from Mr. Stevens' deep
knowledge of the oil and gas industry, his expertise in strategically evaluating and valuing oil and gas assets, and his significant managerial experience as an executive at
Occidental, including his extensive experience in allocating capital, managing Occidental's and our assets and dealing with California's regulatory environment, agencies and
political regime.
Marshall D. "Mark" Smith was appointed Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of CRC in July 2014. Mr. Smith served as Senior Vice President of
Ultra Petroleum Corp. from January 2011 to July 2014 and served as its Chief Financial Officer from July 2005 to July 2014. Mr. Smith has over 32 years of progressive
experience in a multitude of disciplines within the energy industry including operations, strategic planning, corporate finance and business development. Early in his career,
Mr. Smith served as a practicing petroleum engineer for both major and independent oil companies and later focused his career on mergers, acquisitions and corporate finance
advisory assignments in the energy sector. From 2001 to 2002, Mr. Smith served as the Chief Financial Officer at Gulf Liquids, Inc. Mr. Smith was the Vice
121
Table of Contents
President of Business Development at J.M. Huber Energy from 2002 to 2004. From 2004 until joining Ultra Petroleum Corp. in July 2005, Mr. Smith served as Vice President of
Upstream Business Development at Constellation Energy. Mr. Smith holds a Masters of Business Administration degree with highest honors from Oklahoma City University
and a Bachelors of Science degree from the University of Oklahoma.
Robert A. Barnes was appointed Executive Vice President—Northern Operations of CRC in July 2014. Mr. Barnes served as President and General Manager of Occidental
of Elk Hills from December 2012 to July 2014. He served as Operations Manager for Oxy Permian CO2 from May 2011 to November 2012, as Deputy General Manager and
Senior Vice President, Operations, of Occidental Argentina from June 2010 to April 2011, and as Vice President, Operations, of Occidental Argentina from August 2007 to June
2010. Mr. Barnes also held Production Operations Manager and Operations Team Leader roles at Occidental of Elk Hills from 1998 to 2007, and worked as Production
Superintendent in the Hugoton and Virginia Coalbed Methane Operations and held various roles in Operations and Drilling Engineering throughout the Rocky Mountains,
California and Mid-Continent regions since joining Occidental in 1978. Mr. Barnes has over 36 years of oil and gas industry experience and holds a Bachelor of Business
Administration degree from New Mexico State University.
Frank E. Komin was appointed Executive Vice President—Southern Operations of CRC in July 2014. Mr. Komin served as President and General Manager of OXY Long
Beach from January 2010 to July 2014, and served as President and General Manager of Oxy THUMS from February 2001 to December 2009. During his tenure at OXY Long
Beach, Mr. Komin oversaw all aspects of Long Beach operations and the development of the Wilmington field. Mr. Komin has more than 36 years of experience in the domestic
oil and gas industry. Before joining Oxy THUMS in 2000 as Manager, Production & Development, Mr. Komin worked for 22 years at ARCO as Reservoir Engineering Manager
and Operations Superintendent, Kuparuk, Alaska from 1993 to 1997, as Asset Manager in Midland-Permian Basin, from 1988 to 1993, District Coordinator in Dallas, Texas,
from 1987 to 1988, and in various engineering and engineering leadership roles from 1978 to 1987. Mr. Komin holds a Bachelor of Science degree from the University of
Kansas.
Board of Directors
We currently expect that, upon completion of the separation, our board of directors will consist of      members, a majority of whom we expect to satisfy the independence
standards established by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and the applicable rules of the SEC and the NYSE. The following table sets forth information, as of August 20, 2014,
regarding the individuals who are expected to serve on our board of directors following the distribution. Additional individuals will be appointed prior to the distribution, and we
will include information concerning those individuals in an amendment to this information statement.
Name
William E. Albrecht
Todd A. Stevens
Board Committees
Age
62
47
Upon completion of the spin-off, our board of directors will have the following committees:
Audit Committee
Our audit committee will be composed of at least one director and a majority of independent directors. The Audit Committee will meet separately with representatives of
our independent auditors, our internal audit personnel and representatives of senior management in performing its functions. The Audit Committee will approve the services of
the independent auditors and review the general scope of audit
122
Table of Contents
coverage, matters relating to internal controls systems and other matters related to accounting and reporting functions. The board of directors is expected to determine that all
of the members of the Audit Committee are financially literate and have accounting or related financial management expertise, each as required by the applicable NYSE listing
standards. The board of directors is also expected to determine that at least one member of the Audit Committee will qualify as audit committee financial experts under the
applicable rules of the Exchange Act.
Compensation Committee
Our compensation committee will be composed of at least one director and a majority of independent directors. The Compensation Committee will be responsible for
(i) making compensation recommendations to the board of directors for our chief executive officer and other executive officers, (ii) overseeing and approving compensation and
employee benefit policies and (iii) reviewing and discussing with our management the Compensation Discussion and Analysis and related disclosure included in our annual
proxy statement.
Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee
Our nominating and corporate governance committee will be composed of at least one director and a majority of independent directors. The Nominating and Corporate
Governance Committee will make proposals to the board of directors for candidates to be nominated by the board of directors to fill vacancies or for new directorship positions,
if any, which may be created from time to time. The Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee will also develop and recommend a set of corporate governance
guidelines to our board of directors and oversee evaluation of our board and management.
The phase-in rules of the NYSE permit our Audit Committee to have at least one independent committee member as of the date our common stock is first listed on the
NYSE, a majority of independent members within 90 days after the effectiveness of our registration statement and all independent members within one year after the
effectiveness of our registration statement; these phase-in rules further permit the Audit Committee to have at least two members within 90 days after the date our common
stock is first listed on the NYSE and three members within one year after the date our common stock is first listed on the NYSE. With respect to our Compensation Committee
and the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee, the phase-in rules of the NYSE permit each of these committees to have one independent member as of the
distribution date, a majority of independent members within 90 days after the distribution date and all independent members within one year after the distribution date.
Director Independence
To qualify as "independent" under the NYSE listing standards, a director must meet objective criteria set forth in the NYSE listing standards, and the board of directors
must affirmatively determine that the director has no material relationship with us (either directly or as a partner, stockholder or officer of an organization that has a relationship
with us) that would interfere with his or her exercise of independent judgment in carrying out his or her responsibilities as a director. The NYSE independence criteria include
that the director not be our employee and not have engaged in various types of business dealings with us.
The board of directors will review all direct or indirect business relationships between each director (including his or her immediate family) and us, as well as each
director's relationships with charitable organizations, to assess director independence as defined in the listing standards of the NYSE.
Corporate Governance Policies
Our board of directors will adopt corporate governance policies to help ensure that the board of directors has the necessary authority and practices in place to make
decisions that are independent from management, that the board of directors adequately performs its function as the overseer of management
123
Table of Contents
and to help ensure that the interests of the board of directors and management are aligned with the interests of the stockholders.
Corporate Business Ethics and Corporate Policies
Our business ethics and corporate policies will require that all our directors, officers and employees act ethically in conducting company business.
Substantially all of our employees will be required to complete online training on a regular basis, which includes a review of business ethics and corporate policies and an
acknowledgement that the employee has read and understands the policies.
Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation
During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2013 and the six months ended June 30, 2014, the California business was operated by subsidiaries of Occidental and not
through an independent company and therefore did not have a compensation committee or any other committee serving a similar function. Decisions as to the compensation of
those who will serve as our executive officers will be made initially by Occidental. See "Executive Compensation—Compensation Discussion and Analysis" included elsewhere
in this information statement.
Table of Contents
124
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
For purposes of the following Compensation Discussion and Analysis and Executive Compensation disclosures, the five persons who we expect will be our named
executive officers following the spin-off are:
Name
Todd A. Stevens
William E. Albrecht
Marshall (Mark) Smith
Robert A. Barnes
Frank E. Komin
Most Recent Position at Occidental
Vice President—Corporate Development
Vice President of Occidental Petroleum Corporation
and President, Oxy Oil & Gas, Americas
n/a
President and General Manager of Occidental of Elk
Hills
President and General Manager of Oxy Long Beach
Position at CRC
President and Chief Executive Officer
Executive Chairman of the Board
Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Financial
Officer
Executive Vice President—Northern Operations
Executive Vice President—Southern Operations
For purposes of the Compensation Discussion and Analysis, we refer to Messrs. Albrecht, Stevens, Smith, Barnes and Komin collectively as our "named executive
officers." With the exception of Mr. Smith, all of our expected named executive officers have been employed by Occidental or its subsidiaries; therefore, the compensation
information provided for 2013 will reflect compensation earned at Occidental or its subsidiaries and the design and objectives of the executive compensation programs in place
prior to the spin-off.
Compensation decisions for our named executive officers prior to the spin-off will be made by Occidental. To the extent such persons are executive officers of
Occidental, the decisions will be made by the Executive Compensation Committee of the board of directors of Occidental (the "Occidental Compensation Committee"), which is
composed entirely of independent directors. Executive compensation decisions following the spin-off will generally be made by the compensation committee of CRC.
COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Introduction
Because we are currently part of Occidental and not an independent company, our compensation committee has not yet been formed. This Compensation Discussion and
Analysis discusses Occidental's historical compensation practices with respect to its executive officers. Initially, we anticipate that our compensation practices will reflect in
some ways those practices employed at Occidental. However, given the differences between Occidental and us, we expect that the compensation practices ultimately
approved by our compensation committee and board of directors will be designed to support our strategies and may differ in many ways from Occidental's practices outlined
below. Information regarding our compensation programs, to the extent determined, is included in this information statement.
This Compensation Discussion and Analysis has three main parts:
•
Occidental 2013 Executive Compensation—This section describes and analyzes the executive compensation programs at Occidental in 2013 (beginning on
page 126).
125
Table of Contents
Effects of Spin-Off on Outstanding Executive and Other Compensation Arrangements—This section discusses Occidental's current expectations as to the effect
of the spin-off on outstanding Occidental compensation awards that may be held by CRC's named executive officers upon the spin-off (beginning on page 134).
•
•
Anticipated Post-Spin-off Compensation Programs—This section discusses our anticipated executive compensation programs from and after the spin-off
(beginning on page 135).
Occidental 2013 Compensation Program
Occidental 2013 Executive Compensation
The Occidental Compensation Committee measures executive performance by evaluating both long-term performance of the company and the consistent achievement of
short-term financial goals. This approach is intended to link executive compensation to company performance and help maximize value creation for stockholders. The
Occidental Compensation Committee developed a compensation program designed not only to be consistent with industry practice, but also to attract and retain outstanding
executives, and to provide incentives to reward them for superior performance that supports Occidental's long-term strategic objectives.
Occidental Peer Companies
In 2013, the Occidental Compensation Committee reviewed the peer company group used by Occidental in 2012 to ensure continued comparability to Occidental. The
considerations taken into account, as a whole, were:
Alternative investment choices in the energy sector, including level of investment analyst coverage;
Competitors for projects and acquisitions worldwide;
Competitors for employees worldwide;
Percentages of total proved reserves and total production attributable to oil and to natural gas;
Oil and gas production and reserves;
Total revenue and the percentage derived from upstream (exploration and production) activities; and
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Market capitalization.
Within the oil and gas industry, Occidental has a unique combination of revenue, market capitalization and proportion of production and reserves attributable to oil.
Investors take this into account when making investment choices in the energy industry and Occidental competes for these investor dollars with companies of varying revenue
and market capitalization levels, including companies with much larger levels. Occidental's level of investment analyst coverage is comparable to many of the peer companies.
Occidental competes for talent, projects and acquisitions worldwide against companies with both significantly larger and smaller levels of revenue and market capitalization and
very different oil production profiles. This was taken into consideration in formulating an appropriate peer company group for executive compensation purposes.
The peer group does not include companies primarily in energy-related businesses such as (i) refining, (ii) midstream (transportation, storage and logistics) and marketing,
or (iii) the sale and distribution of products because these companies have different investor bases, do not compete with Occidental for the same projects, and typically do not
compete with Occidental for the same talent. Additionally, publicly traded limited partnerships are not included in the group because they have significantly different investor
bases, corporate structures and compensation structures.
126
Table of Contents
The Occidental Compensation Committee's review of the 2012 peer group and the factors discussed above resulted in replacing Royal Dutch Shell plc with Marathon Oil
Corporation, whose market capitalization, revenues, lines of business and geographical presence are more comparable to Occidental's. In addition to Occidental, the peer
companies (collectively, the "peer group"), effective beginning with Occidental's 2013 long-term incentive awards, are:
Anadarko Petroleum Corporation
Apache Corporation
Canadian Natural Resources Limited
Chevron Corporation
ConocoPhillips
Devon Energy Corporation
EOG Resources, Inc.
ExxonMobil Corporation
Hess Corporation
Marathon Oil Corporation
Total S.A.
The Occidental Compensation Committee designated this group of companies as the peer group for purposes of the total shareholder return ("TSR") award granted to
Occidental's executive officers in 2013.
The Occidental Compensation Committee also reviewed information regarding the oil and gas industry and the peer group companies' executive compensation practices,
programs and data that was publicly disclosed or available. Additionally, the Occidental Compensation Committee reviewed and considered broad-based compensation surveys
and related materials. The purpose of reviewing this information was to evaluate and understand how Occidental's executive compensation program compares within the oil and
gas industry, particularly with respect to types of awards, performance metrics for awards and reported levels of compensation. The information was not used to establish
compensation benchmarks and Occidental does not benchmark executive compensation to a specific percentile within the peer group.
Elements of the Occidental Program
Occidental Salary and Other Annual Compensation.
The Occidental Compensation Committee believes that overall executive compensation should include elements that reward executives for consistent performance of
basic job requirements and achievement of certain short-term goals which, over time, contribute to long-term growth of stockholder value. Consistent with the Occidental
Compensation Committee's goal of emphasizing long-term compensation, salary and other annual compensation generally represent the smaller portion of the 2013
compensation packages of Occidental's executive officers. Short-term compensation for Occidental's executive officers generally includes base salary and other
compensation, plus an award under Occidental's Executive Incentive Compensation Plan. Certain other compensation and benefits that apply to senior executives of
Occidental are described under "Other Occidental Compensation and Benefits" beginning on page 132.
Occidental Executive Incentive Compensation Plan Award (Annual Incentive).
The Annual Incentive is composed of a Non-Equity Incentive portion (60% of target value) and a Bonus portion (40% of target value). The Occidental Compensation
Committee sets target amounts for each senior executive based on a review of commercially available compensation surveys and other publicly available information. In
setting targets for each executive, the Occidental Compensation Committee considers each executive's ability to influence Occidental's performance during the one-year
performance period.
Occidental Non-Equity Incentive Award (Performance-Based Portion).    The Non-Equity Incentive portion (60% of target value) is a performance-based cash award
that is based on Occidental's performance during the year as measured against Occidental's targets established in the first quarter of the year. For purposes of the
Performance-Based Portion of the Annual Incentive, Core, Occidental's Basic Earnings Per Share ("EPS") is computed by excluding the "Significant Items Affecting Earnings"
from Occidental's Net
127
Table of Contents
Income and dividing this amount by the weighted-average basic shares of Occidental outstanding. For a discussion of "Significant Items Affecting Earnings," see "Management
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations—Significant Items Affecting Earnings" on page 25 of Occidental's Annual Report on Form 10-K for
the year ended December 31, 2013 ("Occidental's Form 10-K") and, for Basic Earnings Per Common Share see Occidental's consolidated statements of income on page 44 of
Occidental's Form 10-K. Occidental's EPS was chosen as the financial target for all of Occidental's corporate executives because it directly impacts stockholder value, is a
readily determinable measure of annual performance and rewards the executives for current operating performance. In early 2013, the Occidental Compensation Committee set
the 2013 EPS targets with $7.00 per share as the target, $6.26 per share as the threshold for any payout, and $7.75 per share resulting in the maximum payout of 200% of the
target value. The payout percentage for EPS values from $6.25 to $7.75 is based on a linear interpolation of values from 0% to 200%. These targets were chosen based on
consideration of management's financial models, as well as a review of analysts' estimates of Occidental's earnings per share for 2013 and then-current estimates of global oil
prices for 2013. The EPS for 2013 as certified by Occidental's Compensation Committee was $6.95, which resulted in a payout percentage of 93% for all executives
participating in this bonus program.
Occidental Bonus Award (Discretionary Portion).    The Bonus portion (40% of target value) is a discretionary cash award designed to link incentive compensation
directly to the performance of the particular executive. Payout is determined by the Occidental Compensation Committee's subjective assessment of an executive's handling of
certain key performance areas within such executive's area of responsibility, as well as the executive's response to unanticipated challenges during the year. Key performance
areas assessed by the Occidental Compensation Committee include:
Organizational development;
Succession planning;
Governance and ethical conduct;
Functional and operating accomplishments;
Health, environment and safety responsibilities; and
•
•
•
•
•
•
Encouragement of diversity.
Occidental Long-Term Compensation.
This portion of Occidental's compensation program consists of performance-based awards that provide incentives for achieving results consistent with the goal of
sustained growth in stockholder value. The Occidental Compensation Committee believes that long-term compensation should represent the largest portion of an executive's
total compensation package and that the levels of payouts should reflect the company's performance levels. During the process of determining the values of each of
Occidental's named executive officer's compensation package, the Occidental Compensation Committee evaluated many factors, including the following:
•
•
•
•
Alignment of executive and stockholder interests in achieving long-term growth in stockholder value,
Ensuring that maximum payouts are made only for exceptional performance,
Consistency with the compensation programs of peer companies, and
Allocation of total compensation between long-term and short-term components.
This portion of the executive compensation program includes three types of awards: (i) an incentive based on either return on capital employed ("ROCE") (for executives with
primarily corporate level
128
Table of Contents
responsibilities) or two return on asset ("ROA") awards (one for the oil & gas division as a whole and the other for the regional oil & gas division for which the executive is
responsible); (ii) performance incentives based on TSR; and (iii) performance-based restricted stock incentives ("RSI"). The Occidental Compensation Committee awarded long-
term incentives to Occidental's named executive officers in the following percentages: 40% to either one ROCE award or to two ROA awards, 30% to the TSR award and 30%
to the RSI award.
The table following this paragraph and subsequent descriptions summarize the key features of the long-term incentive components of the 2013 compensation program for
Occidental's named executive officers. Effective as of the spin-off, we currently expect that the awards described below that are held by our named executive officers will be
converted into awards with respect to shares of our common stock in the manner described below under the heading "—Effects of Spin-off on Outstanding Executive and Other
Compensation Arrangements—Equity Based and other Long-Term Incentive Awards."
Compensation Component
PERFORMANCE PERIOD
FORM OF PAYOUT
PERFORMANCE BASIS
Summary of Long-Term Incentive Compensation
Return on
Return on Capital
Employed Award
3 Years(2)
  Stock
  Return on Capital Employed(3)   Return on Assets for Oil and Gas segment as
3 Years(2)
  Stock
Assets Awards
PAYOUT RANGE
Minimum Payout(1)
Performance Resulting in Minimum Payout
0%
  ROCE < 9%(4)
Target Payout(1)
Performance Required for Target Payout
100%
  ROCE = 12%(4)
Maximum Payout(1)
Performance Required for Maximum Payout
200%
  ROCE ³ 18%(4)
a whole (ROA-Total), or for the Americas
region (ROA-Americas)(6)
0%
  ROA-Total < 9%(4)
ROA-Americas < 8%(4)
100%
  ROA-Total = 13%(4)
ROA-Americas = 12%(4)
200%
  ROA-Total ³ 20%(4)
ROA-Americas ³ 18%(4)
Total Shareholder
Return Award(6)
3 Years
  Stock
  TSR ranking within peer group, TSR being
positive or negative, and TSR of S&P 500
Index
0%
  TSR ranking of 25th percentile or less
Restricted
Stock Award
3 - 7 Years(7)
  Stock
  Cumulative Net Income
0%
  Cumulative Net Income < $12 billion(7)
100%
  TSR performance two-thirds of the way
100%
  Cumulative Net Income ³ $12 billion(7)
between the 25th percentile TSR (0% payout)
and the 75th percentile TSR (150% payout)(6)
150%
  TSR ranking of 75th percentile or greater,
TSR is positive and exceeds S&P 500 TSR
100%
  Cumulative Net Income ³ $12 billion(7)
ADJUSTMENTS
HOLDING PERIOD
TAX DEDUCTIBILITY
(1)
The ROCE and all ROA thresholds would have been adjusted up or down by 2% if the three-year average forward strip West Texas Intermediate crude oil (WTI) prices as of
December 31, 2013, were at least $10 greater or less than, respectively, the three-year average forward strip WTI prices as of June 30, 2013, but actual WTI prices resulted
in no adjustments. All thresholds will be further adjusted up or down by 2% at the end of the performance period if actual average WTI prices over the performance period
are at least $10 greater or less than, respectively, the three-year average forward strip WTI prices as of December 31, 2013.
For all awards, a number of shares equal to 50% of net after-tax shares received are required to be retained for three years after vesting.
  All awards are intended to satisfy the tax deductibility requirements of Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Percent of grant for TSR award, RSI award, ROCE award and all ROA awards.
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Three-year performance period begins January 1, 2014 and ends December 31, 2016.
ROCE shall be the percentage obtained by dividing (i) the sum of annual net income attributable to common stock for Occidental, after adding back after-tax interest expense, for each year in the performance
period, as reported in Occidental's Form 10-K by (ii) the sum of the average capital employed (long-term debt plus stockholders' equity) for each year in the performance period, as reported in Occidental's
Form 10-K.
See Adjustments row in chart for threshold adjustments.
ROA shall be the percentage obtained by dividing (i) the sum of the Net Income for the Oil and Gas Segment (Total or Americas) for each year in the performance period by (ii) the sum of the Assets for the Oil
and Gas Segment (Total or Americas) for each year in the performance period. For the purposes of the foregoing calculation, "Net Income" shall be Results of Operations for the Oil and Gas Segment (Total or
Americas) for the applicable year and "Assets" will be the Net Capitalized Costs (Total or Americas) for the applicable year, in each case as reported in the Supplemental Oil and Gas Information contained in
Occidental's Annual Report on Form 10-K. For the purpose of the foregoing sentence, "Assets" will reflect all acquisitions, divestures and write downs during the performance period unless the senior management
of Occidental recommends exclusion and the Occidental Compensation Committee agrees.
Payout percent for the TSR award is determined by performance compared to the peer group and is linearly interpolated between 25th percentile and 75th percentile TSR values.
The shares become non-forfeitable on the later of June 30, 2016, through which date the executive must remain employed by the company, and the date the Occidental Compensation Committee certifies the
achievement of the Cumulative Net Income threshold. If the threshold is not met by June 30, 2020, the shares are forfeited entirely.
129
Table of Contents
Occidental Return on Capital Employed Incentive Award.    This award is a new award implemented in 2013 to ensure a high level of executive focus on the key objective
of ensuring efficient use of capital. This award is denominated in performance shares, each of which is equal to one share of Occidental's common stock. Key terms of the
award are set forth in the table on page 129. At the end of the performance period, dividend equivalents will be paid with respect to the performance share level achieved in an
amount equal to the dividends declared per share of Occidental common stock during the performance period. As described below, in connection with the spin-off, we expect
that any of these awards that are held by our named executive officers will be converted into restricted shares of our common stock subject to such performance-based vesting
requirements as determined by the Occidental Compensation Committee and time-based vesting conditions.
Occidental Return on Assets Incentive Awards.    These new awards were implemented in 2013 to reward operating unit executives for performance within their direct
areas of responsibility and influence. These awards are denominated in performance shares, each of which is equal to one share of Occidental common stock. Key terms of
the awards are set forth in the table on page 129. At the end of the performance period, dividend equivalents will be paid with respect to the performance share level achieved in
an amount equal to the dividends declared per share of Occidental common stock during the performance period. As described below, in connection with the spin-off, we
expect that any of these awards that are held by our named executive officers will be converted into restricted shares of our common stock subject to such performance-based
vesting requirements as determined by the Occidental Compensation Committee and time-based vesting conditions.
Occidental Total Shareholder Return Incentive Award.    The Occidental Compensation Committee believes that the comparison of Occidental's TSR over a specified
period of time to peer companies' returns over that same period is an objective external measure of the company's effectiveness in translating its results into stockholder
returns. TSR is the change in price of a share of Occidental common stock plus reinvested dividends, over a specified period of time, and is an indicator of management's
achievement of long-term growth in stockholder value. TSR awards use both comparative peer company and S&P 500 Index TSRs to determine payout amounts and are not
based on internal performance metrics. The TSR award also takes into account whether TSR is negative or positive. The TSR awards were designed to:
Reward higher returns in Occidental's stock relative to the peer group stockholder returns, based on a percentile ranking of the TSR within the peer group. This
approach neutralizes major market variables that impact the entire oil and gas industry, thereby rewarding executives for superior performance compared to peer
group companies.
Align executive rewards with stockholder returns over a three-year period, which encourages executive focus on long-term returns.
•
•
•
Ensure above-target payouts occur only if Occidental's TSR is positive and exceeds the TSR of the S&P 500 Index.
The TSR awards are denominated in performance share units, each of which is equivalent to one share of Occidental common stock. The percentage of such number of
performance share units that will be payable at the end of the three-year performance period, which runs from July 1, 2013 through June 30, 2016, will depend on Occidental's
TSR performance as described in the table on page 129. Cumulative dividend equivalents will be paid at the end of the three-year performance period and will be paid only on
performance share units earned. As described below, in connection with the spin-off, we expect that any of these awards that are held by our named executive officers will be
converted into restricted shares of our common stock subject to such performance-based vesting requirements as determined by the Occidental Compensation Committee and
time-based vesting conditions.
Occidental Restricted Stock Incentive Award.    Consistent with the executive compensation programs of a majority of the peer group companies, the Occidental
Compensation Committee selected Restricted Stock Incentive awards (RSI awards) as a component of executive long-term incentive compensation. The
130
Table of Contents
RSI award is a grant of shares of Occidental's common stock and key terms of the award are set forth in the table on page 129. The Occidental Compensation Committee
increased the performance goal from the 2012 level of $10 billion in cumulative net income to $12 billion in cumulative net income in order to make the achievement of the goal
more challenging. Dividends will be paid on the shares from the grant date. As described below, in connection with the spin-off, we expect that any of these awards that are
held by our named executive officers will be converted into restricted shares of our common stock subject to such performance-based vesting requirements as determined by
the Occidental Compensation Committee and time-based vesting conditions.
Participants in the Occidental Executive Compensation Process
Role of Occidental Management in Executive Compensation
The Occidental Compensation Committee sets compensation for Occidental's senior executives. Occidental's chief executive officer is involved in making
recommendations relating to compensation payable to senior executives other than himself.
Role of Occidental's Compensation Consultants
In 2013, Occidental participated in compensation surveys conducted by independent compensation consultants in order to better understand general external
compensation practices, including executive compensation. From time to time, Occidental, through its executive compensation department or the Occidental Compensation
Committee, engages a consultant to provide advice on specific compensation issues. The Occidental Board's policy on retention of independent compensation consultants,
adopted in 2009, is set forth in Occidental's corporate governance policies. In 2013, the Occidental Compensation Committee engaged Pay Governance LLC as compensation
consultants to advise and recommend on the design of long-term incentives for executives and on the design of director compensation programs.
In addition, Occidental has also retained Pay Governance LLC to advise and recommend on the treatment of Occidental compensation awards held by our senior officers
in connection with the spin-off and, as described in greater detail below, with respect to the design of CRC's ongoing executive compensation programs.
The Occidental Compensation Committee reviewed the independence of Pay Governance LLC under the Securities and Exchange Commission and New York Stock
Exchange Listed Company Manual Standards and found it to be independent and without conflicts of interest.
Occidental Risk Management of Compensation Policies and Practices
Although the executive compensation program has a high percentage of pay that is performance-based, the Occidental Compensation Committee believes its program
does not encourage unnecessary or excessive risk-taking. The Occidental Compensation Committee believes that the program, through a balanced set of performance metrics,
enhances business performance by encouraging appropriate levels of risk-taking by executives. The Occidental Compensation Committee believes that any potential risk of the
executive compensation program influencing behavior that could be inconsistent with the overall interests of Occidental and its stockholders is mitigated by several factors:
•
•
•
Program elements that use both annual and longer-term performance periods, with the most substantial portion having terms of at least three years.
Transparent performance metrics that use absolute and relative measures readily ascertainable from public information.
Use of external performance metrics, such as TSR, for a significant portion of the long-term performance-based incentive awards.
131
Table of Contents
Comparative nature of the TSR performance measure, which neutralizes the potential impact volatile world oil prices could have on Occidental's TSR.
Use of internal performance metrics, such as ROCE and ROA, that are transparent and publicly disclosed in Occidental's Form 10-K, and reported consistently
with the Securities and Exchange Commission rules and regulations and United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
Adjustment of threshold performance levels for ROCE and ROA awards to moderate the effects of commodity prices on performance levels achieved.
Payouts of long-term incentive awards that are 100% in stock rather than cash.
Stringent share ownership guidelines for executives and the additional requirement that Occidental's named executive officers retain a number of shares equal to
at least 50% of net after-tax shares acquired through equity awards granted after 2009 for at least three years following vesting of such awards.
•
•
•
•
•
•
Forfeiture provisions for unvested awards in the event of violations of Occidental's Code of Business Conduct.
Other Occidental Compensation and Benefits
The following paragraphs provide brief descriptions of some additional Occidental compensation and benefits programs. Our compensation and benefits programs that will
be in effect after the spin-off are still being developed and may differ from Occidental's programs described below. Information concerning our expected compensation
programs, to the extent developed, is included in this information statement under the section entitled "—Anticipated Post-Spin-off Compensation Programs."
Defined Benefit Pension Program
Occidental does not have a defined benefit pension program that provides salaried employees, other than a limited group of acquired employees, a fixed monthly
retirement payment.
Occidental Qualified Defined Contribution Plans
All salaried employees on the U.S. dollar payroll are eligible to participate in one or more tax-qualified, defined contribution plans. The defined contribution retirement plan
provides for periodic contributions by Occidental based on annual cash compensation and age, up to certain levels pursuant to Internal Revenue Service (IRS) regulations.
Occidental generally matches employee contributions with Occidental common stock on a dollar-for-dollar basis, in an amount up to 6% of the employee's base salary.
Occidental Nonqualified Defined Contribution Retirement Plan
Substantially all employees whose participation in Occidental's qualified defined contribution retirement and savings plans is limited by applicable tax laws are eligible to
participate in Occidental's nonqualified defined contribution retirement plan, which provides additional retirement benefits outside of those limitations.
Annual plan allocations for each participant restore the amounts that would have accrued for salary, bonus and non-equity incentive compensation under the qualified
plans, but for the tax law limitations. Account balances are fully vested after three years of service and are payable following separation from service, or upon attainment of a
specified age elected by the participant, as described below.
Interest on nonqualified retirement plan accounts is allocated monthly to each participant's account, based on the opening balance of the account in each monthly
processing period. The amount of interest earnings is calculated using a rate equal to the five-year U.S. Treasury Note rate on the last business day of the processing month
plus 2%, converted to a monthly allocation factor.
132
Table of Contents
In order to provide greater financial planning flexibility to participants while not increasing costs under the plan, the Supplemental Retirement Plan II allows in-service
distribution of a participant's account at a specified age, but not earlier than age 60, as elected by the participant when initially participating in the plan.
Occidental Nonqualified Deferred Compensation Plan
Occidental also sponsors a nonqualified deferred compensation plan referred to as the Modified Deferred Compensation Plan (MDCP), which provides for elective
deferrals of compensation. Under the MDCP, the maximum amount that may be deferred for any one year is limited to $75,000. A participant's overall plan balance must be
less than $1 million at the end of any given year to enable a participant to defer compensation for the subsequent year. Deferred amounts earn interest at a rate equal to the
five-year U.S. Treasury Note rate plus 2%, except for amounts deferred prior to 1994, which will continue to earn interest at a minimum interest rate of 8%.
Occidental Security
Personal security services, including home detection and alarm systems and personal security guards, are provided to certain of Occidental's senior executives to
address perceived risks, at allocated costs based on actual charges and presented to the Occidental Compensation Committee.
Occidental Tax Preparation and Financial Planning
A select group of Occidental's executive officers are eligible to receive reimbursement for financial planning and investment advice, including legal advice related to tax
and financial matters. Eligible Occidental executives are required to have their personal tax returns prepared by a tax professional qualified to practice before the Internal
Revenue Service in order to ensure compliance with applicable tax laws.
Occidental Insurance
Occidental offers a variety of health coverage options to all employees. Occidental's senior executives participate in these plans on the same terms as other employees.
In addition, for all employees above a certain job level, Occidental will pay for an annual physical examination. Occidental provides all salaried employees with life insurance
equal to twice the employee's base salary. For certain senior employees, Occidental increases that insurance coverage to three times base salary. Occidental also provides
senior executives with excess liability insurance coverage.
Individual Retention and Severance Arrangements
In February 2013, Occidental provided a written arrangement regarding retention payment and separation benefits (the "Retention and Separation Arrangements") in certain
circumstances for Messrs. Stevens, Albrecht and Barnes, none of whom has an employment agreement or offer letter that addresses termination payments and benefits.
These arrangements replaced any notice and severance pay that they would otherwise have received under the applicable Occidental severance plan.
Had Messrs. Stevens, Albrecht and Barnes remained employees of Occidental, they would have received a retention payment (the "retention payment") of one to two
times their then-current annual base salary, payable in one lump sum cash payment one year after a new Chief Executive Officer of Occidental began employment. As Messrs,
Stevens, Albrecht and Barnes will no longer be employed by Occidential following the spin-off, they will not receive the retention payment from Occidental. If they were
terminated without cause by Occidental prior to December 31, 2014, subject to providing typical waivers and releases, they would have received (i) separation pay at their then-
current base salary for 24 months, payable monthly; (ii) their target annual bonus amount for the year of separation, payable in one lump sum cash payment; (iii) the same
medical and other benefits (other than notice and severance pay) as are received
133
Table of Contents
by employees under Occidental's severance plan; (iv) the retention payment (if not previously paid); and (v), in the case of Messrs. Stevens and Barnes, cash payments in
consideration of forfeiture of all of their outstanding long-term incentive awards.
Effects of Spin-off on Outstanding Executive and Other Compensation Arrangements
In connection with the spin-off, we and Occidental will enter into an Employee Matters Agreement which will address, among other things, the treatment of certain
outstanding Occidental executive and other compensation awards in connection with the spin-off. The spin-off is not expected to result in a "change in control" or similar
transaction under any of Occidental's executive compensation programs.
Below is a brief summary of what is currently anticipated to occur with respect to outstanding Occidental equity and other compensation awards that may be held by our
executive officers upon the spin-off.
Equity-Based and other Long-Term Incentive Awards
We currently expect that effective as of the spin-off, each Occidental equity-based or other long-term incentive award held by an individual who will be employed by us
following the spin-off will be converted into an award with respect to shares of CRC common stock (other than certain phantom unit awards, the treatment of which is still under
consideration). Specifically, we currently expect that the following will occur:
Stock-Based Equity Incentive Awards.  Each equity incentive award with respect to Occidental common stock (other than Occidental restricted shares, which are
addressed below) that is held by our employees will be converted upon the spin-off into an award of shares of our restricted common stock, with the number of
shares determined based upon the trading price of our common stock following the spin-off and (a) the payout of such incentive award at target performance, in
the case of performance cycles with more than one year of performance remaining as of the spin-off, and (b) the payout of such incentive award based upon
actual performance, calculated as of a date on or prior to the spin-off (as will be determined by the Occidental Compensation Committee), in the case of
performance cycles with less than one year of performance remaining as of the spin-off. Any cash dividend equivalents that have accrued with respect to the
equity incentive award held by our employees will be paid upon the spin-off, assuming settlement of such equity incentive award at the same level of performance
assumed for purposes of converting the award, as described in the preceding sentence. From and after the spin-off, such restricted shares will be subject to
service-based vesting requirements satisfied through continued service with us and our subsidiaries similar to the time-based vesting requirements that were
applicable to the corresponding Occidental incentive award and such performance-based vesting requirements, if any, as are determined by the Occidental
Compensation Committee. Outstanding long-term incentive units (each representing one share of Occidental common stock) that are held by our employees and
that are to be settled 50% in cash and 50% in shares of Occidental common stock, however, will be converted upon the spin-off into long-term incentive units of
CRC (each representing one share of our common stock) based upon the trading price of our common stock following the spin-off. Such company incentive units
will be subject to service-based vesting requirements satisfied through continued service with us and our subsidiaries similar to the time-based vesting
requirements that were applicable to the corresponding Occidental award and will be settled 50% in cash and 50% in shares of our common stock.
•
•
Cash-Based Long-Term Incentive Awards.  Each cash-based long-term incentive award held by our employees will be converted upon the spin-off into an award
of shares of our restricted common stock, with the number of shares determined based upon the trading price of our common stock following the spin-off and
(a) the payout of such incentive award at target performance, in the case of performance cycles with more than one year of performance remaining as of the spin-
off, and
134
Table of Contents
(b) the payout of such incentive award based upon actual performance, calculated as of a date on or prior to the spin-off (as will be determined by the Occidental
Compensation Committee), in the case of performance cycles with less than one year of performance remaining as of the spin-off. From and after the spin-off,
such restricted shares will be subject to service-based vesting requirements satisfied through continued service with us and our subsidiaries similar to the time-
based vesting requirements that were applicable to the corresponding Occidental incentive award and such performance-based vesting requirements, if any, as
are determined by the Occidental Compensation Committee.
•
Restricted Shares.  Each share of restricted Occidental common stock held by our employees will be converted into shares of our restricted common stock, with
the number of shares determined based upon the trading price of our common stock following the spin-off. The company restricted common stock will vest
generally based upon the same schedule as the prior Occidental restricted share, subject to continued service with us and our subsidiaries, and such
performance-based vesting requirements, if any, as are determined by the Occidental Compensation Committee.
Annual Incentive Awards
In the event the spin-off occurs during 2014, we anticipate that our employees will receive a full 2014 annual incentive plan award under our annual incentive programs.
In the event the spin-off occurs during 2015, we anticipate that our employees will not be eligible to receive an award under Occidental's annual incentive programs for
2015, but instead would be eligible for a full-year award under our annual incentive program to be established in connection with the spin-off.
Individual Arrangements
In connection with the spin-off, we expect to assume all individual compensation arrangements between our named executive officers and Occidental.
Other Compensation Programs
Effective as of the spin-off, our employees are expected to cease active participation in all other compensation and benefit plans sponsored by Occidental and its
subsidiaries and commence participation in corresponding plans that we and our subsidiaries maintain, to the extent that we sponsor such plans.
Anticipated Post-Spin-off Compensation Programs
In order to have our executive compensation programs in effect at the time of the spin-off, the Occidental Compensation Committee has approved the initial compensation
programs as described below. The Occidental Compensation Committee retained Pay Governance LLC, its independent compensation consultant, to assist in the design and
implementation of our compensation programs to be in effect following the spin-off. All executive compensation decisions for our named executive officers prior to the spin-off
will be made by Occidental. To the extent such persons are executive officers of Occidental, the decisions will be made by the Occidental Compensation Committee.
Executive compensation decisions following the spin-off will be made by our compensation committee.
In early 2014, Pay Governance LLC assisted in developing a rewards structure for CRC. Specifically, Pay Governance LLC worked with Occidental and us to develop a
peer group for purposes of conducting market analyses and to determine the level and form of executive and broad-based compensation after the spin-off.
Compensation Objectives
Our executive compensation program to be in effect immediately following the spin-off is designed to provide competitive compensation levels generally targeted to
market median, with flexibility to pay above
135
Table of Contents
or below market based on individual factors such as experience, performance, and internal equity. In developing our compensation program, Occidental and we took into
account the following:
Market practices.
The need for a smooth transition of talent from Occidental to us.
The need to attract executive talent from outside of Occidental.
•
•
•
•
The need to provide CRC with appropriate programs immediately following the spin-off, recognizing that our board of directors (or a committee thereof) and
management will be responsible for program design following the spin-off.
We expect our compensation committee will review the compensation program approved by Occidental post spin-off and make adjustments as it deems appropriate to
support our long-term strategic objectives.
Peer Companies
Since our compensation program was designed based on market practices, Occidental and we worked with Pay Governance LLC to develop a peer group of companies
on which to base market practice. Our peer group was developed using a multi-step screening process based on the following criteria:
Industry—Companies in Global Industry Classification Standard sub-industry of oil and gas exploration and production.
Scope—Companies in the range of 25% -400% of our expected market capitalization and 40% - 250% of our expected revenue.
•
•
•
Geography—U.S.-listed companies focused on U.S. exploration and production.
Based on these screens, the following compensation peer group was developed which includes companies generally similar in operations and scope to CRC, as well as
companies that may have some operational or scope differences to CRC, but are in the same industry, and provide a more robust peer group:
Apache Corporation
Chesapeake Energy Corporation
Concho Resources Inc.
Denbury Resources Inc.
EOG Resources, Inc.
Newfield Exploration Company
Pioneer Natural Resources Company
Range Resources Corporation
Whiting Petroleum Corporation
Peer Companies
Cabot Oil and Gas Corporation
Cimarex Energy Co.
Continental Resources, Inc.
Devon Energy Corporation
Marathon Oil Corporation
Noble Energy, Inc.
QEP Resources, Inc.
Southwestern Energy Company
WPX Energy, Inc.
Elements of the Program
The Occidental Compensation Committee believes that overall executive compensation should include elements that reward executives for consistent performance of
basic job requirements and achievement of certain short-term goals which, over time, contribute to long-term growth of stockholder value. With a goal of emphasizing long-term
compensation, salary and other annual compensation will represent the smaller portion of the compensation program for our named executive officers. Our initial executive
compensation program is designed to be consistent with industry practice, linking executive compensation with the performance of the company by providing appropriate
incentives to reward
136
Table of Contents
executives for performance that maximizes value creation for stockholders, while also enhancing retention during the critical transition to an independent company.
Salary—The salaries for our named executive officers will be established based on peer group market data, as well as individual factors including experience and internal
pay equity.
Annual Incentive—The annual incentive component of our initial compensation program will provide each named executive officer with a target annual incentive
opportunity expressed as a percentage of salary. Award opportunities will range from 0% to 200% of target and will be paid in cash. The initial awards will be based 50% on
financial performance (the non-equity incentive award portion) and 50% on strategic goals related to our transition to an independent company (the bonus portion). In
subsequent years, our compensation committee will determine the appropriate mix of financial, strategic and individual goals.
The annual incentive will have established performance targets and weightings for each metric. Each metric will be evaluated independently with results on each metric
summed to determine the final award payout. Specific payouts associated with performance above and below the target level will be determined on a subjective evaluation of
results, including considerations related to the broader business environment, industry environment, oil prices and other factors. Initially, financial performance may be
measured based on internal metrics such as EBITDAX, cash flow, and other metrics to be determined by our compensation committee and strategic goals will focus on
measures related to executing a successful transition.
Long-Term Incentives—Our initial compensation program will provide the majority of each named executive officer's compensation package through long-term
incentives. The long-term incentive portion of the initial compensation program will be delivered using two types of awards:
Restricted Stock Awards—The restricted stock portion of the long-term incentives will generally represent 40%—50% of the total long-term incentive award
value for named executive officers. These awards are intended to enhance retention and development of ownership in the new organization and will vest, subject
to attainment of an established performance goal, as early as the end of three years from the grant date, or as late as the end of seven years from the grant date.
If the performance goal is not attained by the end of the applicable performance period, the award will forfeit in its entirety.
•
•
Stock Options—The stock option portion of the long-term incentives will generally represent 50%—60% of the total long-term incentive award value for named
executive officers. These awards are intended to incentivize executive behaviors that drive stock price appreciation by providing potential for long-term upside.
The stock options will vest in equal installments over three years from the grant date and will have a seven-year exercise term. To account for potential volatility
at the spin-off and to provide additional incentive for meaningful stock price appreciation, initial awards of stock options to named executive officers in connection
with the spin-off will be granted with an exercise price that is 10% above the fair market value of our common stock at the time of the grant.
For future years, the types of awards granted, their weighting as a percentage of total long-term incentive opportunity and any performance metrics will be determined by
our compensation committee.
These long-term incentives will be granted pursuant to the California Resources Corporation Long-Term Incentive Plan, which will be adopted prior to the spin-off. For
greater detail regarding the terms of this plan, see "Executive Compensation-CRC Long-Term Incentive Plan" and the form of California Resources Corporation Long-Term
Incentive Plan, a copy of which is filed as an exhibit to the registration statement of which this information statement is a part.
137
Table of Contents
The following table summarizes key features of the long-term incentive components of the initial compensation program for named executive officers.
Forfeiture Provisions
Change in Control
Restricted Stock Awards
Stock Options
Shares of stock will become non-forfeitable on the
vesting date. If the grantee dies, becomes permanently
disabled, retires with our consent, or is terminated
without cause for our convenience prior to the vesting
date, then the grantee will forfeit a pro rata portion of the
shares based on the days remaining until the vesting
date. If the grantee terminates voluntarily or is
terminated for cause prior to the vesting date, all of the
shares will be forfeited.
In the event of a change in control prior to the vesting
date, a pro-rata portion of the shares will be forfeited
based on the days remaining until the vesting date
following the later of the date of the change in control
and the date of the termination of the grantee's
employment. The remaining shares will become
nonforfeitable.
In the event of a change in control after the vesting
date, but prior to certification of the performance
threshold, the shares of stock will become non-
forfeitable.
138
Stock options will become non-forfeitable on the
applicable vesting dates.
If the grantee dies, becomes permanently disabled,
retires with our consent, or is terminated without cause
for our convenience prior to the final vesting date, then
the grantee will forfeit a pro rata portion of the unvested
stock options based on the days remaining until the
final vesting date. Vested stock options will remain
exercisable through the term of the original award.
If the grantee terminates voluntarily or is terminated for
cause prior to the final vesting date, all unvested stock
options will be forfeited. Vested stock options will be
exercisable for 90 days following the termination and
will be forfeited after that date.
In the event of a change in control prior to the final
vesting date, if a grantee is terminated by us as a result
of the change in control, unvested stock options will
become non-forfeitable. Vested stock options will
remain exercisable through the term of the original
award.
Table of Contents
Individual Compensation Arrangements
The Occidental Compensation Committee has approved the following cash and equity compensation arrangements for our expected named executive officers. As
discussed above, our retirement and other benefits will be substantially similar to the Occidental programs and are described below.
Todd A. Stevens—President and Chief Executive Officer
Mr. Stevens, a 19-year veteran of Occidental, was appointed President, Chief Executive Officer and Director of CRC in July 2014. Mr. Stevens served as Vice President
—Corporate Development of Occidental Petroleum Corporation from August 2012 to July 2014. In that role, he led Occidental's growth-focused initiatives including mergers and
acquisitions, land management and worldwide exploration, and played a key role in the capital allocation process. From October 2004 to August 2012, Mr. Stevens was Vice
President—Acquisition and Corporate Finance of Occidental Petroleum Corporation, and from April 2008 to September 2012, Mr. Stevens was Vice President—California
Operations, Oxy Oil & Gas.
Compensation Element
Base Salary
Annual Incentive
Long-Term Incentive
Restricted Stock Award
Stock Option Award
Total Cash and Equity Compensation
William E. Albrecht—Executive Chairman
Target Value on
$
  $
 
 
  $
  $
  $
Grant Date
825,000 
825,000 
  
2,000,000 
3,000,000 
6,650,000
Mr. Albrecht was appointed as Executive Chairman of our board of directors in July 2014. Mr. Albrecht served as Vice President of Occidental from May 2008 to July
2014 and as President, Oxy Oil & Gas, Americas from January 2012 to July 2014. With more than 35 years of industry experience, Mr. Albrecht was responsible for
Occidental's oil and gas operations in North and South America, including its health, environment and safety, government relations and social responsibility activities. He joined
Occidental in 2007 as Vice President, California Operations.
Compensation Element
Base Salary
Annual Incentive
Long-Term Incentive
Target Value on
$
  $
Grant Date
500,000 
500,000
Long-Term Incentive
Restricted Stock Award
Stock Option Award
Total Cash and Equity Compensation
$
  $
  $
2,000,000 
2,000,000 
5,000,000
In addition, Mr. Albrecht will receive a transition bonus from Occidental of $1,250,000 prior to the spin-off.
Marshall (Mark) Smith—Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
Mr. Smith was appointed Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of CRC in July 2014. He most recently served as Senior Vice President of Ultra
Petroleum Corp. from January 2011 to July 2014 and served as its Chief Financial Officer from July 2005 to July 2014. Mr. Smith's 32 years of experience in the energy
industry spans operations, strategic planning, corporate finance and business development. He began his career as a petroleum engineer working at both major and
independent oil companies, later focusing on mergers, acquisitions and corporate finance advisory assignments. Mr. Smith served as Vice President of Upstream Business
Development at Constellation Energy from 2004 to 2005.
139
Table of Contents
He was Vice President of Business Development at J.M. Huber Energy from 2002 to 2004, and Chief Financial Officer of Gulf Liquids, Inc. from 2001 to 2002. Mr. Smith holds
a Bachelors of Science degree from the University of Oklahoma and a Masters of Business Administration degree from Oklahoma City University.
Compensation Element
Base Salary
Annual Incentive
Long-Term Incentive
Restricted Stock Award
Stock Option Award
Total Cash and Equity Compensation
Target Value on
$
  $
 
 
  $
  $
  $
Grant Date
600,000 
600,000 
  
1,200,000 
1,800,000 
4,200,000
In addition, Mr. Smith received a cash sign-on bonus of $500,000 and a sign-on restricted stock award with a grant date value of $2,500,000, which will vest at the end of
two years, subject to his continued employment with CRC.
Robert A. Barnes—Executive Vice President—Northern Operations
Mr. Barnes, with 36 years' experience at Occidental, was appointed Executive Vice President—Northern Operations of CRC in July 2014. Mr. Barnes served as President
and General Manager of Occidental of Elk Hills from December 2012 to July 2014. He served as Operations Manager for Oxy Permian CO2 from May 2011 to November 2012,
as Deputy General Manager and Senior Vice President, Operations, of Occidental Argentina from June 2010 to April 2011, and as Vice President, Operations, of Occidental
Argentina from August 2007 to June 2010. Mr. Barnes also held Production Operations Manager and Operations Team Leader roles at Occidental of Elk Hills from 1998 to
2007, and worked as Production Superintendent in the Hugoton and Virginia Coalbed Methane Operations and held various roles in Operations and Drilling Engineering
throughout the Rocky Mountains, California and Mid-Continent regions since joining Occidental in 1978.
Compensation Element
Base Salary
Annual Incentive
Long-Term Incentive
Restricted Stock Award
Stock Option Award
Total Cash and Equity Compensation
Target Value on
$
  $
 
 
  $
  $
  $
Grant Date
400,000 
360,000 
  
800,000 
1,200,000 
2,760,000
Frank E. Komin—Executive Vice President—Southern Operations
Mr. Komin, with 14 years' experience at Occidental, was appointed Executive Vice President—Southern Operations of CRC in July 2014. Mr. Komin served as President
and General Manager of OXY Long Beach from January 2010 to July 2014, and served as President and General Manager of Oxy THUMS from February 2001 to December
2009. With more than 36 years of experience in the domestic oil and gas industry, Mr. Komin has overseen all aspects of Long Beach operations and the development of
140
Table of Contents
the Wilmington field. Before joining Occidental, Mr. Komin worked for 22 years at ARCO, most recently as Reservoir Engineering Manager and Operations Superintendent,
Kuparuk, Alaska.
Compensation Element
Base Salary
Annual Incentive
Long-Term Incentive
Restricted Stock Award
Stock Option Award
Total Cash and Equity Compensation
Other Compensation and Benefits
Target Value on
$
  $
 
 
  $
  $
  $
Grant Date
400,000 
360,000 
  
800,000 
1,200,000 
2,760,000
In addition to the three components of the executive compensation program described above, we will provide the following programs to our named executive officers.
Qualified Defined Contribution Plan—All of our employees will be eligible to participate in a tax-qualified, defined contribution plan. The defined contribution plan will
provide for periodic cash contributions by CRC based on annual cash compensation and employee 401(k) deferrals. Employees will be permitted to save a percentage of their
annual salary and bonus up to the annual limit set by IRS regulations. Employees will be able to direct their contributions to a variety of investments.
Nonqualified Defined Contribution Plan—Substantially all employees whose participation in our qualified defined contribution plan is limited by applicable tax laws will
be eligible to participate in our nonqualified defined contribution plan, which provides additional retirement benefits outside of those limitations.
Annual allocations for each participant will restore the amounts that would have been contributed to the qualified defined contribution plan, but for the tax law limitations.
Account balances will be payable following separation from service, or upon attainment of a specified age elected by the participant when initially participating in the plan.
Interest on nonqualified defined contribution accounts will be allocated monthly to each participant's account, based on the balance of the account in each monthly
processing period. The amount of interest earnings will be calculated using a rate equal to the five-year U.S. Treasury Note rate on the last business day of the processing
month plus 2%, converted to a monthly allocation factor.
Nonqualified Deferred Compensation Plan—Certain management and other highly compensated employees will be eligible to participate in a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan. Under the plan, participants will be able to elect to defer a portion of their base salary and annual bonus for a given year. Deferred amounts will earn interest
at a rate equal to the five-year U.S. Treasury Note rate on the last business day of the processing month plus 2%, converted to a monthly allocation factor. Account balances
will be payable following separation from service, or upon attainment of a specified age elected by the participant when initially participating in the plan.
Tax Preparation and Financial Planning—Our senior executives, including each of the named executive officers, will be eligible to receive reimbursement, up to certain
annual limits, for financial planning and investment advice, including legal advice related to tax and financial matters.
Insurance—We will offer a variety of health coverage options to all employees. Named executive officers will participate in these plans on the same terms as other
employees. In addition, for all employees above a certain job level, we will pay for an annual physical examination. We will provide all non-bargained employees with life
insurance equal to twice the employee's base salary. We will also provide senior executives, including the named executive officers, with excess liability insurance coverage.
141
Table of Contents
Severance Benefits—We will maintain a notice and severance pay plan that will, in connection with a qualifying termination of employment, provide for up to 12 months
of base salary and other insurance coverage, depending on years of service, for non-bargained employees, including the named executive officers.
Stock Ownership Guidelines
CRC will have minimum stock ownership guidelines for senior executives following the spin-off. The target ownership level for the Chief Executive Officer will be six times
annual base salary and for the other named executive officers will be three times annual base salary. Executives will have five years to attain their required ownership levels.
CRC Long-Term Incentive Plan
Prior to the spin-off, we will have adopted, and Occidental Petroleum Investment Co. ("OPIC"), a subsidiary of Occidental Petroleum Corporation, in its capacity as the
sole stockholder of CRC will have approved, the California Resources Corporation Long-Term Incentive Plan (the "LTIP") to attract and retain employees, consultants and
directors of CRC and its affiliates. The description of the LTIP set forth below is a summary of the material features of the LTIP. This summary, however, does not purport to
be a complete description of all of the provisions of the LTIP and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the LTIP, a copy of which is filed as an exhibit to the registration
statement of which this information statement is a part. As described in greater detail below, the LTIP provides for the grant of cash-based and equity-based awards with
respect to our common stock.
Share Limits
The number of shares of our common stock that will be available for issuance under the LTIP has not yet been determined. However, once such number is determined
(which number will be disclosed in a subsequent amendment to the registration statement of which this information statement is a part) it will be subject to adjustment in
accordance with the terms of the LTIP upon certain changes in capitalization and similar events. Awards payable in cash or payable in cash or shares, including restricted
shares, that are forfeited, cancelled or do not vest, and shares that are subject to awards that expire or for any reason are terminated, cancelled, or fail to vest, will be available
for subsequent awards under the LTIP. If an award under the LTIP is or may be settled only in cash, such award generally will not be counted against the share limit in the
LTIP.
During the term of the LTIP, no participant may be granted awards with respect to more than 50% of the shares of our common stock authorized for issuance under the
LTIP, subject to adjustment in accordance with the terms of the LTIP. In addition, the LTIP will include a maximum limit on the amount of compensation that can be paid with
respect to any performance-based awards denominated in cash granted to any one individual during any calendar year.
Administration and Eligibility
Prior to the spin-off, the LTIP will be administered by the Occidental Compensation Committee. From and after the spin-off, the LTIP will be administered by the
compensation committee of our board of directors (collectively with the Occidental Compensation Committee, the "Committee").
Under the terms of the LTIP, the Committee has broad discretion to administer the plan, including the ability to determine to whom and when awards will be granted,
determine the type and amount of awards (measured in cash or in shares of our common stock), construe and interpret the terms and provisions of each award agreement (the
terms of which may vary), accelerate the vesting of any award, delegate certain duties under the LTIP and execute all other responsibilities permitted or required under the
LTIP.
142
Table of Contents
The individuals eligible to receive awards under the LTIP include any person who at the time of grant is an officer, employee or consultant of CRC or any of our affiliates
or is a non-employee member of our board of directors (together, an "eligible person").
Types of Awards
As described above, the Committee has broad discretion under the plan to determine the types of awards it grants to eligible persons. The types of awards permitted
under the LTIP (collectively, "awards") include: stock options (including both incentive stock options and nonstatutory options), stock purchase rights, stock bonuses, restricted
stock units, stock appreciation rights, limited stock appreciation rights, phantom stock, restricted stock, stock units, dividend equivalents (independently or in tandem with any
form of stock grant), dividend rights (independently or in tandem with any form of stock grant), or any similar securities with a value derived from the value of or related to our
common stock or other securities or returns thereon, in each case, any of which may be payable in shares or cash, and may consist of one or more of such features in any
combination, as determined by the Committee. In addition, the Committee has the authority under the LTIP to grant cash-based awards.
Performance-Based Awards
The Committee may designate any award under the LTIP (including a cash award) as a "performance-based award." A performance-based award is any award the grant,
exercise or settlement of which is subject to one or more performance standards that the Committee deems appropriate. However, if the Committee desires a performance-
based award to constitute "performance-based compensation" for purposes of Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code, then one or more of the following business criteria
for us, on a consolidated basis, and/or for specified subsidiaries or business or geographical units, may be used by the Committee in establishing the performance goals for
such performance awards: (A) accounts receivable to day sales outstanding; (B) accounts receivable to sales, services and/or other income; (C) debt; (D) debt to debt plus
stockholder equity; (E) debt to earnings before interest expense and taxes (EBIT) or earnings before interest expense, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA);
(F) EBIT; (G) EBITDA; (H) earnings per share; (I) economic value added; (J) expense reduction or improvement; (K) interest coverage; (L) inventory to sales, (M) inventory
turns, (N) net income, (O) operating cash flow, (P) pre-tax margin, (Q) return on assets; (R) return on capital employed; (S) return on equity; (T) sales; (U) stock price
appreciation; (V) total stockholder return; (W) operational measures such as changes in proved reserves, production goals, drilling costs, lifting costs, exploration costs,
environmental compliance, safety and accident rates; (X) mix of oil and natural gas production or reserves; (Y) finding and development costs; (Z) recycling ratios; (AA) reserve
growth; (BB) additions or revisions; (CC) captured prospects; (DD) lease operating expense; or (EE) captured net risked resource potential, in each case, as determined on an
absolute or relative basis or as compared to the performance of a published or special index deemed applicable by the Committee including, but not limited to, the Standard &
Poor's 500 Stock Index or a group of comparable companies.
Change in Control and Other Adjustments
Upon a "change in control" (as defined in the LTIP), unless otherwise determined by the Committee, all awards outstanding pursuant to the plan will fully-vest and, if
applicable, become exercisable. In addition, upon any change that is made to our capitalization, such as a stock split, stock combination, stock dividend, exchange of shares
or other recapitalization, merger or otherwise, appropriate adjustments may be made by the compensation committee in the shares subject to the LTIP and awards under the
LTIP.
Amendment and Termination
Our board of directors may amend or terminate the LTIP at any time. However, no amendment or termination may impair the rights or benefits of a participant under an
outstanding award in any material
Table of Contents
143
way without such participant's consent. In addition, to the extent required pursuant to any federal or state law or regulation or the rules of any stock exchange or automated
quotations system in which shares of our common stock is listed or quoted, any such amendment will be subject to the approval of our stockholders.
No awards may be granted under the LTIP from or after the tenth anniversary of the effective date of the plan.
Restrictions on Transfer
Subject to certain limited exceptions under the LTIP, awards are generally not transferrable by the participant other than by will or the laws of descent.
Tax Withholding
At our discretion, subject to conditions that the Committee may impose, a participant's minimum statutory tax withholding with respect to an award may be satisfied by
withholding from any payment related to an award or by the withholding of shares of our common stock issuable pursuant to the award based on the fair market value of the
shares.
CRC Employee Stock Purchase Plan
Prior to the spin-off, we anticipate that our board of directors will have adopted, and OPIC, in its capacity as the sole stockholder of CRC will have approved, the California
Resources Corporation 2014 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (the "ESPP"). The ESPP will provide our employees and the employees of our subsidiaries that participate in the
ESPP the ability to purchase shares of our common stock at a price equal to 85% of the closing price of a share of our common stock as of the first day of each offering period
or the last day of each offering period, whichever amount is less. The ESPP will be administered by our compensation committee and is intended to qualify as an "employee
stock purchase plan" pursuant to Section 423 of the Internal Revenue Code.
The maximum number of shares of our common stock which may be issued pursuant to the ESPP has not yet been determined. However, once such number is
determined (which number will be disclosed in a subsequent amendment to the registration statement of which this information statement is a part), it will be subject to
adjustment pursuant to the terms of the ESPP. In addition, participants in the ESPP are subject to certain statutory limits on the number of shares that can be purchased in
any given year.
Table of Contents
Summary Compensation Table
144
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION TABLES
We are a newly-formed entity and have not historically paid compensation or had employees (including executive officers). The tables below and the accompanying
footnotes summarize the 2013 compensation paid by Occidental for the individuals that we expect to constitute our named executive officers following the spin-off.
Compensation relating to our principal financial officer is not shown because he was not an employee of Occidental during 2013.
Name
Todd A. Stevens
President and Chief Executive Officer
William E. Albrecht
Executive Chairman
Robert A. Barnes
Executive Vice President—Northern Operations
Frank E. Komin
Executive Vice President—Southern Operations
Year
Salary
Bonus(1)
Stock
Awards(2)
2013  $
2013  $
2013  $
2013  $
385,000  $ 259,000  $
575,000  $ 300,000  $
310,000  $ 325,186(5) $
302,000  $ 288,459(5) $
2,846,340
4,197,732
250,000
225,000
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
The 2013 amounts shown represent only the discretionary portion of the executive's Annual Incentive award, which was paid in the first quarter of 2014.
Awards that are payable in stock or based on stock value are stated at the grant date fair value, which incorporates the value of Occidental's stock as well as the estimated payout percentage as of the grant
date. For a description of the assumptions used for calculating this amount, see Note 12 to Consolidated Financial Statements in Occidental's Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013 regarding
assumptions underlying valuation of equity awards.
The amounts represent only the performance-based portion of the executive's Annual Incentive award. The payout related to the Annual Incentive award was determined based on Occidental's attainment of
specified earnings per share targets for Messrs. Stevens and Albrecht or production and cash flow goals for Messrs. Barnes and Komin.
The following table shows "All Other Compensation" amounts for 2013.
All Other Compensation
Savings Plan(a)
Supplemental Retirement Plan II(b)
Personal Benefits
Total
Todd A. Stevens   William E. Albrecht
  $
  $
  $
  $
15,300  $
83,355  $
16,111(c)$
114,766  $
15,300  $
129,675  $
14,372(d)$
159,347  $
Robert A. Barnes
15,300  $
68,175  $
0  $
83,475  $
Frank E. Komin  
15,300 
62,175
239(d)
77,714
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(5)
The amount shown is the company's contribution to the Occidental Petroleum Corporation Savings Plan (the "Savings Plan").
The amount shown is the company's contribution to the Occidental Petroleum Corporation Supplemental Retirement Plan II (the "Supplemental Retirement Plan II").
Includes tax preparation and financial counseling, excess liability insurance, physical examinations, and tax gross-up related to the amounts paid by Occidental for spousal travel ($596).
Reflects tax gross-up related to the amounts paid by Occidental for spousal travel.
Includes a special bonus of $183,186 for Mr. Barnes and $178,459 for Mr. Komin for 2013 operational performance.
145
Table of Contents
Grants of Plan-Based Awards
The table below summarizes the following plan-based awards granted by the Occidental Compensation Committee to the expected named executive officers in 2013:
Executive Incentive Compensation Plan (Non-Equity Incentive Portion)—EICP, Total Shareholder Return Incentive Awards ("TSR"), Restricted Stock Incentive Awards ("RSI"),
Restricted Stock Incentive Awards (Time Vested)—RSI-TV, Return on Capital Employed Incentive Awards ("ROCE"), Return on Assets (Total) Awards ("ROA-T"), Return on
Assets (Americas) Awards ("ROA-A").
The equity awards listed below are the only stock awards granted to the expected named executive officers in 2013. No option awards or non-performance-based stock
awards were granted in 2013.
Name / Type of Grant
Todd A. Stevens
EICP(1)
TSR(3)
RSI(2)
ROCE(4)
William E. Albrecht
EICP(1)
TSR(3)
RSI(2)
ROA-T(4)
ROA-A(4)
Robert A. Barnes
EICP(1)
RSI-TV(5)
ROA-T(6)
ROA-A(6)
Frank E. Komin
EICP(1)
RSI-TV(5)
ROA-T(6)
ROA-A(6)
Estimated Future Payouts
Under Non-Equity Incentive
Plan Awards
Estimated Future Payouts
Under Equity Incentive
Plan Awards
Grant
Date
$
7/22/2013   
7/22/2013   
7/22/2013
$
7/22/2013   
7/22/2013   
7/22/2013   
7/22/2013
$
7/22/2013   
7/22/2013  $
7/22/2013  $
$
7/22/2013   
7/22/2013  $
7/22/2013  $
Threshold
($)
4,000  $
6,000  $
3,000  $
    
15,000  $
47,500  $
2,000  $
    
13,500  $
42,750  $
Target
($)
285,000  $
450,000  $
210,000  $
    
60,000  $
190,000  $
150,000  $
    
54,000  $
171,000  $
Maximum
($)
570,000
Target
Shares
Threshold
# Shares  
    
    
88   
    
2,935
900,000
420,000   
    
120,000   
380,000
300,000   
    
108,000   
342,000
147   
    
1,223   
3,670
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Payout at threshold assumes EPS of $6.26.
Dollar value shown represents the estimated grant date fair value of the full number of shares granted which become non-forfeitable on the later of the vesting date (July 21, 2016), through which date the
executive must remain employed by the company, and the date the Occidental Compensation Committee certifies the achievement of the performance goal, which must be met no later than June 30, 2020. The
RSI award does not have threshold to maximum payout ranges.
Actual payout may range from zero to the maximum number of performance share units. Awards will be paid out 100% in stock in a number of shares equal to the number of performance share units earned on
the date of certification of the attainment of the performance goals. The target shares represent the target number of performance shares granted on the grant date, representing a payout of 100%. Threshold
shares represent Occidental's performance just above the 25th percentile, resulting in an assumed payout of 1% of the target number of performance share units. The actual percentage payout would be linearly
interpolated between the 25th percentile TSR performance (0% payout) and the 75th percentile TSR performance (150% payout). The estimated fair value of the TSR at the grant date is based on the projected
performance at the grant date for Occidental indicating a payout of 68% of the target number of performance share units . See Note 12 to Consolidated Financial Statements in Occidental's Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2013, regarding assumptions underlying valuation of equity awards.
Dollar value shown represents the estimated grant date fair value of the target number of performance share units granted. The estimated fair value of the ROCE, ROA-T, and ROA-A is based on the projected
performance at the grant date for Occidental indicating payouts of approximately 138%, 129%, and 100%, respectively. The actual payout may range from 0% to 200% of the target number of performance share
units and will be paid out 100% in stock. Threshold shares represent a 25% payout percentage, which would be achieved with a return meeting the minimum threshold of 9% ROCE, 9% ROA-T, and 8% ROA-A.
Dollar value shown represents the estimated grant date fair value of the full number of units granted which become non-forfeitable with respect to one—third of the total units granted each on July 21, 2014,
July 21, 2015, and July 21, 2016. The RSI-TV award does not have threshold to maximum payout ranges.
Dollar value shown represents the estimated grant date fair value of the target award granted. The estimated fair value of the ROA-T, and ROA-A is based on the projected performance at the grant date for
Occidental indicating payouts of approximately 129%, and 100%, respectively. The actual payout may range from 0% to 200% of the target award amount and will be paid out 100% in cash. Threshold shares
represent a 25% payout percentage, which would be achieved with a return meeting the minimum threshold of 9% ROA-T and 8% ROA-A.
146
Table of Contents
Outstanding Equity Awards at December 31, 2013
The table below sets forth the outstanding equity awards held by the expected named executive officers as of December 31, 2013, including RSI, TSR, ROCE, ROA-T,
ROA-A, Restricted Stock Incentive Awards (Time Vested), Phantom Share Unit Awards (PhSU), and Long-Term Incentive Awards (LTI).
The TSR, RSI, ROCE, ROA-T, and ROA-A are performance-based awards with payouts that depend on the outcome of the performance criteria and the price of
Occidental's stock on the award certification date, as applicable, with the possibility of no payout if performance criteria are not met. These are long-term awards with three-year
and three- to seven-year performance periods, as applicable, that, based on achievement of performance criteria, will vest or become nonforfeitable between 2014 and 2020.
The values shown for the TSR, ROCE, ROA-T, and ROA-A awards in the table below are shown at threshold, target, estimated performance, or maximum levels, as described
below. Actual payouts, if any, will reflect actual performance, which may be at lower or higher levels than shown below, and on the price of Occidental's common stock at the
time of payout, as applicable.
Name / Type of Grant
Todd A. Stevens
RSI
RSI
RSI
TSR
TSR
TSR
ROCE
7/13/2011 
7/11/2012 
7/22/2013 
7/13/2011 
7/11/2012 
7/22/2013 
7/22/2013
Grant Date
Option Awards
Number of
Securities
Underlying
Unexercised
Options (#)
Exercisable
Number of
Securities
Underlying
Unexercised
Options (#)
Unexercisable
Option
Exercise
Price ($)
Option
Exercise
Date
William E. Albrecht
RSI
RSI
RSI
TSR
TSR
TSR
ROA-T
ROA-A
Robert A. Barnes
PhSU
LTI
RSI-TV
Frank E. Komin
LTI
LTI
RSI-TV
7/13/2011 
7/11/2012 
7/22/2013 
7/13/2011 
7/11/2012 
7/22/2013 
7/22/2013 
7/22/2013
7/15/2011 
7/11/2012 
7/22/2013
7/13/2011 
7/11/2012 
7/22/2013
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
The amounts shown represent the product of the number of shares or units shown in the column immediately to the left and the closing price on December 31, 2013 of Occidental common stock as reported in the
NYSE Composite Transactions, which was $95.10.
The shares are forfeitable until the later of July 12, 2014 and the certification by the Occidental Compensation Committee that the achievement of the performance threshold is met no later than June 30, 2018.
The shares are forfeitable until the later of July 10, 2015 and the certification by the Occidental Compensation Committee that the achievement of the performance threshold is met no later than June 30, 2019.
The shares are forfeitable until the later of July 21, 2016 and the certification by the Occidental Compensation Committee that the achievement of the performance threshold is met no later than June 30, 2020.
For TSRs granted in 2011 and 2012, the values shown reflect an estimated payout of a number of shares based on the threshold performance level which also reflects the performance of Occidental through
December 31, 2013, and would result in payouts of 10%. For TSRs granted in 2013, the values shown reflect an estimated payout of the target number of shares since the performance of Occidental through
December 31, 2013 exceeds the
147
Table of Contents
threshold payout level, but is less than the level required to attain target payout. However, the ultimate payout may be significantly less or more than the amounts shown, with the possibility of no payout,
depending on the outcome of the performance criteria and the value of Occidental stock on the award certification date.
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
The performance period for the TSR ends June 30, 2014.
The performance period for the TSR ends June 30, 2015.
The performance period for the TSR ends June 30, 2016.
For ROA awards and ROCE awards granted in 2013, payout values shown are at the threshold payout level of 25% since the performance periods begin January 1, 2014. However, the ultimate payout may be
significantly less (zero) or more than the amounts shown, depending on the outcome of the performance criteria and the value of Occidental stock on the award certification date.
The units were forfeitable until July 14, 2014.
50% of the units were forfeitable until July 10, 2014 and 50% of the units are forfeitable until July 10, 2015.
331/3% of the units were forfeitable until July 21, 2014, 331/3% of the units are forfeitable until July 21, 2015 and 331/3% of the units are forfeitable until July 21, 2016.
The units were forfeitable until July 12, 2014.
Option Exercises and Stock Vested in 2013
The following table summarizes, for the expected named executive officers, the stock awards vested during 2013. The amounts reported as value realized are shown on a
before-tax basis. No option awards vested. The stock awards that vested for Messrs. Stevens and Albrecht were TSR awards granted in 2009 and 2010 and RSI awards
granted in 2010. The stock awards that vested for Messrs. Barnes and Komin were LTI awards granted in 2012 which were payable 50% in stock and 50% in cash.
Previously Granted Vested Option Awards Exercised and Previously Granted Stock Awards Vested in 2013
Name
Todd A. Stevens
William E. Albrecht
Robert A. Barnes
Frank E. Komin
(1)
Option Awards
Number of Shares
Acquired on
Exercise (#)
Value Realized
on Exercise ($)
0 
0 
0 
0
0  $
0  $
0  $
0  $
Number of Shares
The amount represents the product of the number of shares vested and the closing price of the common stock on the New York Stock Exchange on the vesting date.
The following table shows the number of shares of each type of performance-based award that vested.
Name
Todd A. Stevens
William E. Albrecht
Robert A. Barnes
Frank E. Komin
Nonqualified Deferred Compensation
Nonqualified Defined Contribution Retirement Plan
Number of Shares of
Restricted Stock
Number of Shares
of TSR Awards
Awards
or LTIs
19,731 
31,494 
0 
0
9,492 
16,610 
414 
395
Substantially all employees whose participation in Occidental's qualified defined contribution retirement and savings plans is limited by applicable tax laws are eligible to
participate in Occidental's nonqualified defined contribution retirement plan, which provides additional retirement benefits outside of those limitations.
148
Table of Contents
Annual plan allocations for each participant restore the amounts that would have accrued for salary, bonus and non-equity incentive compensation under the qualified
plans, but for the tax law limitations. Account balances are fully vested after three years of service and are payable following separation from service, or upon attainment of a
specified age elected by the participant, as described below.
Interest on nonqualified retirement plan accounts is allocated monthly to each participant's account, based on the opening balance of the account in each monthly
processing period. The amount of interest earnings is calculated using a rate equal to the five-year U.S. Treasury Note rate on the last business day of the processing month
plus 2%, converted to a monthly allocation factor.
In order to provide greater financial planning flexibility to participants while not increasing costs under the plan, Occidental's Supplemental Retirement Plan II (SRP II)
allows in-service distribution of a participant's account at a specified age, but not earlier than age 60, as elected by the participant when initially participating in the plan.
Mr. Albrecht made a specified age election such that his SRP II account, shown below, is being distributed annually. After a participant receives a specified age
distribution, future allocations under the SRP II and earnings on those allocations will be distributed in the first 70 days of each following year.
Nonqualified Deferred Compensation
Under Occidental's Modified Deferred Compensation Plan (MDCP), the maximum amount that may be deferred by a participant for any one year is limited to $75,000. A
participant's overall plan balance must be less than $1 million at the end of any given year to enable a participant to defer compensation for the subsequent year. Deferred
amounts earn interest at a rate equal to the five-year U.S. Treasury Note rate plus 2%, except for amounts deferred prior to 1994, which will continue to earn interest at a
minimum interest rate of 8%.
The following table sets forth for 2013 the contributions, earnings, withdrawals and balances under the SRP II and the MDCP in which the named executive officers
participate. Each of the executive officers are fully vested in their respective aggregate balances shown below.
Name
Todd A. Stevens
William E. Albrecht
Robert A. Barnes
Frank E. Komin
(1)
(2)
(3)
No employee contributions are permitted in the SRP II.
Amounts represent Occidental's 2013 contributions to the SRP II, which are reported under "All Other Compensation" in the Summary Compensation Table.
Distribution made in February 2013 in accordance with the specified age elections described under Nonqualified Defined Contribution Retirement Plan above.
149
Table of Contents
Potential Payments Upon Termination or Change in Control
Summary
Payments and other benefits payable to named executive officers in various termination circumstances and a change of control are subject to certain policies, plans and
agreements. Following is a summary of the material terms of these arrangements.
Occidental's Golden Parachute Policy provides that, subject to certain exceptions, Occidental will not grant Golden Parachute Benefits (as defined in the Policy) to any
senior executive which exceed 2.99 times his or her salary plus annual incentive pay unless the grant of such benefits is approved by a vote of the corporation's stockholders
or the obligation with respect to such benefit pre-dated adoption of the Policy. The Golden Parachute Policy was approved by Occidental's stockholders. The complete Golden
Parachute Policy is available at www.oxy.com.
Under Occidental's Notice and Severance Pay Plan, employees, including named executive officers without employment agreements (which includes our expected named
executive officers), terminated in certain circumstances without cause or as a result of a change of control are eligible for up to 12 months base salary depending on years of
service, two months of contributions pursuant to Occidental's Savings Plan and the SRP II, and continued medical and dental coverage for the 12-month notice and severance
period at the active employee rate.
In February 2013, Occidental provided the Retention and Separation Arrangements for Messrs. Stevens, Albrecht and Barnes, none of whom has an employment
agreement or offer letter that addresses termination payments and benefits. These arrangements replaced any notice and severance pay that they would otherwise have
received under the Notice and Severance Pay Plan. Had they remained employees of Occidental, they would have received a retention payment (Retention Payment) of one to
two times their then-current annual base salary, payable in one lump sum cash payment one year after a new Chief Executive Officer of Occidental began employment. As
Messrs. Stevens, Albrecht and Barnes will no longer be employed by Occidental following the spin-off, they will not receive the Retention Payment from Occidental. If they
were terminated without cause by Occidental prior to December 31, 2014, subject to providing typical waivers and releases, they would have received (i) separation pay at their
then-current base salary for 24 months, payable monthly; (ii) their target annual bonus amount for the year of separation, payable in one lump sum cash payment; (iii) the same
medical and other benefits (other than notice and severance pay) as are received by employees under the Notice and Severance Pay Plan; and (iv) the Retention Payment (if
not previously paid). In addition, Messrs. Stevens and Barnes would have received cash payments in consideration of forfeiture of all of their outstanding long-term incentive
awards, as described in the footnotes to the individual tables below.
Occidental's 2005 Long-Term Incentive Plan has provisions that, in the event of a change of control of Occidental, require the outstanding awards granted under such plan
to become fully vested and exercisable unless the Plan Administrator determines, prior to the occurrence of the event, that benefits will not accelerate. This plan was approved
by Occidental's stockholders. Notwithstanding the foregoing, as of 2011, all new grants of equity awards under such plan vest on a pro rata basis in the event of a change of
control, TSR awards granted prior to 2013 vest based on 50% of the maximum number of units that could be paid, and TSR awards, ROCE awards and ROA awards granted in
2013 vest at the target number of performance shares granted and are converted to restricted stock. All outstanding RSI awards vest on a pro rata basis. Payout of all
outstanding awards in the event of a change of control occurs at the earlier of the employee's termination date as a result of the change of control or the end of the applicable
performance or restricted period.
Except as described in this summary and below under "Potential Payments," Occidental does not have any other agreements or plans that will require it to provide
compensation to our expected named executive officers in the event of a termination of employment or a change of control.
150
Table of Contents
Potential Payments
In the discussion that follows, payments and other benefits payable upon various terminations and change of control situations are set out as if the conditions for
payments had occurred and the terminations took place on December 31, 2013, and reflect the terms of applicable plans, agreements, offer letters and long-term incentive
award agreements then in effect. The amounts set forth below are estimates of the amounts that would be paid to each named executive officer upon his or her termination.
The "Maximum Payout" is the maximum amount, including incentive awards and certain benefits, that could have been payable in the event of a change of control situation.
The actual amounts to be paid out can be determined only at the time of such named executive officer's separation from Occidental. The disclosures below do not take into
consideration any requirements under Section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code, which could affect, among other things, the timing of payments and distributions.
The following payments and benefits, which are potentially available to all full-time salaried employees when their employment terminates, are not included in the amounts
shown below:
Notice and Severance Pay Plan payments and benefits.
Life insurance proceeds equal to two times base salary, payable on death as available to all eligible employees.
Amounts vested under Occidental's plans that are qualified under Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Amounts vested under the Nonqualified Deferred Compensation arrangements.
•
•
•
•
•
Bonus and non-equity incentive compensation (collectively, "bonus") under Occidental's Executive Incentive Compensation Plan (EICP) that would have been
earned as of year-end. Any plan participant who leaves on or after that date for any reason is entitled to such amounts when payment is made in the first quarter
of the following year. The amounts that were earned in 2013 by the named executive officers are included in the Summary Compensation Table. Bonus under the
EICP that would have been payable in accordance with the terms of the Retention and Separation Arrangements is shown in the amounts below.
Mr. Stevens.    Mr. Stevens does not have an employment agreement, but effective beginning February 2013, he would have received the benefits pursuant to his
Retention and Separation Arrangement as
151
Table of Contents
described above. The following is a summary of the payments and benefits he would have been entitled to receive if the event specified occurred as of December 31, 2013.
Benefits and Payments Upon
Termination
Equity Compensation
TSR Awards
RSI Awards(2)
ROCE Awards(4)
Cash Payments
Unused Vacation (lump sum)
Retention Payment
Severance (24 months)
EICP Bonus (at target)(5)
Benefits
Retirement Benefits (2 months)
Savings Plan
SRP II
TOTAL
For numeric footnotes, see page 154.
Retirement with
Occidental
Consent, Death,
or Disability
Termination by
Mr. Stevens or
Termination for
$
  $
  $
 
 
  $
  $
  $
  $
 
 
 
 
  $
  $
417,538(1)
2,227,908 
0 
  
31,420 
0 
0 
0 
  
  
0 
0
$
2,676,866
$
$
$
 
$
$
$
$
 
 
$
$
$
(a)
(b)
Under the terms of his Retention and Separation Arrangement, Mr. Stevens would have been entitled to receive a cash payment equal to the product of the year-end price of Occidental common stock of $95.10,
and 50% of the maximum number of shares payable under the TSR awards.
Under the terms of his Retention and Separation Arrangement, Mr. Stevens would have been entitled to receive a cash payment equal to the product of the year-end price of Occidental common stock of $95.10,
and the target number of shares payable under the ROCE awards.
Mr. Albrecht.    Mr. Albrecht does not have an employment agreement, but effective beginning February 2013, he would have received the benefits pursuant to his
Retention and Separation
Table of Contents
152
Arrangement as described above. The following is a summary of the payments and benefits he would have been entitled to receive if the event specified occurred as of
December 31, 2013.
Benefits and Payments Upon
Termination
Equity Compensation
TSR Awards
RSI Awards(2)
ROA Awards(4)
Cash Payments
Unused Vacation (lump sum)
Retention Payment
Severance (24 months)
EICP Bonus (at target)(5)
Benefits
Retirement Benefits (2 months)
Savings Plan
SRP II
Retirement with
Occidental
Consent, Death,
or Disability
$
  $
  $
 
 
  $
  $
  $
  $
 
 
 
 
  $
$
1,016,224(1)
2,311,025 
0 
  
64,505 
0 
0 
0 
  
  
0
0
TOTAL
For numeric footnotes, see page 154.
$
3,391,754
Mr. Barnes.    Mr. Barnes does not have an employment agreement, but effective beginning February 2013, he would have received the benefits pursuant to his Retention
and Separation Arrangement as described above. The following is a summary of the payments and benefits he would have been entitled to receive if the event specified
occurred as of December 31, 2013.
Benefits and Payments Upon
Termination
Equity Compensation
RSI-TV Awards(6)
LTI Awards(a)
PhSU Awards(a)
Cash Payments
ROA Awards(4)
Unused Vacation (lump sum)
Retention Payment
Severance (24 months)
EICP Bonus (at target)(5)
Benefits
Retirement Benefits (2 months)
Savings Plan
SRP II
TOTAL
For numeric footnotes, see page 154.
(a)
Retirement with
Occidental
Consent, Death,
or Disability
Termination by
Mr. Barnes or
Termination for
Cause
$
  $
  $
 
 
  $
  $
  $
  $
  $
 
 
 
 
  $
  $
$
38,516  $
37,565  $
26,248  $
  
 
0  $
62,000  $
0  $
0  $
0  $
  
 
  
 
0  $
0  $
164,329  $
Represents the product of the year-end price of Occidental common stock of $95.10 and the pro-rata number of unvested LTI or PhSU awards for Retirement with Occidental Consent, Death, or Disability, payable
50% in cash and 50% in shares for the LTI awards and 100% cash for the PhSU awards. Under the terms of his Retention and Separation Arrangement, Mr. Barnes
153
Table of Contents
would have received a cash payment equal to the product of the year-end price of Occidental common stock of $95.10, and the number of unvested LTI and PhSU awards for Termination without Cause. For
Change of Control, represents the product of the year-end price of Occidental common stock of $95.10 and the number of unvested LTI and PhSU awards, payable in cash. All unvested LTI and PhSU awards
are forfeited in the case of voluntary termination by the executive and termination for cause.
Mr. Komin.    Mr. Komin does not have an employment agreement. The following is a summary of the payments and benefits he would have been entitled to
receive if the event specified occurred as of December 31, 2013.
Benefits and Payments Upon
Termination
Equity Compensation
RSI Awards(2)
LTI Awards(a)
Cash Payments
ROA Awards(4)
Unused Vacation (lump sum
Benefits
Retirement Benefits (2 months)
Savings Plan
SRP II
TOTAL
Retirement with
Occidental
Consent, Death,
or Disability
Termination by
Mr. Komin or
Termination for
Cause
$
  $
 
 
  $
  $
 
 
 
 
  $
  $
$
34,616  $
61,150  $
  
 
0  $
20,924  $
 
  
  
 
0  $
0  $
116,690  $
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Represents the product of the year-end price of Occidental common stock of $95.10 and the pro-rata number of unvested LTI awards for all scenarios except voluntary termination or termination for cause,
payable 50% in cash and 50% in shares. All unvested LTI awards are forfeited in the case of voluntary termination by the executive and termination for cause.
Represents the product of the year-end price of Occidental common stock of $95.10, and the pro rata shares of TSR awards. Under the terms of the TSR agreements, executives receive a prorated payout, paid
after the end of the applicable performance period, based on actual performance and the number of days employed at Occidental during the performance period. The values shown reflect an estimated payout of
a prorated number of shares based on performance of Occidental through December 31, 2013, which would result in payouts of 10% for the TSRs granted in 2011, 2012 and 69% for 2013. The performance
periods for the TSRs end in 2014, 2015 and 2016 for the 2011, 2012 and 2013 grants, respectively, so these payouts may not be indicative of the payout that would be made at the end of the performance
period based on actual performance. Actual payout would be prorated and could vary from zero to 100% of maximum for grants in 2011 and 2012, or zero to 150% of target for 2013 grants, depending on
attainment of performance objectives. The value of the payout also depends on the price of Occidental common stock at payout.
Represents the product of the year-end price of Occidental common stock of $95.10 and the pro rata number of RSI awards for scenarios other than Change of Control for 2013 RSI awards which are not affected
by a Change of Control. All RSI awards are forfeited in the case of voluntary termination by the executive and termination for cause. Awards that have not been forfeited are subject to achievement of
performance goals in all scenarios except Change of Control. The right to receive amounts in excess of these amounts would have been forfeited.
Represents the product of the year-end price of Occidental common stock of $95.10 and the shares of TSR awards that become non-forfeitable. For 2011 and 2012 awards, the right to receive 50% of the
maximum number of performance shares (payable in shares for 2012 awards and 50% in shares and 50% in cash for 2011 awards) becomes non-forfeitable, and for all shares received, a number of shares equal
to 50% of the after-tax shares received are subject to a 3-year holding period. For 2013 awards, the target number of performance shares is converted into shares of restricted stock which become non-forfeitable.
A number of shares equal to 50% of the net after-tax shares received are subject to a 3-year holding period until the earlier of the date of the grantee's termination as a result of the Change of Control, or the last
day of the performance period. The right to receive amounts in excess of these amounts would have been forfeited.
Under the terms of the respective agreements for the ROCE awards and all ROA awards, in scenarios of termination due to death, disability, retirement with the consent of Occidental less than 12 months after the
grant date and termination without cause, executives receive a prorated payout, paid after the end of the applicable performance period, based on actual performance and the number of days employed at
Occidental during the performance period. Since the performance period
154
Table of Contents
began January 1, 2014 and these tables show values for events as of December 31, 2013, no values are shown for most scenarios because the executive would not have been employed during the performance
period. For voluntary termination and termination for cause, all awards are forfeited. For Change of Control, the target number of shares granted convert to shares of restricted stock that become non-forfeitable. A
number of shares equal to 50% of the net after-tax shares received are subject to a 3-year holding period until the earlier of the date of termination due to the Change of Control or the last day of the performance
period. Values shown for both Change of Control scenarios represent either the product of the year-end price of Occidental common stock of $95.10, and the target number of shares granted or the target dollar
amount granted, as applicable.
Calculated assuming Occidental achieves target performance for the performance-based portion, but payment would be based on Occidental's actual performance.
Represents the product of the year-end price of Occidental common stock of $95.10 and the pro rata number of unvested RSI-TV awards for scenarios other than Change of Control which does not affect the
award. All unvested RSI-TV awards are forfeited in the case of voluntary termination by the executive and termination for cause.
(5)
(6)
Director Compensation
In order to have our director compensation program in effect at the time of the spin-off, Occidental has approved the initial director compensation program as described
below. Following the spin-off, our board of directors will make decisions regarding our director compensation program.
The Occidental Compensation Committee retained Pay Governance LLC, its independent compensation consultant, to assist in the design of the director compensation
program to be in effect following the spin-off. Specifically, Pay Governance worked with Occidental and us to develop a peer group for purposes of conducting market analyses,
as described above under "Executive Compensation—Anticipated Post-Spin-off Compensation Programs", and to determine the level and form of outside director
compensation after the spin-off.
Program Objectives
Our director compensation program to be in effect immediately following the spin-off is designed to be consistent with the programs of peer companies. In developing our
director compensation program, Occidental and we took into account the following:
Market practices of our peer companies, as well as a group of 100 general industry companies similar in size to us, targeting a compensation package between
the median of those two groups.
The need to recruit independent directors.
•
•
•
The need to provide us with appropriate programs immediately following the spin-off, recognizing that our board of directors will be responsible for program design
following the spin-off.
Program Elements
The elements of our approved outside director compensation program are as follows:
Outside directors will receive an annual cash board retainer of $100,000.
Board committee chairpersons will receive an additional annual cash retainer of $15,000.
The lead independent director will receive an additional annual cash retainer of $20,000.
Outside directors will receive an annual equity award relating to our common stock equivalent to $150,000 on the grant date. The equity award will generally vest
one year following the grant date.
•
•
•
•
•
A stock ownership guideline of five times the annual cash board retainer will apply to outside directors and must be attained within five years of election to our
board of directors.
In addition, we anticipate that after the spin-off we will implement a program that allows our outside directors to defer some or all of their cash compensation.
155
Table of Contents
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT
As of the date of this information statement, all outstanding shares of our common stock are owned beneficially and of record by Occidental. After the spin-off, Occidental
will hold the Retained Securities for a maximum of 18 months. The following table sets forth information with respect to the anticipated beneficial ownership of our common
stock by:
each shareholder we believe (based on the assumptions described below) will beneficially own more than 5% of our outstanding common stock;
each person who is expected to serve as a director upon completion of the spin-off;
each person who is expected to serve as an executive officer upon completion of the spin-off; and
•
•
•
•
all persons who are expected to serve as directors or executive officers upon completion of the spin-off as a group.
Except as otherwise noted below, we based the share amounts shown on each person's beneficial ownership of Occidental common stock on          , 2014, and a
distribution ratio of           shares of our common stock for each share of Occidental common stock held by such person.
To the extent persons who are directors or executive officers or who are expected to serve as directors or executive officers upon completion of the spin-off own
Occidental common stock at the record date of the spin-off, they will participate in the distribution on the same terms as other holders of Occidental common stock.
Immediately following the spin-off, we expect to have approximately          stockholders of record, based on the number of registered stockholders of Occidental common
stock on           , 2014, and approximately           million shares of our common stock outstanding. The actual number of shares of our common stock outstanding following the
spin-off will be determined on          , 2014, the record date. As of          , 2014, Occidental had approximately          stockholders of record and approximately            million
shares of Occidental common stock outstanding.
To our knowledge, except as indicated in the footnotes to this table or as provided by applicable community property laws, the persons named in the table have sole
voting and investment power with respect to the shares of common stock indicated. Unless otherwise indicated, the address for each director and executive officer listed is: c/o
California Resources Corporation,                                     .
Amount and Nature
Name of Beneficial Owner
All executive officers and directors as a group (        persons)
156
Table of Contents
of Beneficial
Ownership
Percentage
Number
ARRANGEMENTS BETWEEN OCCIDENTAL AND OUR COMPANY
This section provides a summary description of agreements between Occidental and us relating to our restructuring transactions and our relationship with Occidental after
the spin-off. This description of the agreements between Occidental and us is a summary and, with respect to each such agreement, is qualified by reference to the terms of
the agreement, a form of each of which will be filed as an exhibit to the registration statement of which this information statement is a part. We encourage you to read the full
text of these agreements. We will enter into these agreements with Occidental prior to the completion of the spin-off; accordingly, we will enter into these agreements with
Occidental in the context of our relationship as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Occidental. Occidental will determine the terms of these agreements, which may be more or less
favorable to us than if they had been negotiated with unaffiliated third parties.
The terms of the agreements described below have not yet been finalized. Changes, some of which may be material, may be made prior to our separation from
Occidental, in Occidental's sole discretion. No changes may be made after the spin-off without our consent.
Separation and Distribution Agreement
The Separation and Distribution Agreement will govern the terms of the separation of the California business from Occidental's other businesses. Generally, the
Separation and Distribution Agreement will include the agreements of Occidental and us on the steps to be taken to complete the separation, including the assets and rights to
be transferred, liabilities to be assumed or retained, contracts to be assigned and related matters. Subject to the receipt of required governmental and other consents and
approvals, in order to accomplish the separation, the Separation and Distribution Agreement will provide for Occidental and us to transfer specified assets and liabilities
between the two companies to separate the California business from Occidental's remaining businesses. As a result of this transfer, we will own all assets exclusively related
to the California business, including the assets reflected on our balance sheet as of                , 2014, and certain other assets related to the California business specifically
allocated to us. We will also be responsible for all liabilities, including environmental liabilities, to the extent relating to the operation or ownership of the California business or
any of the assets allocated to us in the separation, as well as all liabilities arising out of, relating to or resulting from our new financing arrangements or reflected as liabilities on
our balance sheet as of June 30, 2014, subject to the discharge of any such liabilities after June 30, 2014. Occidental will retain all other assets and liabilities, including assets
and liabilities related to discontinued businesses (other than those businesses that were a part of the California business prior to being discontinued). For purposes of allocating
assets and liabilities between us and Occidental, the Separation and Distribution Agreement will provide that the California business will generally be defined as:
the exploration for and development and production of crude oil and condensate, NGLs and natural gas in the State of California and in state waters offshore
California, including all California operations of Occidental's oil and gas segment;
the ownership and operation of our power plants at Elk Hills Field and in the offshore portion of the Wilmington Field;
the marketing and trading of crude oil and condensate, NGL, natural gas, water, steam and electricity produced in the operations described in the prior two bullet
points; and
•
•
•
•
certain activities and operations directly and exclusively supporting or exclusively conducted in respect of the business described in the prior three bullet points.
The Separation and Distribution Agreement will also provide that the California business will not include the existing third-party gas marketing business of Occidental's non-
California midstream and marketing segment, which participates in various U.S. markets, including California.
157
Table of Contents
Unless otherwise provided in the Separation and Distribution Agreement or any of the related ancillary agreements, all assets will be transferred on an "as is, where is"
basis.
The Separation and Distribution Agreement will require Occidental and us to endeavor to obtain consents, approvals and amendments required to novate or assign the
assets and liabilities that are to be transferred pursuant to the Separation and Distribution Agreement as soon as reasonably practicable. Generally, if the transfer of any assets
or liabilities requires a consent that will not be obtained before the distribution, or if any assets or liabilities are erroneously transferred or if any assets or liabilities are
erroneously not transferred, each party will agree to hold the relevant assets or liabilities for the intended party's use and benefit (at the intended party's expense) until they can
be transferred to the intended party.
The Separation and Distribution Agreement will also govern the treatment of all aspects relating to indemnification and insurance, and will generally provide for cross-
indemnities principally designed to place financial responsibility for the obligations and liabilities of our business with us and financial responsibility for the obligations and
liabilities of the remaining Occidental business with Occidental. The Separation and Distribution Agreement will also establish procedures for handling claims subject to
indemnification and related matters. We and Occidental will also generally release each other from all claims arising prior to the spin-off other than claims arising under the
transaction agreements, including the indemnification provisions described above.
The Separation and Distribution Agreement will specify those conditions that must be satisfied or waived by Occidental, in its sole discretion, prior to the distribution,
including the following conditions:
the SEC will have declared effective our registration statement on Form 10, of which this information statement is a part, under the Exchange Act; no stop order
suspending the effectiveness of the registration statement shall be in effect; and no proceedings for such purpose shall be pending before or threatened by the
SEC;
any required actions and filings with regard to state securities and blue sky laws of the U.S. (and any comparable laws under any foreign jurisdictions) will have
been taken and, where applicable, have become effective or been accepted;
our common stock will have been authorized for listing on the NYSE, or another national securities exchange approved by Occidental, subject to official notice of
issuance;
•
•
•
•
Occidental shall have received a private letter ruling from the IRS to the effect that certain aspects of the transactions that will be undertaken in preparation for, or
in connection with, the spin-off will not cause the distribution to be taxable to Occidental or its affiliates, and such private letter ruling shall not have been revoked
or modified in any material respect;
Occidental shall have received an opinion of its tax counsel, in form and substance acceptable to Occidental and which shall remain in full force and effect, that
(i) certain transactions that will be undertaken in preparation for, or in connection with, the spin-off will not be taxable to Occidental or its affiliates for federal
income tax purposes and (ii) the spin-off generally qualifies as a tax-free transaction under Sections 355, 361 and/or 368(a)(1)(D) of the Code;
no order, injunction, decree or regulation issued by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction or other legal restraint or prohibition preventing consummation of
the distribution will be in effect;
the completion of our new financing arrangements;
no other events or developments shall have occurred or exist that, in the judgment of the board of directors of Occidental, in its sole discretion, makes it
inadvisable to effect the distribution or other transactions contemplated by the Separation and Distribution Agreement;
each of the ancillary agreements contemplated by the Separation and Distribution Agreement shall have been executed by each party thereto; and
158
•
•
•
•
•
Table of Contents
•
any government approvals and other material consents necessary to consummate the distribution will have been obtained and remain in full force and effect.
In addition, Occidental will have the right to determine the date and terms of the distribution, including payment by us of a special distribution of approximately $6.0 billion
to Occidental, and will have the right, at any time until completion of the distribution, to determine to abandon or modify the distribution and to terminate or modify the
Separation and Distribution Agreement.
Transition Services Agreement
The Transition Services Agreement will set forth the terms on which Occidental will provide to us, and we will provide to Occidental, on a temporary basis, certain
services or functions that the companies historically have shared. Transition services may include administrative, payroll, human resources, data processing, environmental
health and safety, financial audit support, financial transaction support, marketing support and other support services, information technology systems and various other
corporate services. We expect the agreement will provide for the provision of specified transition services, generally for a period of up to 12 months, with a possible extension
of 6 months (an aggregate of 18 months), on a cost or a cost-plus basis.
Tax Sharing Agreement
The Tax Sharing Agreement will govern the respective rights, responsibilities, and obligations of Occidental and us with respect to tax liabilities and benefits, tax
attributes, the preparation and filing of tax returns, the control of audits and other tax proceedings, and other matters regarding taxes. The Tax Sharing Agreement will remain in
effect until the parties agree in writing to its termination; however, notwithstanding such termination, the Tax Sharing Agreement will remain in effect with respect to any
payments or indemnification due for all taxable periods prior to such termination during which the agreement was in effect.
In general, pursuant to the Tax Sharing Agreement:
•
•
•
•
CRC and Occidental will agree to cooperate in the preparation of tax returns, refund claims and with regard to audits concerning matters covered by the
agreement;
the Tax Sharing Agreement will assign responsibilities for administrative matters, such as the filing of tax returns, payment of taxes due, retention of records and
conduct of audits, examinations, or similar proceedings;
with respect to any periods (or portions thereof) ending prior to the distribution and periods that begin on or before but end after the distribution, Occidental will pay
any U.S. federal income taxes of the affiliated group of which Occidental is the common parent and, if CRC (including any of its subsidiaries) is included in that
affiliated group, CRC will pay Occidental an amount equal to the amount of U.S. federal income tax CRC would have paid had CRC filed a separate consolidated
U.S. federal income tax return, subject to certain adjustments. With respect to any periods (or portions thereof) beginning after the distribution, CRC will be
responsible for any U.S. federal income taxes of CRC and its subsidiaries;
with respect to any periods (or portions thereof) ending prior to the distribution and periods that begin on or before but end after the distribution, Occidental will pay
any U.S. state or local franchise or income taxes that are determined on a consolidated, combined, or unitary basis and, if CRC (including any of its subsidiaries)
is included in such determination, CRC will pay Occidental an amount equal to the amount of tax CRC would have paid had CRC filed a separate return for such
income, subject to certain adjustments;
159
Table of Contents
•
•
•
with respect to any periods (or portions thereof) beginning after the distribution, CRC will be responsible for any U.S. state or local income taxes of CRC and its
subsidiaries;
Occidental will be responsible for any U.S. federal, state, local, or foreign taxes due with respect to tax returns that include only Occidental and/or its subsidiaries
(excluding CRC and its subsidiaries), and CRC will be responsible for any U.S. federal, state, local or foreign taxes due with respect to tax returns that include
only CRC and/or its subsidiaries;
to the extent that any gain or income is recognized by Occidental (including its subsidiaries) in connection with the failure of the spin-off or certain transactions
undertaken in preparation for, or in connection with, the spin-off, to qualify for tax-free treatment under the relevant provisions of the Code, CRC will indemnify
Occidental for any taxes on such gain or income to the extent such failure is attributable to:
•
inaccurate covenants, representations, or warranties by CRC (or any CRC subsidiaries) made in connection with the Tax Sharing Agreement or any tax
ruling requested or received from the IRS or opinions of Occidental's outside tax advisors;
any breach by CRC (or any CRC subsidiaries) of certain restrictive covenants in the Tax Sharing Agreement; or
certain other actions taken by CRC; and
•
•
•
CRC will bear 50% of the amount of any taxes resulting from gain or income that is recognized by Occidental (including its subsidiaries) in connection with the
failure of the spin-off or a related transaction to qualify for tax-free treatment under the relevant provisions of the Code, to the extent such failure is not attributable
to the fault of either party.
Occidental has requested a private letter ruling from the IRS substantially to the effect that certain aspects of the transactions that will be undertaken in preparation for, or
in connection with, the spin-off will not cause the distribution to be taxable to Occidental or its affiliates for federal income tax purposes. In addition, the spin-off is conditioned
on Occidental's receipt of an opinion from its tax counsel, in form and substance acceptable to Occidental, that (i) certain transactions that will be undertaken in preparation for,
or in connection with, the spin-off will not be taxable to Occidental or its affiliates for federal income tax purposes, and (ii) the spin-off generally qualifies as a tax-free
transaction under Sections 355, 361 and/or 368(a)(1)(D) of the Code. The opinion will rely on the private letter ruling as to matters covered by the private letter ruling.
CRC will agree to certain restrictions that are intended to preserve the tax-free status of the contribution, distribution, and related transactions. After Occidental's initial
distribution of at least 80.1% of CRC common stock and during the two-year period following Occidental's final disposition of the Retained Securities, these covenants will
restrict CRC's ability to: (a) voluntarily liquidate or dissolve; (b) merge, convert or consolidate with or into another entity; (c) issue any capital stock or other equity interests,
options or rights to acquire capital stock or other equity interests, or any other instruments convertible into or exchangeable for, or that could otherwise result in the issuance of,
capital stock or other equity interests; (d) redeem or otherwise repurchase any outstanding capital stock or other equity interests, rights or instruments, other than pursuant to
open market stock repurchase programs meeting certain requirements; (e) recapitalize, reclassify, or alter the voting rights of one or more shares of capital stock or other
equity interests, rights or instruments; (f) take certain other actions inconsistent with any representation made in any materials provided in connection with any private letter
ruling request or opinions of Occidental's outside tax advisors; (g) increase or decrease the number of members of the board of directors of CRC or any pre-spin-off CRC
subsidiary, alter in any way the procedures for the nomination, election, and termination of members of the board, or expand, contract, or otherwise modify the rights of the
board to govern the affairs of CRC except in certain circumstances; (h) sell, exchange, distribute, or otherwise dispose of any pre-spin-off CRC subsidiary or all or a substantial
part of the assets
160
Table of Contents
of any of the trades or businesses conducted by CRC and the pre-spin-off CRC subsidiaries (other than sales or transfers of inventory in the ordinary course of business) before
the spin-off except in certain circumstances; (i) take, or fail to take, any action that causes the trades or businesses conducted by CRC or any pre-spin-off CRC subsidiary to
cease to be actively conducted in substantially the manner conducted pre-spin-off; (j) sell, transfer or agree to sell or transfer to any corporate subsidiary any assets held by
certain Occidental subsidiaries before Occidental's internal reorganization in connection with the spin-off; (k) enter into any negotiations, agreements, understandings, or
arrangements with respect to any of the foregoing; and (l) take, or fail to take, any action that could reasonably be expected to cause the spin-off to fail to qualify as a tax-free
transaction under Sections 355, 361 and/or 368(a)(1)(D) of the Code. CRC may take certain actions otherwise subject to these restrictions only if Occidental consents to the
taking of such action or if CRC obtains, and provides to Occidental, a private letter ruling from the IRS and/or an opinion from an independent law firm or accounting firm, in
either case, acceptable to Occidental in its sole discretion, to the effect that such action would not jeopardize the tax-free status of the contribution, distribution, or related
transactions.
Employee Matters Agreement
The Employee Matters Agreement will govern Occidental's and our compensation and employee benefit obligations with respect to the current and former employees of
each company, and generally will allocate liabilities and responsibilities relating to employee compensation and benefit plans and programs. The Employee Matters Agreement
will generally provide for the following:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
the transfer of all employees who, following the spin-off, will work for the California business ("transferred employees") to us or one of our subsidiaries;
the assumption (or retention) by us and our subsidiaries of all liabilities and obligations relating to current and former employees of the California business
(excluding, with respect to current employees, certain pension obligations and, with respect to former employees, certain pension, retiree medical and nonqualified
deferred compensation plan obligations);
the retention by Occidental of all employee and benefit plan-related liabilities and obligations not relating to current or former employees of the California business;
the establishment by us and our subsidiaries of new employee benefit plans for purposes of providing benefits to transferred employees;
the cessation of active participation by transferred employees under all benefit plans sponsored by Occidental;
the conversion of Occidental equity and equity-based awards held by transferred employees into awards with respect to our common stock;
the adjustment of Occidental equity and equity-based awards not held by transferred employees to reflect the effect of the spin-off;
the transfer of all assets held in trusts maintained by Occidental which relate to benefits payable under certain defined benefit plans maintained by our
subsidiaries to a trust (or trusts) maintained by the respective subsidiaries;
the transfer of liabilities and other obligations relating to benefits accrued by transferred employees pursuant to Occidental's supplemental retirement and
nonqualified deferred compensation plans from Occidental to us and our subsidiaries;
that the spin-off is not intended to constitute a "change in control" or similar transaction under Occidental or our benefit and compensation plans;
161
Table of Contents
•
the crediting of transferred employees for their service with Occidental for purposes of determining eligibility, vesting and benefit levels under our benefit plans;
and
•
general cooperation and sharing of information between us and Occidental on matters relating to the transfers of employees and employee benefit plan-related
liabilities and obligations.
AMI Agreement
The AMI Agreement will set forth the terms upon which Occidental may acquire an interest in and rights with respect to certain oil and gas properties (the "AMI Interests")
in the United States (excluding California and federal waters offshore California) (the "AMI Area"). Pursuant to the terms of the AMI Agreement, for a period of one year after
notice from us, Occidental may elect to exercise an option to acquire an interest in the AMI Interest. Upon exercise, Occidental will acquire an undivided      % interest in the
subject AMI Interest for consideration equal to the sum of (i)       % of the net acquisition price paid by us for such AMI Interest and (ii)       % of the drilling and/or operating
costs paid by us (net of any reimbursements) in respect of such AMI Interests attributable to any periods after the date of our acquisition of such AMI Interests, and less
(iii)     % of the revenue attributable to such AMI Interests after the date of our acquisition of such AMI Interests, subject to certain limited exceptions. If applicable, in
connection with the exercise of Occidental's option, we will resign as operator and vote for Occidental or its designee as the replacement operator. The term of the AMI
Agreement will be five years.
Confidentiality and Trade Secret Protection Agreement
Pursuant to the Confidentiality and Trade Secret Protection Agreement, we will agree to keep confidential and not misuse certain information we learned about Occidental
prior to the spin-off. In order to preserve Occidental's trade secrets and confidential information and to protect the goodwill transferred to us in connection with the spin-off,
among other things, CRC and Occidental will agree (i) not to hire the other party's employees for a period of one year following the completion of the spin-off and (ii) not to
solicit the other party's employees for an additional four years following the expiration of the non-hire restrictions.
Intellectual Property License Agreement
The Intellectual Property License Agreement will set forth the terms on which Occidental, on behalf of itself and its affiliates, will license certain intellectual property and
documentation to us, including software owned by Occidental and its affiliates. We will have the right to create derivative works of the software and use it for our internal
business purposes.
Stockholder's and Registration Rights Agreement
Prior to the distribution, we and Occidental will enter into a Stockholder's and Registration Rights Agreement pursuant to which we will agree that, upon the request of
Occidental, we will use our best efforts to effect the registration under applicable federal and state securities laws of the disposition of shares of our common stock retained by
Occidental after the distribution and to cooperate with Occidental to facilitate its disposition of the Retained Securities through one or more exchanges for Occidental common
stock. In addition, Occidental will grant us a proxy to vote the shares of our common stock that Occidental retains immediately after the distribution in proportion to the votes
cast by our other stockholders. This proxy, however, will be automatically revoked as to a particular share upon any transfer of such share from Occidental to a person other
than Occidental, and neither the voting agreement nor the proxy will limit or prohibit any transfer.
Table of Contents
162
OTHER RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
In addition to the related party transactions described in "Arrangements Between Occidental and Our Company" above, this section discusses other transactions and
relationships with related persons during the past three fiscal years. As a current subsidiary of Occidental, we engage in related party transactions with Occidental. Those
transactions are described in more detail in the notes to the accompanying combined financial statements.
Marketing Transactions
Substantially all of our marketing of oil, gas and NGLs has historically been transacted through Occidental's marketing subsidiaries. For the years ended December 31,
2013, 2012 and 2011, sales to Occidental's marketing subsidiaries accounted for approximately $4.2 billion, $4.0 billion and $3.9 billion of our net sales respectively. After the
spin-off, we expect to market our products through a wholly-owned marketing subsidiary.
Policies and Procedures with Respect to Related Party Transactions and Conflicts of Interest
Prior to the spin-off, our board of directors will adopt policies restricting related party transactions. We will review all relationships and transactions in which we and our
directors and executive officers or their immediate family members are participants to determine whether such persons have a direct or indirect material interest. Our Corporate
Secretary's office will develop and implement procedures to obtain information from the directors and executive officers with respect to related party transactions.
Determinations as to whether an executive officer or directors has a direct or indirect material interest and whether such an interest is permissible will be determined by the
audit committee of our board of directors. Agreements that embody transactions that are material in amount or significance will be filed with the SEC as required, and the
transactions will be disclosed in our proxy statement as required.
Our business ethics and corporate policies will prohibit significant conflicts of interest. Any waivers of these policies will require approval by a compliance officer, the
corporate compliance committee or uninvolved members of the audit committee (in the case of conflicts of our executive officers or directors). Under the business ethics and
corporate policies, conflicts of interest will occur when private or family interests interfere or compete with the interests of our Company.
We will have multiple processes for reporting conflicts of interests, including related party transactions. Under the business ethics and corporate policies, all our directors
and employees will be required to report any known or apparent, actual or potential conflict of interest, or potential conflict of interest, to their supervisors, a compliance officer,
the corporate compliance committee or the audit committee as appropriate. As part of any review, the following factors will generally be considered:
the nature of the related person's interest in the transaction;
the material terms of the transaction
the importance of the transaction to the related person;
the importance of the transaction to us;
whether the transaction would impair the judgment of a director or executive officer to act or their ability to act in our best interest;
whether the transaction might affect a director's independence under NYSE standards; and
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
any other matters deemed appropriate with respect to the particular transaction.
We also will have other policies and procedures to prevent conflicts of interest, including related person transactions. For example, the charter of our Nominating &
Governance Committee will require
163
Table of Contents
that committee members assess the independence of the non-management directors at least annually, including a requirement that it determine whether any such directors
have a material relationship with us, either directly or indirectly, as defined therein and as further described above under "Management—Board of Directors—Director
Independence."
Guidelines will be contained in our business ethics and corporate policies to establish restrictions with regard to corporate participation in the political system as imposed
by law.
DESCRIPTION OF MATERIAL INDEBTEDNESS
In connection with the separation, we expect to incur an aggregate of $6.065 billion in new debt from which we will not retain any substantial amount of cash following the
separation. We expect that this indebtedness will consist of long-term notes, term loans and borrowings under a revolving credit facility.
In addition, we expect that our revolving credit facility will be available for working capital and for general corporate purposes including issuance of letters of credit.
We will describe the terms and covenants of any notes to be issued, bank debt to be incurred or liquidity facilities to be entered into in an amendment to the registration
statement of which this information statement is a part.
Table of Contents
164
DESCRIPTION OF CAPITAL STOCK
The following is a description of the material terms of our capital stock as provided in our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and amended and restated
bylaws, as each is anticipated to be in effect upon the completion of the spin-off. The summaries and descriptions below do not purport to be complete statements of the
relevant provisions of these documents. For a complete description, we refer you to, and the following summaries and descriptions are qualified in their entirety by reference to,
our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and amended and restated bylaws, copies of which will be filed as exhibits to the registration statement of which this
information statement forms a part.
Authorized Capitalization
Following completion of the spin-off, our authorized capital stock will consist of (i)           shares of common stock, par value $0.01 per share, of which          shares will
be issued and outstanding based on the number of shares of Occidental's common stock expected to be outstanding as of the record date and (ii)           shares of preferred
stock, par value $0.01 per share, of which no shares will be issued and outstanding.
Common Stock
Except as provided by law or in a preferred stock designation, holders of common stock are entitled to one vote for each share held of record on all matters submitted to a
vote of the stockholders, will have the exclusive right to vote for the election of directors and do not have cumulative voting rights. Except as otherwise required by law, holders
of common stock are not entitled to vote on any amendment to the amended and restated certificate of incorporation (including any certificate of designations relating to any
series of preferred stock) that relates solely to the terms of any outstanding series of preferred stock if the holders of such affected series are entitled, either separately or
together with the holders of one or more other such series, to vote thereon pursuant to the amended and restated certificate of incorporation (including any certificate of
designations relating to any series of preferred stock) or pursuant to the DGCL. Subject to prior rights and preferences that may be applicable to any outstanding shares or
series of preferred stock, holders of common stock are entitled to receive ratably in proportion to the shares of common stock held by them such dividends (payable in cash,
stock or otherwise), if any, as may be declared from time to time by our board of directors out of funds legally available for dividend payments. All outstanding shares of
common stock are fully paid and non-assessable, and the shares of common stock to be issued upon completion of the-spin off will be fully paid and non-assessable. The
holders of common stock have no preferences or rights of conversion, exchange, pre-emption or other subscription rights. There are no redemption or sinking fund provisions
applicable to the common stock. In the event of any voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution or winding-up of our affairs, holders of common stock will be entitled to
share ratably in our assets in proportion to the shares of common stock held by then that are remaining after payment or provision for payment of all of our debts and
obligations and after distribution in full of preferential amounts to be distributed to holders of outstanding shares of preferred stock, if any.
Preferred Stock
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation authorizes our board of directors, subject to any limitations prescribed by law, without further stockholder approval,
to establish and to issue from time to time one or more series of preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share, covering up to an aggregate of                        shares of preferred
stock. Each series of preferred stock will cover the number of shares and will have the powers, preferences, rights, qualifications, limitations and restrictions determined by the
board of directors, which may include, among others, dividend rights, liquidation preferences, voting rights, conversion or exchange rights, preemptive rights and redemption
rights. Except as provided by law or in a preferred stock designation, the holders of preferred stock will not be entitled to vote at or receive notice of any meeting of
stockholders.
165
Table of Contents
Anti-Takeover Effects of Provisions of our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, our Amended and Restated Bylaws and Delaware Law
Some provisions of Delaware law, our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and our amended and restated bylaws will contain provisions that could make
acquisitions of us by means of a tender offer, a proxy contest or otherwise or removal of our incumbent officers and directors more difficult. These provisions may also have
the effect of preventing changes in our management. It is possible that these provisions could make it more difficult to accomplish or could deter transactions that stockholders
may otherwise consider to be in their best interests or in our best interests, including transactions that might result in a premium over the market price for our shares.
These provisions are expected to discourage coercive takeover practices and inadequate takeover bids. These provisions are also designed to encourage persons
seeking to acquire control of us to first negotiate with us. We believe that the benefits of increased protection and our potential ability to negotiate with the proponent of an
unfriendly or unsolicited proposal to acquire or restructure us outweigh the disadvantages of discouraging these proposals because, among other things, negotiation of these
proposals could result in an improvement of their terms.
Delaware Law
We will be subject to Section 203 of the DGCL, which generally prohibits a Delaware corporation, including those whose securities are listed for trading on the NYSE, from
engaging in any business combination with any interested stockholder (which is defined generally as a person owning 15% or more of a Delaware corporation's outstanding
voting stock) or its affiliates or associates for a period of three years following the time that the stockholder became an interested stockholder, unless:
the transaction is approved by the board of directors before the time the interested stockholder attained that status;
upon consummation of the transaction that resulted in the stockholder becoming an interested stockholder, the interested stockholder owned at least 85% of the
voting stock of the corporation outstanding at the time the transaction commenced; or
•
•
•
on or after such time the business combination is approved by the board of directors and authorized at a meeting of stockholders by at least two-thirds of the
outstanding voting stock that is not owned by the interested stockholder.
We may elect in the future to not be subject to the provisions of Section 203 of the DGCL.
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation and Amended and Restated Bylaws
Provisions of our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and amended and restated bylaws, which will become effective following the spinoff, may delay or
discourage transactions involving an actual or potential change in control or change in our management, or transactions that our stockholders might otherwise deem to be in
their best interests or in our best interests, including transactions that might result in a premium over the market price for our shares. Therefore, these provisions could
adversely affect the price of our common stock.
Among other things, upon the completion of the spin-off, our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and amended and restated bylaws will:
•
establish advance notice procedures with regard to stockholder proposals relating to the nomination of candidates for election as directors or new business to be
brought before meetings of our stockholders. These procedures provide that notice of stockholder proposals must be timely given in writing to our corporate
secretary prior to the meeting at which the action is to be taken. Generally, to be timely, notice must be received at our principal executive offices not later than
90 days nor earlier than 120 days prior to the first anniversary date of the annual meeting for the preceding year. Our amended and restated bylaws specify the
requirements as to form and content of all stockholder notices. These requirements may preclude stockholders from bringing matters before
Table of Contents
166
•
•
•
•
•
the stockholders at an annual or special meeting, and may discourage or deter a third party from conducting a solicitation of proxies to elect its slate of directors
or to approve its proposal, without regard to whether consideration of those nominees or proposals might be harmful or beneficial to us and our stockholders;
provide our board of directors the ability to authorize undesignated preferred stock. This ability makes it possible for our board of directors to issue, without
stockholder approval, preferred stock with voting or other rights or preferences that could impede the success of any attempt to change control of us. These
provisions may have the effect of deferring hostile takeovers or delaying changes in control or management of our company;
provide that our board of directors is initially divided into three classes, but that our classified board structure will be eliminated at our 2018 annual meeting, when
stockholders will be permitted to elect all of our board members annually. The terms of our initial first class of directors will expire at our 2015 annual meeting of
stockholders, and their successors will be elected for a three-year term. The terms of our initial second class of directors will expire at our 2016 annual meeting of
stockholders, and their successors will be elected for a two-year term. The terms of our initial third class of directors will expire at our 2017 annual meeting of
stockholders, and their successors will be elected for a one-year term. These provisions regarding the election of our board of directors may have the effect of
deferring hostile takeovers or delaying changes in control or management of our company prior to our 2018 annual meeting;
provide that (x) the authorized number of directors may be changed only by resolution of the board of directors, (y) all vacancies, including newly created
directorships, may, except as otherwise required by law or, if applicable, the rights of holders of a series of preferred stock, only be filled by the affirmative vote of
a majority of directors then in office, even if less than a quorum, and (z) for so long as we have a classified board of directors, our stockholders will have no
ability to remove our directors without cause, and that, upon the declassification of our board of directors, directors may be removed without cause by our
stockholders only upon the affirmative vote of holders of at least 75% of the voting power of our then outstanding common stock. These provisions regarding the
makeup of our board of directors may have the effect of deferring hostile takeovers or delaying changes in control or management of our company;
provide that (x) any action required or permitted to be taken by the stockholders must be effected at a duly called annual or special meeting of stockholders and
may not be effected by any consent in writing in lieu of a meeting of such stockholders, subject to the rights of the holders of any series of preferred stock with
respect to such series, and (y) special meetings of our stockholders may only be called by the board of directors, the chief executive officer or the chairman of
the board. These provisions regarding our stockholder meetings may have the effect of deferring hostile takeovers or delaying changes in control or management
of our company;
provide that (x) certain provisions of our certificate of incorporation related to the voting rights of stockholders, our board of directors, special meetings of our
stockholders, the ability of our stockholders to act by written consent and the forum for certain disputes related to us or our stockholders, may be amended only
by the affirmative vote of the holders of at least 75% of the voting power of our then outstanding common stock and that other provisions of our certificate of
incorporation may be amended upon the affirmative vote of the holders of at least a majority of our then outstanding common stock and the approval of a majority
of our directors then in office, or otherwise only by the affirmative vote of the holders of at least 75% of the voting power of the shares of our then outstanding
common stock and (y) our bylaws can be amended or repealed at any regular or special meeting of stockholders or by the board of directors, provided any
amendment by the stockholders will be effective only upon the affirmative vote of the holders of at least 75% of the voting power of the shares of common stock
outstanding and entitled to vote thereon. These provisions regarding the amendment of our constituent documents may have the effect of deferring hostile
takeovers or delaying changes in control or management of our company.
167
Table of Contents
Forum Selection
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation will provide that unless we consent in writing to the selection of an alternative forum, the Court of Chancery of the
State of Delaware will, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, be the sole and exclusive forum for:
any derivative action or proceeding brought on our behalf;
any action asserting a claim of breach of a fiduciary duty owed by any of our directors, officers, employees or agents to us or our stockholders;
any action asserting a claim arising pursuant to any provision of the DGCL, our amended and restated certificate of incorporation or our bylaws (as either may be
amended from time to time); or
•
•
•
•
any action asserting a claim that is governed by the internal affairs doctrine, in each such case subject to such Court of Chancery having personal jurisdiction
over the indispensable parties named as defendants therein.
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation will also provide that any person or entity purchasing or otherwise holding any interest in shares of our capital stock
will be deemed to have notice of and to have consented to this forum selection provision. However, it is possible that a court could find our forum selection provision to be
inapplicable or unenforceable.
Limitation of Liability and Indemnification Matters
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation limits the liability of our directors for monetary damages for breach of their fiduciary duty as directors, except for
liability that cannot be eliminated under the DGCL. Delaware law permits a certificate of incorporation to provide that directors of a company will not be personally liable for
monetary damages for breach of their fiduciary duty as directors, except for liabilities:
for any breach of their duty of loyalty to us or our stockholders;
for acts or omissions not in good faith or which involve intentional misconduct or a knowing violation of law;
for unlawful payment of dividend or unlawful stock repurchase or redemption, as provided under Section 174 of the DGCL; or
•
•
•
•
for any transaction from which the director derived an improper personal benefit.
Any amendment, repeal or modification of these provisions will be prospective only and would not affect any limitation on liability of a director for acts or omissions that
occurred prior to any such amendment, repeal or modification.
Our amended and restated bylaws also provide that we will indemnify our directors and officers to the fullest extent permitted by Delaware law. Our amended and restated
bylaws also permit us to purchase insurance on behalf of any officer, director, employee or other agent for any liability arising out of that person's actions as our officer,
director, employee or agent, regardless of whether Delaware law would permit indemnification. We may from time to time enter into indemnification agreements with our
directors and officers. These agreements will typically require us to indemnify these individuals to the fullest extent permitted under Delaware law against liability that may arise
by reason of their service to us, and to advance expenses incurred as a result of any proceeding against them as to which they could be indemnified. We believe that the
limitation of liability provision in our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and any indemnification agreements we enter into will facilitate our ability to continue to
attract and retain qualified individuals to serve as directors and officers.
Sale of Unregistered Securities
Upon our incorporation, we issued 1,000 shares of our common stock, par value $0.01 per share, to Occidental upon payment by Occidental of $10.00 pursuant to
Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act. We did
168
Table of Contents
not register the issuance of these shares under the Securities Act because such issuance did not constitute a public offering.
Transfer Agent and Registrar
The transfer agent and registrar for our common stock is American Stock Transfer & Trust Company, LLC.
Following the distribution, all inquiries regarding our common stock should be directed to the following:
Regular Mail: 6201 15th Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11219
Telephone: (800) 937-5449
Listing
Our common stock is expected to trade on the NYSE under the symbol "CRC."
169
Table of Contents
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We have filed with the SEC a Registration Statement on Form 10 for our shares of common stock that Occidental stockholders will receive in the distribution. This
information statement does not contain all of the information contained in the Form 10 and the exhibits to the Form 10. We have omitted some items in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the SEC. For additional information relating to us and the spin-off, we refer you to the Form 10 and its exhibits, which are on file at the offices of the
SEC. Statements contained in this information statement about the contents of any contract or other document referred to may not be complete, and in each instance, if we
have filed the contract or document as an exhibit to the Form 10, we refer you to the copy of the contract or other documents so filed. We qualify each statement in all respects
by the relevant reference.
You may inspect and copy the Form 10 and exhibits that we have filed with the SEC at the SEC's Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549.
Please call the SEC at (800) SEC-0330 for further information on the Public Reference Room. In addition, the SEC maintains an Internet site at www.sec.gov, from which you
can electronically access the Form 10, including its exhibits.
We maintain an Internet site at www.                .com. We do not incorporate our Internet site, or the information contained on that site or connected to that site, into the
information statement or our Registration Statement on Form 10.
As a result of the distribution, we will be required to comply with the full informational requirements of the Exchange Act. We will fulfill those obligations with respect to
these requirements by filing periodic reports and other information with the SEC.
We plan to make available free of charge on our website, all materials that we file electronically with the SEC, including our annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports
on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, Section 16 reports and amendments to these reports as soon as reasonably practicable after such materials are electronically filed
with, or furnished to, the SEC. You also can obtain information about us at the offices of the New York Stock Exchange, 20 Broad Street, New York, New York 10005.
You should rely only on the information contained in this information statement or to which we have referred you. We have not authorized any person to provide you with
different information or to make any representation not contained in this information statement.
Table of Contents
170
GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS
%Ro or vitrinite reflectance   A measurement of the maturity of organic matter with respect to whether it has generated hydrocarbons or could be an effective source rock.
100% commercial success
rate
Basin
Bbl
A large natural depression on the earth's surface in which sediments generally brought by water accumulate.
All wells were completed and produce in commercially viable quantities.
BBoe
One stock tank barrel, or 42 U.S. gallons liquid volume, used in reference to oil or other liquid hydrocarbons.
One billion Boe.
Bcf
Boe
BS
Completion
Condensate
Conventional
Reservoir
/d
Development drilling or
development wells
Disposal well
Economically Producible
EOR
Exploration activities
Exploration well
Extension Well
Table of Contents
One billion cubic feet of natural gas.
  One stock tank barrel of oil equivalent, using the ratio of six Mcf of natural gas to one barrel of crude oil.
  One barrel of steam, cold water equivalent.
  The installation of permanent equipment for the production of oil or natural gas or, in the case of a dry well, reporting to the appropriate
authority that the well has been abandoned.
A mixture of hydrocarbons that exists in the gaseous phase at original reservoir temperature and pressure, but that, when produced, is in the
liquid phase at surface pressure and temperature.
A reservoir in which buoyant forces keep hydrocarbons in place below a sealing caprock. Reservoir and fluid characteristics of conventional
reservoirs typically permit oil or natural gas to flow readily into wellbores.
Per day.
Drilling or wells drilled within the proved area of an oil or natural gas reservoir to the depth of a stratigraphic horizon known to be productive.
A well utilized to dispose of excess produced fluids that are not reused in normal operations.
  A resource which generates revenue that exceeds, or is reasonably expected to exceed, the costs of the operation.
  Enhanced oil recovery.
  The initial phase of oil and natural gas operations that includes the generation of a prospect or play and the drilling of an exploration well.
  Refers to a well drilled to find a new field or to find a new reservoir in a field previously found to be productive of oil or gas in another reservoir.
  A well drilled to extend the limits of a known reservoir.
171
Field
An area consisting of a single reservoir or multiple reservoirs all grouped on, or related to, the same individual geological structural feature or stratigraphic
condition. The field name refers to the surface area, although it may refer to both the surface and the underground productive formations.
Formation
Gross acres or
gross wells
Infill drilling
Injection well
IOR
Maximum
Efficiency Rate
MBbl
MBoe
Mcf
mD
MMBbl
MMBoe
MMBtu
MMcf
Natural gas
liquids or
NGLs
Net acres or
net
wells
NYMEX
Oil
Pay zone
Permeability
A layer of rock which has distinct characteristics that differs from nearby rock.
The total acres or wells, as applicable, in which a working interest is owned.
Drilling of an additional well or wells at less than existing spacing to more adequately drain a reservoir.
  A well in which water, gas or steam is injected, the primary objective typically being to maintain reservoir pressure and/or improve hydrocarbon recovery.
 
  The maximum sustainable daily oil or gas withdrawal rate from a reservoir which will permit economic development and depletion of that reservoir without
Improved oil recovery.
detriment to ultimate recovery.
One thousand barrels.
  One thousand Boe.
  One thousand cubic feet of natural gas. For the purposes of this report, this volume is stated at the legal pressure base of the state or area in which the
reserves are located and at 60 degrees Fahrenheit.
One millidarcy.
  One million barrels.
  One million Boe.
  One million British thermal units. A British thermal unit is the quantity of heat required to raise the temperature of one pound of water by one degree
Fahrenheit.
One million cubic feet of natural gas. For the purposes of this report, this volume is stated at the legal pressure base of the state or area in which the
reserves are located and at 60 degrees Fahrenheit.
Hydrocarbons found in natural gas which may be extracted as liquefied petroleum gas and natural gasoline.
The gross acres or wells, as applicable, multiplied by the working interests owned.
The New York Mercantile Exchange.
  Crude oil or condensate.
  A geological deposit in which oil and natural gas is found in commercial quantities.
  The ability, or measurement of a rock's ability, to transmit fluids.
172
Table of Contents
Porosity
Primary
Recovery
Productive
Wells
Proved
developed
non-
producing
reserves
Proved
developed
reserves
Proved
developed
producing
reserves
Proved
reserves or
proved oil
and gas
reserves
Proved
undeveloped
reserves or
PUDs
PV-10
The total pore volume per unit volume of rock.
  The first stage of hydrocarbon production, in which natural reservoir energy, such as gasdrive, waterdrive or gravity drainage, displaces hydrocarbons from the
reservoir, into the wellbore and up to surface. During primary recovery, only a small percentage of the initial hydrocarbons in place are produced, typically
around 10% for oil reservoirs. Primary recovery is also called primary production.
Producing wells and wells mechanically capable of production.
Proved developed reserves that do not qualify as proved developed producing reserves, including reserves that are expected to be recovered from
(i) completion intervals that are open at the time of the estimate, but have not started producing, (ii) wells that are shut in because pipeline connections are
unavailable or (iii) wells not capable of production for mechanical reasons.
Proved reserves that can be expected to be recovered through existing wells with existing equipment and operating methods, or for which the cost of the
required equipment is relatively minor compared to the cost of a new well.
Reserves that are being recovered through existing wells with existing equipment and operating methods.
Refers to the quantities of oil and gas, which, by analysis of geoscience and engineering data, can be estimated with reasonable certainty to be economically
producible—from a given date forward, from known reservoirs, and under existing economic conditions, operating methods, and government regulations—prior
to the time at which contracts providing the right to operate expire, unless evidence indicates that renewal is reasonably certain, regardless of whether
deterministic or probabilistic methods are used for the estimation.
Undeveloped reserves that qualify as proved reserves.
PV-10 is a non-GAAP financial measure and represents the year-end present value of estimated future cash inflows from proved oil and gas reserves, less
future development and production costs, discounted at 10% per annum to reflect the timing of future cash flows and using SEC prescribed pricing
assumptions for the period.
Recompletion The completion for production of an existing wellbore in a different formation or producing horizon, either deeper or shallower, from that in which the well was
Recompletion  The completion for production of an existing wellbore in a different formation or producing horizon, either deeper or shallower, from that in which the well was
previously completed.
Secondary
recovery
The second stage of hydrocarbon production during which a substance such as water or gas is injected into the reservoir through injection wells located in rock
that has fluid communication with production wells. The purpose of secondary recovery is to support reservoir pressure and to displace hydrocarbons toward
the wellbore.
Table of Contents
173
Shut in
Tcf
Thermal
Maturity
Thickness
Total Organic
Carbon
Unconventional
Resource
Undeveloped
acreage
Undeveloped
reserves
Working
interest
Workover
A well suspended from production or injection but not abandoned.
  One trillion cubic feet of natural gas.
The degree of heating of a source rock in the process of transforming kerogen into hydrocarbon.
The thickness of a layer or stratum of sedimentary rock measured perpendicular to its lateral extent, presuming deposition on a horizontal surface.
The concentration of organic material in source rocks as represented by the weight percent of organic carbon.
Oil and gas resources whose porosity, permeability, fluid trapping mechanism, or other characteristics differ from conventional sandstone and carbonate
reservoirs.
Acreage on which wells have not been drilled or completed to a point that would permit the production of economic quantities of oil or natural gas regardless
of whether the acreage contains proved oil or natural gas reserves.
Refers to reserves that are expected to be recovered from new wells on undrilled acreage, or from existing wells where a relatively major expenditure is
required for recompletion.
The operating interest that gives the owner the right to drill, produce and conduct operating activities on the property and to receive a share of production,
subject to all royalties, overriding royalties and other burdens, all costs of exploration, development and operations and all risks in connection therewith.
Remedial operations on a well conducted with the intention of restoring or increasing production from the same zone, including by plugging back, squeeze
cementing, reperforating, cleanout and acidizing.
174
Table of Contents
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
Interim unaudited combined condensed financial statements
Combined Condensed Balance Sheets as of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013 (unaudited)
Combined Condensed Statements of Income for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 (unaudited)
Combined Condensed Statements of Comprehensive Income for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 (unaudited)
Combined Condensed Statements of Cash Flows for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 (unaudited)
Notes to Combined Condensed Financial Statements (unaudited)
Annual audited combined financial statements
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Combined Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2013 and 2012
Combined Statements of Income for the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
Combined Statements of Comprehensive Income for the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
Combined Statements of Net Investment for the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
Combined Statement of Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
Notes to Combined Financial Statements
Supplemental Financial Information
Supplemental Oil and Gas Information (unaudited)
F-1
Page  
  
 
  F-2 
  F-3 
  F-4 
  F-5 
  F-6 
 
  
  F-10 
  F-11 
  F-12 
  F-13 
  F-14 
  F-15 
  F-16 
 
  
  F-33
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Combined Condensed Balance Sheets
(unaudited)
June 30,
December 31,
2014
2013
(in millions)
Table of Contents
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Trade receivables, net
Inventories
Other current assets
Total current assets
PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
Accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization
OTHER ASSETS
TOTAL ASSETS
$
—  $
 
21 
 
72 
185
278
21,985
(7,551)
14,434
34
— 
30 
75 
149
254
20,972 
(6,964)
14,008
35
$ 14,746  $
14,297
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Accounts payable
Accrued liabilities
Total current liabilities
DEFERRED INCOME TAXES
OTHER LONG-TERM LIABILITIES
NET INVESTMENT
Accumulated other comprehensive income
Net parent company investment
Total net investment
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND NET INVESTMENT
Table of Contents
REVENUES
Net sales to related parties
Net sales to third parties
Other income
COSTS AND OTHER DEDUCTIONS
Production costs
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Taxes other than on income
Exploration expense
INCOME BEFORE INCOME TAXES
Provision for income taxes
NET INCOME
$
504  $
175
679
3,293 
500
3,793
(22)
10,296
10,274
448 
241
689
3,122 
497
3,619 
  
(24)
10,013
9,989
$ 14,746  $
14,297
For the six
months ended
June 30,
2014
2013
(in millions)
$ 2,206  $ 2,049 
49 
 
—
56 
 
(1)
2,261
2,098
578 
166 
582 
107 
46
527 
154 
565 
109 
40
1,479
1,395
782 
(313)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these combined financial statements.
F-2
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Combined Condensed Statements of Income
(unaudited)
$
469  $
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these combined financial statements.
F-3
703 
(281)
422
Table of Contents
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Combined Condensed Statements of Comprehensive Income
(unaudited)
For the six
months
ended
June 30,
2014
2013
(in millions)
Net income
Other comprehensive income (loss) items:
Unrealized losses on derivatives(a)
Pension and postretirement gains(b)
Reclassification to income of realized losses (gains) on derivatives(c)
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax
Comprehensive income
(a)
(b)
(c)
Net of tax of $1 and zero in 2014 and 2013, respectively.
Net of tax of zero and $1 in 2014 and 2013, respectively. See Note 6, Retirement and Postretirement Benefit Plans, for additional information.
Net of tax of $(2) and zero in 2014 and 2013, respectively.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these combined financial statements.
F-4
Table of Contents
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Combined Condensed Statements of Cash Flows
(unaudited)
CASH FLOW FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Net income
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
Depreciation, depletion and amortization of assets
Deferred income tax provision
Other noncash charges to income
Dry hole expenses
Changes in operating assets and liabilities, net
Net cash provided by operating activities
CASH FLOW FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES
Capital expenditures
Payments for purchases of assets and businesses, and other
Net cash used by investing activities
CASH FLOW FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES
Distributions to parent company
Net cash used by financing activities
$
$ 469  $ 422 
 
  
  
(2)   — 
 
1 
 
2 
(1)
3
2
1
$ 471  $ 423
For the six
months ended
June 30,
2014
2013
(in millions)
469  $
582 
178 
21 
32 
(48)
422 
  
565 
126 
27 
24 
13
1,234
1,177
(1,003)
(35)
(1,038)
(196)
(737)
(31)
(768)
(409)
Net cash used by financing activities
Increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents—beginning of period
Cash and cash equivalents—end of period
Table of Contents
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these combined financial statements.
F-5
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Condensed Financial Statements
(unaudited)
$
(196)
— 
—
—  $
(409)
— 
—
—
NOTE 1    THE SPIN-OFF AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The Separation and Spin-Off
On February 14, 2014, Occidental Petroleum Corporation ("Occidental") announced that its board of directors had authorized Occidental's management to pursue the
separation of its California oil and gas exploration and production operations and related assets, which CRC will assume in connection with the spin-off, into a stand-alone,
publicly traded company (California Resources Corporation and its subsidiaries). Unless otherwise stated or the context otherwise indicates, references to "CRC," "us", "our" or
"we" refer to California Resources Corporation, or as the context requires, the California business.
The separation will be completed through a spin-off that is being executed in accordance with a separation and distribution agreement and several other agreements
between us and Occidental. The spin-off is intended to be tax-free to the stockholders of Occidental and to Occidental and us for United States federal income tax purposes.
Occidental intends to distribute, on a pro-rata basis, at least 80.1% of the outstanding shares of our common stock to the Occidental stockholders as of the record date for the
spin-off. Upon completion of the spin-off, which does not require shareholder approval, we will be an independent, stand-alone company from Occidental. The spin-off is, among
other things, subject to final approval by Occidental's board of directors, receipt of a private letter ruling from the Internal Revenue Service regarding certain aspects of the spin-
off and an opinion of tax counsel, with respect to the tax-free nature of the spin-off for federal income tax purposes, the registration statement on Form 10 being declared
effective and the execution of the separation and distribution and related agreements.
We were incorporated in Delaware as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Occidental on April 23, 2014. We are an oil and gas exploration and production company operating
properties exclusively within the state of California, with integrated organization and infrastructure to gather, process and market our production.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying combined condensed financial statements were prepared in connection with the spin-off and were derived from the consolidated financial statements
and accounting records of Occidental. These combined condensed financial statements reflect the historical results of operations, financial position and cash flows of
Occidental's California business, which comprises exploration and production of oil and gas properties located exclusively in California. We account for our share of oil and gas
exploration and production ventures, in which we have a direct working interest, by reporting our proportionate share of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and cash flows within
the relevant lines on the balance sheets and statements of income and cash flows.
The combined statements of income also include expense allocations for certain corporate functions and centrally-located activities historically performed by Occidental.
These functions include executive oversight, accounting, treasury, tax, financial reporting, finance, internal audit, legal, risk management, information technology, government
relations, public relations, investor relations, human resources, procurement, engineering, drilling, exploration, marketing, ethics and compliance, and certain other shared
services. These allocations are based primarily on specific identification of time or activities associated with us, employee headcount or our relative size compared to
Occidental. Our management believes the assumptions underlying the combined condensed financial statements, including the assumptions regarding allocating expenses
from Occidental, are reasonable. However, the combined condensed financial statements may not include all of the actual expenses that would have been incurred,
Table of Contents
F-6
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Condensed Financial Statements (Continued)
(unaudited)
NOTE 1    THE SPIN-OFF AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)
may include duplicative costs and may not reflect our combined results of operations, financial position and cash flows had we operated as a stand-alone public company
during the periods presented. Actual costs that would have been incurred if we had been a stand-alone company would depend on multiple factors, including organizational
structure and strategic and operating decisions.
The assets and liabilities in the combined financial statements are presented on a historical cost basis. We have eliminated all of our significant intercompany
transactions and accounts. We have historically participated in Occidental's centralized treasury management program. Excess cash generated by our business has been
distributed to Occidental, and likewise our cash needs have been provided by Occidental, in the form of an investment. We have not included debt or related interest expense
in the combined condensed financial statements since there was no specifically identifiable debt associated with our operations.
In the opinion of our management, the accompanying combined condensed financial statements contain all adjustments (consisting of normal recurring adjustments)
necessary to fairly present our combined condensed financial position as of June 30, 2014, and the combined condensed statements of income, comprehensive income and
cash flows for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013, as applicable. The income and cash flows for the periods ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 are not necessarily
indicative of the income or cash flows to be expected for the full year.
Events and transactions subsequent to the balance sheet date have been evaluated through August 18, 2014, the date these combined condensed financial statements
were issued, for potential recognition or disclosure in the combined condensed financial statements.
NOTE 2    INVENTORIES
Inventories as of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013, consisted of the following (in millions):
Materials and supplies
Finished goods
Total
NOTE 3    OTHER INFORMATION
2014   2013  
73 
 
2
69 
3
$ 72  $ 75
Other current assets include amounts due from joint venture partners of approximately $135 million and $97 million at June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013,
respectively. Other long-term liabilities include asset retirement obligations of $385 million and $388 million at June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013, respectively.
F-7
Table of Contents
NOTE 4    DERIVATIVES
Objective & Strategy
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Condensed Financial Statements (Continued)
(unaudited)
We only occasionally hedge our oil and gas production, and, when we do so, the volumes are usually insignificant.
Cash-Flow Hedges
We entered into financial swap agreements in November 2012 for the sale of a portion of our natural gas production. These swap agreements hedged 50 MMcf of natural
gas per day beginning in January 2013 through March 2014 and qualified as cash-flow hedges. The weighted-average strike price of these swaps was $4.30. The gross and net
fair values of these derivatives as of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013 were not material, as determined using Level 2 inputs in the fair value hierarchy.
The after-tax gains and losses recognized in, and reclassified to income from, Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (AOCI) for derivative instruments classified as
cash-flow hedges for the six month periods ended June 30, 2014 and 2013, and the ending AOCI balances for each period were not material. The gains and losses reclassified
to income were recognized in net sales, and the amount of the ineffective portion of cash-flow hedges was immaterial for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013.
There were no fair value hedges as of and during the six month periods ended June 30, 2014 and 2013.
NOTE 5    LAWSUITS, CLAIMS AND CONTINGENCIES
We or certain of our subsidiaries are involved, in the normal course of business, in lawsuits, environmental and other claims and other contingencies that seek, among
other things, compensation for alleged personal injury, breach of contract, property damage or other losses, punitive damages, civil penalties, or injunctive or declaratory relief.
We accrue reserves for currently outstanding lawsuits, claims and proceedings when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the liability can be reasonably
estimated. Reserve balances at June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013, were not material to our balance sheets. We also evaluate the amount of reasonably possible losses
that we could incur as a result of these matters. We believe that reasonably possible losses that we could incur in excess of reserves accrued on the balance sheet would not
be material to our financial position or results of operations.
We will indemnify Occidental under the Tax Sharing Agreement for taxes incurred as a result of the failure of the spin-off or certain transactions undertaken in preparation
for, or in connection with, the spin-off, to qualify as tax-free transactions under the relevant provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, to the extent caused
by our breach of any representations or covenants made in the Tax Sharing Agreement, or made in connection with the private letter ruling or the tax opinion or by any other
action taken by us. We also have agreed to pay 50% of any taxes arising from the spin-off or related transactions to the extent that the tax is not attributable to the fault of
either party. In addition, under the Separation and Distribution Agreement, we will also indemnify Occidental and its remaining subsidiaries against claims and liabilities relating
to the past operation of our business.
Table of Contents
F-8
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Condensed Financial Statements (Continued)
(unaudited)
NOTE 6    RETIREMENT AND POSTRETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS
The following table sets forth the components of the net periodic benefit costs for our defined benefit pension and postretirement benefit plans for the six months ended
June 30, 2014 and 2013 (in millions):
Net Periodic Benefit Costs
Service cost
Interest cost
Expected return on plan assets
Recognized actuarial loss
Total
2014
2013
Postretirement
Pension Benefits  
  $
2  $
2 
 
(3)  
1
Benefits
Pension Benefits  
2 
2 
(2)
2
2  $
2 
 
 
— 
—
$
2  $
4  $
4
We did not make any contributions in either of the six-month periods ended June 30, 2014 and 2013, to our defined benefit pension plans.
NOTE 7    RELATED-PARTY TRANSACTIONS
During the periods ended June 30, 2014 and 2013, we entered into the following related-party transactions (in millions):
Sales
Allocated costs for services provided by affiliates
Purchases
2013
2014
$ 2,206  $ 2,049 
61 
  $
  $
86
77  $
119  $
Substantially all of our products were historically sold to Occidental's marketing subsidiaries at market prices and have been settled at the time of sale to those entities.
For each of the periods ended June 30, 2014 and 2013, sales to Occidental subsidiaries accounted for approximately 98% of our net sales.
The combined statements of income include expense allocations for certain corporate functions and centrally-located activities historically performed by Occidental.
These functions include executive oversight, accounting, treasury, tax, financial reporting, finance, internal audit, legal, risk management, information technology, government
relations, public relations, investor relations, human resources, procurement, engineering, drilling, exploration, marketing, ethics and compliance, and certain other shared
services. Charges from Occidental for these services are reflected in selling, general and administrative expenses.
Purchases from related parties reflect products purchased at market prices from Occidental's subsidiaries and are used in our operations. These purchases are included
in production costs. There are no significant related party receivable or payable balances at June 30, 2014 and 2013.
F-9
Table of Contents
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders
Occidental Petroleum Corporation:
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
We have audited the accompanying combined balance sheets of California Resources Corporation (the "Company") as of December 31, 2013 and 2012, and the related
combined statements of income, comprehensive income, net investment and cash flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2013. These
combined financial statements are the responsibility of the Company's management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these combined financial statements based
on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis,
evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made
by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the combined financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of California Resources Corporation as of
December 31, 2013 and 2012, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2013 in conformity with
U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
/s/ KPMG LLP
F-10
California Resources Corporation
Combined Balance Sheets
As of December 31, 2013 and 2012
$
Los Angeles, California
June 2, 2014
Table of Contents
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Trade receivables, net
Inventories
Other current assets
Total current assets
PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
Accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization
OTHER ASSETS
TOTAL ASSETS
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Accounts payable
Accrued liabilities
2013
2012
(in millions)
—  $
30 
 
 
75 
149
254
— 
22 
81 
142
245
20,972
(6,964)
19,324 
(5,825)
14,008
13,499
35
20
$ 14,297  $ 13,764
$
448  $
241
371 
180
Total current liabilities
DEFERRED INCOME TAXES
OTHER LONG-TERM LIABILITIES
CONTINGENT LIABILITIES AND COMMITMENTS
NET INVESTMENT
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND NET INVESTMENT
Table of Contents
REVENUES AND OTHER INCOME
Net sales to related parties
Net sales to third parties
Other income
COSTS AND OTHER DEDUCTIONS
Production costs
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Asset impairments and related items
Taxes other than on income
Exploration expense
INCOME BEFORE INCOME TAXES
Provision for income taxes
NET INCOME
Table of Contents
689
3,122 
497
3,619
9,989
551
2,842 
511
3,353
9,860
$ 14,297  $ 13,764
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these combined financial statements.
F-11
California Resources Corporation
Combined Statements of Income
For the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
2013
2012
(in millions)
2011
$ 4,174  $ 3,970  $ 3,862 
76 
 
(4)
(1)
102 
1
111
4,284
4,073
3,934
1,066 
 
326 
  1,144 
— 
 
185 
 
116
1,314 
 
296 
926 
 
41 
 
167 
 
148
1,074 
 
287 
675 
 
— 
 
143 
 
114
2,837
2,892
2,293
1,447
(578)
1,181
(482)
1,641 
(670)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these combined financial statements.
F-12
California Resources Corporation
Combined Statements of Comprehensive Income
For the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
$
869  $
699  $
971
2013
2012
(in millions)
2011
Net income
Other comprehensive income (loss) items:
Unrealized (losses) gains on derivatives(a)
Pension and postretirement gains (losses)(b)
Reclassification to income of realized (gains) losses on derivatives(c)
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax
Comprehensive income
$ 869  $ 699  $ 971 
 
 
  
  — 
 
 
 
(10)
  —
3 
(2)  
27 
2 
 
(2)   —
23
5
(10)
$ 892  $ 704  $ 961
(a)
(b)
(c)
Net of tax of $1, $(1) and zero in 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
Net of tax of $(16), $(1) and $6 in 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively. See Note 10, Retirement and Postretirement Benefit Plans, for additional information.
Net of tax of $1, zero and zero in 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these combined financial statements.
F-13
California Resources Corporation
Combined Statements of Net Investment
For the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
Accumulated Other
Comprehensive
Income (Loss)
Net Parent
Company
Investment
Table of Contents
Balance, December 31, 2010
Net income
Other comprehensive loss, net of tax
Net contributions from parent company
Balance, December 31, 2011
Net income
Other comprehensive income, net of tax
Net contributions from parent company
Balance, December 31, 2012
Net income
Other comprehensive income, net of tax
Net distributions to parent company
Balance, December 31, 2013
Table of Contents
$
$
$
$
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these combined financial statements.
F-14
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Combined Statements of Cash Flows
For the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
Total
(in millions)
(42) $
— 
 
(10)  
—
6,599  $ 6,557 
 
971 
 
(10)
  1,106
971 
— 
1,106
(52) $
— 
 
 
5 
—
(47) $
 
— 
 
23 
—
8,676  $ 8,624 
699 
5 
532
699 
— 
532
869 
—
(763)
9,907  $ 9,860 
869 
23 
(763)
(24) $ 10,013  $ 9,989
2013
2012
2011
(in millions)
 
  
869  $
699  $
971
CASH FLOW FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Net income
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
Depreciation, depletion and amortization of assets
$
1,144 
 
260 
 
29 
 
— 
 
72 
  
 
(8)  
8 
 
 
2 
100
926 
 
603 
 
28 
 
41 
 
128 
 
  
20 
 
(23)  
(49)  
(150)
675 
586 
27 
— 
74 
  
(31)
(2)
(15)
171
2,476
2,223
2,456
Depreciation, depletion and amortization of assets
Deferred income tax provision
Other noncash charges to income
Asset impairments and related items
Dry hole expenses
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
(Increase) decrease in trade receivables, net
Decrease (increase) in inventories
Decrease (increase) in other current assets
Increase (decrease) in accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Net cash provided by operating activities
CASH FLOW FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES
Capital expenditures
Payments for purchases of assets and businesses
Other, net
Net cash used by investing activities
CASH FLOW FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES
(Distributions to) contributions from parent company
Net cash (used) provided by financing activities
Increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents—beginning of year
Cash and cash equivalents—end of year
$
(1,669)  
(48)
4
(2,331)  
(427)
3
(1,713)
(2,755)
(763)
(763)
— 
—
—  $
532
532
— 
—
—  $
(2,164)
(1,405)
4
(3,565)
1,106
1,106
(3)
3
—
Table of Contents
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these combined financial statements.
F-15
NOTE 1    THE SPIN-OFF AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The Separation and Spin-Off
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Financial Statements
On February 14, 2014, Occidental Petroleum Corporation ("Occidental") announced that its board of directors had authorized Occidental's management to pursue the
separation of its California oil and gas exploration and production operations and related assets, which CRC will assume in connection with the spin-off, into a stand-alone,
publicly traded company (California Resources Corporation and its subsidiaries). Unless otherwise stated or the context otherwise indicates, references to "CRC," "us", "our" or
"we" refer to California Resources Corporation, or as the context requires, the California business.
The separation will be completed through a spin-off that is being executed in accordance with a separation and distribution agreement and several other agreements
between us and Occidental. The spin-off is intended to be tax-free to the stockholders of Occidental and to Occidental and us for United States federal income tax purposes.
Occidental intends to distribute, on a pro-rata basis, at least 80.1% of the outstanding shares of our common stock to the Occidental stockholders as of the record date for the
spin-off. Upon completion of the spin-off, which does not require shareholder approval, we will be an independent, stand-alone company from Occidental. The spin-off is, among
other things, subject to final approval by Occidental's board of directors, receipt of a private letter ruling from the Internal Revenue Service regarding certain aspects of the spin-
off and an opinion of tax counsel, with respect to the tax-free nature of the spin-off for federal income tax purposes, the registration statement on Form 10 being declared
effective and the execution of the separation and distribution and related agreements.
We were incorporated in Delaware as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Occidental on April 23, 2014. We are an oil and gas exploration and production company operating
properties exclusively within the state of California, with integrated organization and infrastructure to gather, process and market our production.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying combined financial statements were prepared in connection with the spin-off and were derived from the consolidated financial statements and
accounting records of Occidental. These combined financial statements reflect the historical results of operations, financial position and cash flows of Occidental's California oil
and gas operations, which comprises exploration and production of oil and gas properties located exclusively in California. We account for our share of oil and gas exploration
and production ventures, in which we have a direct working interest, by reporting our proportionate share of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and cash flows within the relevant
lines on the balance sheets and statements of income and cash flows.
The combined statements of income also include expense allocations for certain corporate functions and centrally-located activities historically performed by Occidental.
These functions include executive oversight, accounting, treasury, tax, financial reporting, finance, internal audit, legal, risk management, information technology, government
relations, public relations, investor relations, human resources, procurement, engineering, drilling, exploration, marketing, ethics and compliance, and certain other shared
services. These allocations are based primarily on specific identification of time or activities associated with us, employee headcount or our relative size compared to
Occidental. Our management believes the assumptions underlying the combined financial statements, including the assumptions regarding allocating expenses from
Occidental, are reasonable. However, the combined financial statements may not include all of the actual expenses that would have been incurred, may include duplicative
costs and may not reflect our combined results of operations, financial position and cash flows had we operated as a stand-alone public company during the periods presented.
Actual costs that would
Table of Contents
F-16
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Financial Statements (Continued)
NOTE 1    THE SPIN-OFF AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)
have been incurred if we had been a stand-alone company would depend on multiple factors, including organizational structure and strategic and operating decisions.
The assets and liabilities in the combined financial statements are presented on a historical cost basis. We have eliminated all of our significant intercompany
transactions and accounts. We have historically participated in Occidental's centralized treasury management program. Excess cash generated by our business has been
distributed to Occidental, and likewise our cash needs have been provided by Occidental, in the form of an investment. We have not included debt or related interest expense
in the combined financial statements since there was no specifically identifiable debt associated with our operations.
Events and transactions subsequent to the balance sheet date have been evaluated through June 2, 2014, the date these combined financial statements were issued, for
potential recognition or disclosure in the combined financial statements.
Risks and Uncertainties
The process of preparing financial statements in conformity with United States generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) requires management to make informed
estimates and judgments regarding certain types of financial statement balances and disclosures. Such estimates primarily relate to unsettled transactions and events as of
the date of the combined financial statements and judgments on expected outcomes as well as the materiality of transactions and balances. Changes in facts and
circumstances or discovery of new information relating to such transactions and events may result in revised estimates and judgments and actual results may differ from
estimates upon settlement. Management believes that these estimates and judgments provide a reasonable basis for the fair presentation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue from oil and gas production when title has passed from us to the transportation company or the customer, as applicable. We recognize our share of
revenues net of any royalties and other third-party share.
Net Investment
In our combined balance sheets, net investment represents Occidental's historical investment in us, our accumulated net income and the net effect of transactions with,
and allocations from, Occidental.
Inventories
Materials and supplies are valued at weighted-average cost and are reviewed periodically for obsolescence. Finished goods include oil and gas products, which are valued
at the lower of cost or market.
Property, Plant and Equipment
The carrying value of our property, plant and equipment (PP&E) represents the cost incurred to acquire or develop the asset, including any asset retirement obligations,
net of accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization (DD&A) and any impairment charges. For assets acquired, PP&E cost is based
Table of Contents
F-17
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Financial Statements (Continued)
NOTE 1    THE SPIN-OFF AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)
on fair values at the acquisition date. Asset retirement obligations are capitalized and amortized over the lives of the related assets.
We use the successful efforts method to account for oil and gas properties. Under this method, we capitalize costs of acquiring properties, costs of drilling successful
exploration wells and development costs. The costs of exploratory wells are initially capitalized pending a determination of whether we find proved reserves. If we find proved
reserves, the costs of exploratory wells remain capitalized. Otherwise, we charge the costs of the related wells to expense. In some cases, we cannot determine whether we
have found proved reserves at the completion of the exploration drilling, and must conduct additional testing and evaluation of the wells. We generally expense the costs of
such exploratory wells if we do not determine we have found proved reserves within a 12-month period after drilling is complete.
The following table summarizes the activity of capitalized exploratory well costs for continuing operations for the years ended December 31:
Balance—Beginning of Year
Additions to capitalized exploratory well costs pending the determination of proved reserves
Reclassifications to property, plant and equipment based on the determination of proved reserves
Capitalized exploratory well costs charged to expense
Balance—End of Year
(in millions)
2013   2012   2011  
 
 
  $ 18  $ 63  $ 24 
85 
 
(34)
 
(12)
46 
(31)  
(15)
62 
 
(61)  
(46)
$ 18  $ 18  $ 63
We expense annual lease rentals, the costs of injection used in production and exploration, geological, geophysical and seismic costs as incurred. Cost of maintenance
and repairs are expensed as incurred, except that the costs of replacements that expand capacity or add proven oil and gas reserves are capitalized.
We determine depreciation and depletion of oil and gas producing properties by the unit-of-production method. We amortize acquisition costs over total proved reserves,
and capitalized development and successful exploration costs over proved developed reserves. Substantially all of our total depreciation, depletion and amortization expense
relates to production costs.
Proved oil and gas reserves and production are used as the basis for recording depreciation and depletion of oil and gas properties. Proved reserves are those quantities
of oil and gas which, by analysis of geoscience and engineering data, can be estimated with reasonable certainty to be economically producible—from a given date forward,
from known reservoirs, and under existing economic conditions, operating methods, and government regulations—regardless of whether deterministic or probabilistic methods
are used for the estimation. We have no proved oil and gas reserves for which the determination of economic producibility is subject to the completion of major additional
capital expenditures.
Our gas plant and power plant assets are depreciated over the estimated useful lives of the assets, using the straight-line method, with expected useful lives of the
assets ranging from 2 to 30 years. Other
Table of Contents
F-18
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Financial Statements (Continued)
NOTE 1    THE SPIN-OFF AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)
property and equipment is depreciated using the straight-line method based on expected lives of the individual assets or group of assets ranging from two to 20 years.
We perform impairment tests with respect to proved properties when product prices decline other than temporarily, reserve estimates change significantly, other
significant events occur or management's plans change with respect to these properties in a manner that may impact our ability to realize the recorded asset amounts.
Impairment tests incorporate a number of assumptions involving expectations of undiscounted future cash flows, which can change significantly over time. These assumptions
include estimates of future product prices, which we base on forward price curves and, when applicable, contractual prices, estimates of oil and gas reserves and estimates of
future expected operating and development costs. Any impairment loss would be calculated as the excess of the asset's net book value over its estimated fair value.
A portion of the carrying value of our oil and gas properties is attributable to unproved properties. At December 31, 2013, the net capitalized costs attributable to unproved
properties were approximately $900 million. The unproved amounts are not subject to DD&A until they are classified as proved properties. As exploration and development work
progresses, if reserves on these properties are proved, capitalized costs attributable to the properties become subject to DD&A. If the exploration and development work were
to be unsuccessful, or management decided not to pursue development of these properties as a result of lower commodity prices, higher development and operating costs,
contractual conditions or other factors, the capitalized costs of the related properties would be expensed. The timing of any writedowns of these unproved properties, if
warranted, depends upon management's plans, the nature, timing and extent of future exploration and development activities and their results. In 2012, management decided
not to pursue development of certain of our gas properties which were impacted by persistently low gas prices. As a result, we recorded an impairment charge in 2012, which is
reflected in asset impairments and related charges in the combined statement of income. We believe the current plans and exploration and development efforts will allow us to
realize the unproved property balance.
We perform impairment tests on our infrastructure assets whenever events or changes in circumstances lead to a reduction in the estimated useful lives or estimated
future cash flows that would indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable, or when management's plans change with respect to those assets. Any impairment loss
would be calculated as the excess of the asset's net book value over its estimated fair value.
Asset Retirement Obligations
We recognize the fair value of asset retirement obligations in the period in which a determination is made that a legal obligation exists to dismantle an asset and reclaim
or remediate the property at the end of its useful life and the cost of the obligation can be reasonably estimated. The liability amounts are based on future retirement cost
estimates and incorporate many assumptions such as time to abandonment, technological changes, future inflation rates and the risk-adjusted discount rate. When the liability
is initially recorded, we capitalize the cost by increasing the related PP&E balances. If the estimated future cost of the asset retirement obligation changes, we record an
adjustment to both the asset retirement obligation and PP&E. Over time, the liability is increased and expense is recognized for accretion, and the capitalized cost is
depreciated over the useful life of the asset.
Table of Contents
F-19
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Financial Statements (Continued)
NOTE 1    THE SPIN-OFF AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)
At certain of our facilities, we have identified asset retirement obligations that are related mainly to plant and field decommissioning, including plugging and abandonment
of wells. We do not know or cannot estimate when we may settle these obligations. Therefore, we cannot reasonably estimate the fair value of these liabilities. We will
recognize these asset retirement obligations in the periods in which sufficient information becomes available to reasonably estimate their fair values. Additionally, for certain
plants, we do not have a legal obligation to decommission them and accordingly we have not recorded a liability.
The following table summarizes the activity of the asset retirement obligation, of which $388 million and $367 million is included in other long-term liabilities, with the
remaining current portion in accrued liabilities at December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively.
Beginning balance
Liabilities incurred—capitalized to PP&E
Liabilities settled and paid
Accretion expense
Acquisitions, dispositions and other—changes in PP&E
Revisions to estimated cash flows—changes in PP&E
Ending balance
Derivative Instruments
For the years
ended
(in millions)
December 31,
2013
2012
$ 387  $ 327 
24 
 
25 
 
 
(12)
(9)  
21 
 
18 
 
(2)   — 
 
30 
(7)
$ 415  $ 387
Derivatives are carried at fair value and on a net basis when a legal right of offset exists with the same counterparty. We apply hedge accounting when transactions meet
specified criteria for cash-flow hedge treatment and management elects and documents such treatment. Otherwise, any fair value gains or losses are recognized in earnings in
the current period. For cash-flow hedges, the gain or loss on the effective portion of the derivative is reported as a component of other comprehensive income (OCI) with an
offsetting adjustment to the basis of the item being hedged. Realized gains or losses from cash-flow hedges, and any ineffective portion, are recorded as a component of net
sales in the combined statements of income. Ineffectiveness is primarily created by a lack of correlation between the hedged item and the hedging instrument due to location,
quality, grade or changes in the expected quantity of the hedged item. Gains and losses from derivative instruments are reported net in the combined statements of income.
A hedge is regarded as highly effective such that it qualifies for hedge accounting if, at inception and throughout its life, we expect that changes in the fair value or cash
flows of the hedged item will be offset by 80 to 125 percent of the changes in the fair value or cash flows, respectively, of the hedging instrument. In the case of hedging a
forecast transaction, the transaction must be probable and must present an exposure to variations in cash flows that could ultimately affect reported net income or loss. We
discontinue hedge accounting when we determine that a derivative has ceased to be highly effective as a hedge; when the hedged item matures or is sold or repaid; or when a
forecast transaction is no longer deemed probable.
F-20
Table of Contents
NOTE 1    THE SPIN-OFF AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)
Retirement and Postretirement Benefit Plans
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Financial Statements (Continued)
A majority of our employees participated in postretirement benefit plans sponsored by Occidental, which included participants from other Occidental subsidiaries. These
plans do not have any assets and are funded as benefits are paid. We recognized a liability in the accompanying balance sheets for the employees of the California operations.
The related postretirement expenses were allocated to us from Occidental based on headcount.
For defined benefit pension and postretirement plans that are sponsored by us, we recognize the net overfunded or underfunded amounts in the financial statements using
a December 31 measurement date.
We determine our defined benefit pension and postretirement benefit plan obligations based on various assumptions and discount rates. The discount rate assumptions
used are meant to reflect the interest rate at which the obligations could effectively be settled on the measurement date. We estimate the rate of return on assets with regard to
current market factors but within the context of historical returns.
Pension plan assets are measured at fair value. Common stock, preferred stock, publicly registered mutual funds, U.S. government securities and corporate bonds are
valued using quoted market prices in active markets when available. When quoted market prices are not available, these investments are valued using pricing models with
observable inputs from both active and non-active markets. Common and collective trusts are valued at the fund units' net asset value (NAV) provided by the issuer, which
represents the quoted price in a non-active market. Short-term investment funds are valued at the fund units' NAV provided by the issuer.
Actuarial gains and losses that have not yet been recognized through income are recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income within net investment, net of
taxes, until they are amortized as a component of net periodic benefit cost.
Fair Value Measurements
We have categorized our assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value in a three-level fair value hierarchy, based on the inputs to the valuation techniques: Level 1
—using quoted prices in active markets for the assets or liabilities; Level 2—using observable inputs other than quoted prices for the assets or liabilities; and Level 3—using
unobservable inputs. Transfers between levels, if any, are recognized at the end of each reporting period. We primarily apply the market approach for recurring fair value
measurements, maximize our use of observable inputs and minimize use of unobservable inputs. We generally use an income approach to measure fair value when observable
inputs are unavailable. This approach utilizes management's judgments regarding expectations of projected cash flows and discounts those cash flows using a risk-adjusted
discount rate.
Cash flow hedges are carried at fair value. We utilize the mid-point between bid and ask prices for valuing these instruments. In addition to using market data in
determining these fair values, we make assumptions about the risks inherent in the inputs to the valuation technique. These instruments are Over-the-Counter (OTC) bilateral
financial commodity contracts, which are generally valued using quotations provided by brokers. Substantially all of these inputs are observable data or are supported by
observable prices at which transactions are executed in the marketplace. We classify these measurements as Level 2.
Table of Contents
F-21
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Financial Statements (Continued)
NOTE 1    THE SPIN-OFF AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)
The carrying amounts of on-balance-sheet financial instruments approximate fair value.
Other current assets
Other current assets include amounts due from joint venture partners of approximately $97 million and $71 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively.
Accrued liabilities
Accrued liabilities include accrued compensation-related costs of approximately $70 million and $50 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively.
Supplemental Cash Flow Information
We have not made United States federal and state income tax payments directly to taxing jurisdictions; rather, our share of our parent's tax payments or refunds were
paid or received, as applicable, by our parent and are reflected as part of the net parent company investment. Such amounts paid during the year ended December 31, 2013
and 2011 were approximately $318 million and $84 million, respectively, while the year ended December 31, 2012 resulted in a net refund of approximately $121 million. We
also paid taxes other than on income, consisting mostly of property taxes, of approximately $185 million, $171 million and $143 million during the years ended December 31,
2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
Income taxes
Our taxable income was historically included in the consolidated U.S. federal income tax returns of Occidental Petroleum Corporation and in a number of their
consolidated state income tax returns. In the accompanying combined financial statements, our provision for income taxes is computed as if we were a stand-alone tax-paying
entity.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts
of assets and liabilities and their tax bases. Deferred tax assets are recorded when it is more likely than not that they will be realized. The realization of deferred tax assets is
assessed periodically based on several factors, primarily our expectation to generate sufficient future taxable income.
NOTE 2    ACQUISITIONS
2013
During the year ended December 31, 2013, we paid approximately $50 million to acquire certain oil and gas properties in California. One of our acquisitions in the San
Joaquin basin also included an obligation to spend at least $250 million on exploration and development activities over a period of five years from the date of acquisition. We
currently plan to spend more than this amount in the next five years.
2012
During the year ended December 31, 2012, we paid approximately $380 million for oil and gas properties, almost all of which was allocated to PP&E, including an
acquisition for $275 million for certain
F-22
Table of Contents
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Financial Statements (Continued)
NOTE 2    ACQUISITIONS (Continued)
producing and non-producing assets in the Sacramento basin and undeveloped acreage in the San Joaquin basin.
2011
During the year ended December 31, 2011, we acquired approximately $1.4 billion of various oil and gas assets, almost all of which was allocated to PP&E. We paid
$720 million for producing and non-producing assets within the San Joaquin basin. We also acquired producing and non-producing assets in the Los Angeles Basin for
$330 million and certain assets in the Sacramento basin for $190 million.
NOTE 3    ACCOUNTING AND DISCLOSURE CHANGES
Recently Adopted Accounting and Disclosure Changes
In July 2013, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued rules requiring net, rather than gross, presentation of a deferred tax asset for a net operating loss
or other tax credit and any related liability for unrecognized tax benefits. These rules became effective on January 1, 2014, and did not have a material impact on our financial
statements.
In April 2014, the FASB issued rules changing the requirements for reporting discontinued operations so that only the disposals of components of an entity that represent
a strategic shift that has (or will have) a major effect on an entity's operations and financial results will be reported as discontinued operations in the financial statements. These
rules are effective for annual periods beginning on or after December 15, 2014. They are not expected to have a material impact on our financial statements upon adoption. We
will assess them on an ongoing basis.
NOTE 4    INVENTORIES
Inventories consisted of the following:
Materials and supplies
Finished goods
Total
Table of Contents
Balance at
(in millions)
December 31,
2013   2012  
 
 
  $ 73  $ 77 
 
4
2
$ 75  $ 81
F-23
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Financial Statements (Continued)
NOTE 5    LEASE COMMITMENTS
We have entered into various operating lease agreements, mainly for office equipment, field equipment and office space. We lease assets when leasing offers greater
operating flexibility. Lease payments are generally expensed as part of production costs or selling, general and administrative expenses. At December 31, 2013, future net
minimum lease payments for noncancelable operating leases (excluding oil and gas and other mineral leases, utilities, taxes, insurance and maintenance expense) totaled:
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Thereafter
Total minimum lease payments
$
Amount
(in millions)
9 
6 
5 
5 
4 
4
$
33
Rental expense for operating leases was $11 million in 2013, $12 million in 2012 and $8 million in 2011.
NOTE 6    DERIVATIVES
Objective & Strategy
We only occasionally hedge our oil and gas production, and, when we do so, the volumes are usually insignificant. Refer to Note 1 for our accounting policy on
derivatives.
Cash-Flow Hedges
We entered into financial swap agreements in November 2012 for the sale of a portion of our natural gas production. These swap agreements hedged 50 MMcf of natural
gas per day beginning in January 2013 through March 2014 and qualified as cash-flow hedges. The weighted-average strike price of these swaps was $4.30. The gross and net
fair values of these derivatives as of December 31, 2013 and 2012 were not material, as determined using Level 2 inputs in the fair value hierarchy
The after-tax gains and losses recognized in, and reclassified to income from, Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (AOCI), for derivative instruments classified as
cash-flow hedges for the year ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, and the ending AOCI balances for each period were not material. We expect to reclassify an insignificant
amount, based on the valuation as of December 31, 2013, of net after-tax derivative losses from AOCI into income during the next 12 months. We recognized gains and losses
reclassified to income in net sales. The amount of the ineffective portion of cash-flow hedges was immaterial for the year ended December 31, 2013 and 2012.
There were no fair value hedges as of and during the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011.
F-24
Table of Contents
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Financial Statements (Continued)
NOTE 7    LAWSUITS, CLAIMS, COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
We or certain of our subsidiaries are involved, in the normal course of business, in lawsuits, environmental and other claims and other contingencies that seek, among
other things, compensation for alleged personal injury, breach of contract, property damage or other losses, punitive damages, civil penalties, or injunctive or declaratory relief.
We accrue reserves for currently outstanding lawsuits, claims and proceedings when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the liability can be reasonably
estimated. Reserve balances at December 31, 2013 and 2012, were not material to our balance sheets. We also evaluate the amount of reasonably possible losses that we
could incur as a result of these matters. We believe that reasonably possible losses that we could incur in excess of reserves accrued on the balance sheet would not be
material to our financial position or results of operations.
We have certain commitments under contracts, including purchase commitments for goods and services. At December 31, 2013, total purchase obligations were
approximately $650 million, which included approximately $250 million, $80 million, $40 million, $30 million and $230 million that will be paid in 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017 and
2018, respectively. Included in the purchase obligations are commitments for major fixed and determinable capital expenditures during 2014 and thereafter, which were
approximately $270 million.
We will indemnify Occidental under the Tax Sharing Agreement for taxes incurred as a result of the failure of the spin-off or certain transactions undertaken in preparation
for, or in connection with, the spin-off, to qualify as tax-free transactions under the relevant provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, to the extent caused
by our breach of any representations or covenants made in the Tax Sharing Agreement, or made in connection with the private letter ruling or the tax opinion or by any other
action taken by us. We also have agreed to pay 50% of any taxes arising from the spin-off or related transactions to the extent that the tax is not attributable to the fault of
either party. In addition, under the Separation and Distribution Agreement, we will also indemnify Occidental and its remaining subsidiaries against claims and liabilities relating
to the past operation of our business.
NOTE 8    INCOME TAXES
Income before income taxes was as follows:
For the years ended December 31,
2013
2012
2011
Table of Contents
F-25
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Financial Statements (Continued)
$
(in millions)
1,447
$
$
1,181
1,641
NOTE 8    INCOME TAXES (Continued)
The provisions (credits) for federal, state and local income taxes consisted of the following:
United States
State
For the years ended December 31,
 
2013
Current
Deferred
2012
Current
Deferred
$
$
$
$
Federal
and Local
Total
(in millions)
227  $
222
91  $ 318 
260 
38
449  $
129  $ 578
(140) $
518
19  $ (121)
603 
85
378  $
104  $ 482
2011
Current
Deferred
$
$
22  $
504
526  $
62  $
82
84 
586
144  $ 670
The following reconciliation of the United States federal statutory income tax rate to our effective tax rate is stated as a percentage of pre-tax income:
United States federal statutory tax rate
State income taxes, net of federal benefit
Other
Effective tax rate
The tax effects of temporary differences resulting in deferred income taxes at December 31, 2013 and 2012 were as follows:
For the years ended
December 31,
2013   2012   2011  
35%
 
35% 
35% 
 
6 
 
6 
6 
 
  — 
(1)   —
40%
41%
41%
Tax effects of temporary differences
 
Property, plant and equipment differences
Postretirement benefit accruals
Deferred compensation and benefits
Asset retirement obligations
Federal benefit of state income taxes
All other
Total deferred taxes
2013
Deferred Tax
Deferred Tax
Assets
Liabilities
2012
Deferred Tax
Deferred Tax
Assets
Liabilities
$
$
—  $
 
14 
 
60 
 
182 
 
208 
22
(in millions)
(3,583) $
 
— 
 
— 
 
— 
— 
 
(2)
—  $
 
28 
 
46 
 
170 
 
170 
31
486  $
(3,585) $
445  $
(3,270)
— 
— 
— 
— 
(2)
(3,272)
The current portion of total deferred tax assets was $23 million and $15 million as of December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively, which was reported in other current
assets. The noncurrent portion of total deferred tax assets was reported net against deferred tax liabilities. We expect to realize the recorded deferred tax assets through future
operating income and reversal of temporary differences.
Table of Contents
F-26
NOTE 9    ACCUMULATED OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (LOSS)
Accumulated other comprehensive loss consisted of the following after-tax amounts:
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Financial Statements (Continued)
Unrealized losses (gains) on derivatives
Pension and post-retirement adjustments(a)
Total
(a)
Balance at
December 31,
2013   2012
(in millions)
(1)  
(23)
3 
(50)
$ (24) $ (47)
See Note 10 for further information.
NOTE 10    RETIREMENT AND POSTRETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS
As discussed in Note 1, a majority of our employees participated in postretirement benefit plans sponsored by Occidental, which included participants of other Occidental
subsidiaries and certain employees were part of pension and postretirement plans sponsored by us.
Defined Contribution Plans
All of our employees were eligible to participate in one or more of the defined contribution retirement or savings plans that provide for periodic contributions by us, our
subsidiaries or Occidental, based on plan-specific criteria, such as base pay, age, level and employee contributions. Certain salaried employees participated in a supplemental
retirement plan that restored benefits lost due to governmental limitations on qualified retirement benefits. The accrued liabilities for the supplemental retirement plan were
$17 million and $11 million as of December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively, and we expensed $34 million in 2013, $35 million in 2012 and $31 million in 2011 under the
provisions of these defined contribution and supplemental retirement plans.
Defined Benefit Plans
Participation in defined benefit pension and postretirement plans sponsored by us is limited. Approximately 270 employees, mainly union, nonunion hourly and certain
employees that joined us from acquired operations with grandfathered benefits, are currently accruing benefits under these plans.
Pension costs for the defined benefit pension plans, determined by independent actuarial valuations, are generally funded by payments to trust funds, which are
administered by independent trustees.
Postretirement and Other Benefit Plans
We provided postretirement medical and dental benefits and life insurance coverage for our employees not covered by our sponsored plans and their eligible dependents
through Occidental sponsored plans. The benefits were generally funded as they were paid during the year. These benefit costs were approximately $18 million in 2013,
$17 million in 2012 and $12 million in 2011.
Table of Contents
F-27
NOTE 10    RETIREMENT AND POSTRETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS (Continued)
Obligations and Funded Status
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Financial Statements (Continued)
The following tables show the amounts recognized in our combined balance sheets related to pension and postretirement benefit plans, including our share of obligations
for Occidental-sponsored plans as well as plans that we or our subsidiaries sponsor, and their funding status, obligations and plan asset fair values (in millions):
Amounts recognized in the consolidated balance sheet:
Accrued liabilities
Other long-term liabilities
AOCI included the following after-tax balances:
Net loss
Changes in the benefit obligation:
Benefit obligation—beginning of year
Service cost—benefits earned during the period
Interest cost on projected benefit obligation
Actuarial (gain) loss
Benefits paid
Benefit obligation—end of year
Changes in plan assets:
Fair value of plan assets—beginning of year
Actual return on plan assets
Employer contributions
Benefits paid
Fair value of plan assets—end of year
(Unfunded) status:
Postretirement
Pension
Benefits
Benefits
As of December 31,
2013   2012   2013   2012  
  
 
(1)
(73)
$ —  $ —  $
 
(34)
(1) $
(62)
(12)
$ (12) $ (34) $ (63) $ (74)
$ 19  $ 31  $
4  $ 19
Pension
Benefits
Postretirement
Benefits
For the years ended
2013
December 31,
2012
2013   2012  
 
  
 
  $ 108  $ 108  $ 74  $ 67 
4 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
  — 
  —
4 
3 
(18)
(15)   —
5 
3 
 
(2)  
(11)
4 
4 
7
$ 103  $ 108  $ 63  $ 74
$
$
74  $
 
13 
15 
 
(11)
91  $
70  $ —  $ — 
  — 
  — 
7 
  — 
12 
  — 
  — 
(15)   —
74  $ —  $ —
$ (12) $ (34) $ (63) $ (74)
Table of Contents
F-28
NOTE 10    RETIREMENT AND POSTRETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS (Continued)
The following table sets forth the accumulated and projected benefit obligations and fair values of assets of the defined benefit pension plans:
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Financial Statements (Continued)
Accumulated
Benefit
Plan Assets
in Excess of
Accumulated
Benefit
Projected Benefit Obligation
Accumulated Benefit Obligation
Fair Value of Plan Assets
We do not expect any plan assets to be returned during 2014.
COMPONENTS OF NET PERIODIC BENEFIT COST
The following table sets forth the components of net periodic benefit costs:
Net periodic benefit costs:
Service cost—benefits earned during the period
Interest cost on projected benefit obligation
Expected return on plan assets
Recognized actuarial loss
Settlement cost
Net periodic benefit cost
Obligation
in Excess of
Plan Assets
2012
Obligation
As of December 31,
2013   2012
2013  
 
  $ 30  $ 108  $ 73  $ — 
85  $ 58  $ — 
  $ 25  $
  $ 23  $
74  $ 68  $ —
(in millions)
Postretirement
Pension
Benefits
Benefits
For the years ended December 31,
2013   2012   2011   2013   2012   2011
(in millions)
$
5  $
3 
 
(4)  
4 
 
2
4  $
3 
4  $
5  $
4  $
4 
 
 
 
5 
3 
3 
3 
 
  — 
  — 
(5)   — 
(4)  
 
4 
 
3 
2 
 
2 
 
2 
  — 
  — 
  — 
  — 
6
$ 10  $ 14  $
7  $ 10  $
9  $
8
The estimated net loss and prior service cost for the defined benefit pension plans that will be amortized from AOCI into net periodic benefit cost over the next fiscal year
are $2 million and zero, respectively. The estimated net loss and prior service cost for the defined benefit postretirement plans that will be amortized from AOCI into net
periodic benefit cost over the next fiscal year are $1 million and zero, respectively.
Table of Contents
F-29
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Financial Statements (Continued)
NOTE 10    RETIREMENT AND POSTRETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS (Continued)
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The following table sets forth the weighted-average assumptions used to determine our benefit obligations and net periodic benefit cost:
Benefit Obligation Assumptions:
Discount rate
Rate of compensation increase
Net Periodic Benefit Cost Assumptions:
Discount rate
Assumed long term rate of return on assets
Rate of compensation increase
Pension
Benefits
Postretirement
Benefits
For the years ended
December 31,
2012  
  2013   2012   2013
 
  
  4.45%   3.59%  4.75%   3.89%
  4.00%   4.00%  — 
  — 
 
  
 
  
  3.59%   4.12%  3.89%   4.12%
  — 
  6.50%   6.50%  — 
  4.00%   4.00%  — 
  —
For pension plans and postretirement benefit plans that we or our subsidiaries sponsor, we based the discount rate on the Aon/Hewitt AA-AAA Universe yield curve in
2013 and 2012. The weighted-average rate of increase in future compensation levels is consistent with our past and anticipated future compensation increases for employees
participating in retirement plans that determine benefits using compensation. The assumed long-term rate of return on assets is estimated with regard to current market factors
but within the context of historical returns for the asset mix that exists at year end.
The postretirement benefit obligation was determined by application of the terms of medical and dental benefits and life insurance coverage, including the effect of
established maximums on covered costs, together with relevant actuarial assumptions and healthcare cost trend rates projected at an assumed U.S. Consumer Price Index
(CPI) increase of 2.36 percent and 2.39 percent as of December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. A 1-percent increase or a 1-percent decrease in these assumed healthcare
cost trend rates would result in an increase of $6 million or a reduction of $5 million, respectively, in the postretirement benefit obligation as of December 31, 2013. The annual
service and interest costs would not be materially affected by these changes.
The actuarial assumptions used could change in the near term as a result of changes in expected future trends and other factors that, depending on the nature of the
changes, could cause increases or decreases in the plan assets and liabilities.
Fair Value of Pension Plan Assets
We employ a total return investment approach that uses a diversified blend of equity and fixed-income investments to optimize the long-term return of plan assets at a
prudent level of risk. The investments were monitored by Occidental's Investment Committee in its role as fiduciary. The Investment Committee, consisting of senior
Occidental executives, selected and employed various external professional investment management firms to manage specific investments across the spectrum of asset
classes. Equity investments were diversified across United States and non-United States stocks, as well as differing styles and market capitalizations. Other asset classes,
such as private equity and real estate, may have been used by the investment management firms with the goals of enhancing long-term returns and improving portfolio
F-30
Table of Contents
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Financial Statements (Continued)
NOTE 10    RETIREMENT AND POSTRETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS (Continued)
diversification. The target allocation of plan assets was 65 percent equity securities and 35 percent debt securities. Investment performance was measured and monitored on
an ongoing basis through quarterly investment portfolio and manager guideline compliance reviews, annual liability measurements and periodic studies.
The fair values of our pension plan assets by asset category are as follows (in millions):
Asset Class:
Master trust investment account(a)
Mutual funds:
Bond funds
Blend funds
Value
Growth funds
Guaranteed deposit account
Total pension plan assets(b)
Asset Class:
Master trust investment account(a)
Mutual funds:
Bond funds
Blend funds
Value
Growth funds
Guaranteed deposit account
Total pension plan assets(b)
(a)
(b)
Represents our investment in a master trust investment account established by Occidental. The trust investments include common stock, preferred stock, publicly
registered mutual funds, U.S. government securities and corporate bonds.
Amounts exclude net payables of approximately $1 million as of December 31, 2013 and 2012.
The activity during the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, for the assets using Level 3 fair value measurements was insignificant.
We do not expect to contribute to our defined benefit pension plans during 2014.
F-31
Table of Contents
NOTE 10    RETIREMENT AND POSTRETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS (Continued)
Estimated future benefit payments, which reflect expected future service, as appropriate, are as follows:
CALIFORNIA RESOURCES CORPORATION
Notes to Combined Financial Statements (Continued)
For the years ended December 31,
 
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019 - 2023
Pension
Benefits
Postretirement
Benefits
(in millions)
9  $
7  $
11  $
9  $
9  $
— 
— 
— 
1 
1
$
  $
  $
  $
  $
Fair Value Measurements at
December 31, 2013 Using
Level 1   Level 2   Level 3   Total
$ —  $
5 
3 
3 
3 
—
69  $ —  $ 69 
  
5 
3 
3 
3 
9
— 
— 
— 
— 
—
— 
— 
— 
— 
9
$
14  $
69  $
9  $ 92
Fair Value Measurements at
December 31, 2012 Using
Level 1   Level 2   Level 3   Total
$ —  $
6 
3 
3 
2 
—
53  $ —  $ 53 
  
6 
3 
3 
2 
8
— 
— 
— 
— 
—
— 
— 
— 
— 
8
$
14  $
53  $
8  $ 75
2019 - 2023
NOTE 11    RELATED-PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Related Party Transactions
During 2013, 2012 and 2011, we entered into the following related-party transactions:
Sales
Allocated costs for services provided by affiliates
Purchases
$
52  $
6
2011
2013
2012
(in millions)
$ 4,174  $ 3,970  $ 3,862 
148 
  $
  $
133
129  $
119  $
146  $
164  $
Substantially all of our products are historically sold to Occidental's marketing subsidiaries at market prices and have been settled at the time of sale to those entities. For
the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011, sales to Occidental subsidiaries accounted for approximately 97%, 97% and 98% of our net sales, respectively.
As discussed in Note 1, the combined statements of income include expense allocations for certain corporate functions and centrally-located activities historically
performed by Occidental. These functions include executive oversight, accounting, treasury, tax, financial reporting, internal audit, legal, risk management, information
technology, government relations, public relations, investor relations, human resources, procurement, engineering, drilling, exploration, finance, marketing, ethics and
compliance, and certain other shared services. Charges from Occidental for these services are reflected in selling, general and administrative expenses.
Purchases from related parties reflect products purchased at market prices from Occidental's subsidiaries and are used in our operations. These purchases are included
in production costs. There are no significant related party receivable or payable balances at December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011.
Table of Contents
F-32
The following tables set forth our net interests in quantities of proved developed and undeveloped reserves of oil (including condensate), natural gas liquids and natural
gas and changes in such quantities. Reserves are stated net of applicable royalties. Estimated reserves include our economic interests under arrangements similar to
production-sharing contracts (PSCs) relating to the Wilmington field in Long Beach. All of our proved reserves are located within the state of California.
SUPPLEMENTAL OIL AND GAS INFORMATION (UNAUDITED)
Oil Reserves
PROVED DEVELOPED AND UNDEVELOPED RESERVES
Balance at December 31, 2010
Revisions of previous estimates
Improved recovery
Extensions and discoveries
Purchases of proved reserves
Sales of proved reserves
Production
Balance at December 31, 2011
Revisions of previous estimates
Improved recovery
Extensions and discoveries
Purchases of proved reserves
Sales of proved reserves
Production
Balance at December 31, 2012
Revisions of previous estimates
Improved recovery
Extensions and discoveries
Purchases of proved reserves
Sales of proved reserves
Production
Balance at December 31, 2013
PROVED DEVELOPED RESERVES
December 31, 2010
December 31, 2011
December 31, 2012
San Joaquin
Los Angeles
Sacramento
Basin
Basin(a)
(In millions of barrels (MMBbl))
Basin
Ventura
Basin
340 
 
(58)  
 
51 
 
7 
16 
 
— 
 
(20)
336 
(44)  
 
36 
 
3 
 
1 
— 
 
(21)
311
(8)  
49 
 
 
— 
 
— 
— 
 
(21)
331
266
239
220
110 
 
— 
 
12 
 
— 
 
16 
— 
 
(7)
131 
 
1 
 
16 
 
— 
 
— 
— 
 
(9)
139 
 
3 
 
24 
 
— 
 
— 
— 
 
(10)
156
83
97
104
39 
 
— 
 
3 
 
1 
 
— 
— 
 
(2)
41 
(3)  
 
11 
 
— 
 
— 
— 
 
(2)
47 
 
(3)  
3 
 
 
— 
 
— 
— 
 
(2)
45
27
30
30
Total
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
—
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
—
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
—
489 
(58)
 
66 
 
 
8 
 
32 
  — 
(29)
508 
(46)
 
63 
 
3 
 
 
1 
  — 
 
(32)
497 
 
(8)
 
76 
  — 
  — 
  — 
(33)
—
532
—
376
—
366
—
354
December 31, 2013(b)
PROVED UNDEVELOPED RESERVES
December 31, 2010
December 31, 2011
December 31, 2012
December 31, 2013
(a)
(b)
225
74
97
91
106
109
27
34
35
47
29
12
11
17
16
—
363
—
113
—
142
—
143
—
169
Includes proved reserves related to economic arrangements similar to PSCs of 102 MMBbl, 98 MMBbl, 92 MMBbl and 89 MMBbl at December 31, 2013, 2012, 2011 and
2010, respectively.
Approximately 11 percent of the proved developed reserves at December 31, 2013 are nonproducing.
F-33
Table of Contents
NGLs Reserves
PROVED DEVELOPED AND UNDEVELOPED RESERVES
Balance at December 31, 2010
Revisions of previous estimates
Improved recovery
Extensions and discoveries
Purchases of proved reserves
Sales of proved reserves
Production
Balance at December 31, 2011
Revisions of previous estimates
Improved recovery
Extensions and discoveries
Purchases of proved reserves
Sales of proved reserves
Production
Balance at December 31, 2012
Revisions of previous estimates
Improved recovery
Extensions and discoveries
Purchases of proved reserves
Sales of proved reserves
Production
Balance at December 31, 2013
PROVED DEVELOPED RESERVES
December 31, 2010
San Joaquin
Los Angeles
Sacramento
Basin
Total
Basin
Basin
72 
 
(5)  
 
3 
1 
 
 
— 
— 
 
(5)
66 
 
(14)  
 
12 
 
— 
— 
 
— 
 
(6)
58 
 
13 
 
4 
 
— 
 
— 
— 
 
(7)
68
40
Ventura
Basin
(In MMBbl)
  
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
—
4 
 
(1)  
 
— 
— 
 
 
— 
 
— 
—
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
—
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
—
—
—
3 
— 
1 
— 
— 
— 
—
4 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
—
4
4
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
—
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
—
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
—
—
—
76 
 
(6)
 
3 
 
1 
 
  — 
  — 
(5)
69 
 
(14)
 
 
13 
  — 
  — 
  — 
(6)
62 
 
13 
 
 
4 
  — 
  — 
  — 
 
(7)
72
44
December 31, 2011
December 31, 2012
December 31, 2013(a)
PROVED UNDEVELOPED RESERVES
December 31, 2010
December 31, 2011
December 31, 2012
December 31, 2013
(a)
Approximately 2 percent of the proved developed reserves at December 31, 2013 are nonproducing.
F-34
Table of Contents
Gas Reserves
PROVED DEVELOPED AND UNDEVELOPED RESERVES
Balance at December 31, 2010
Revisions of previous estimates
Improved recovery
Extensions and discoveries
Purchases of proved reserves
Sales of proved reserves
Production
Balance at December 31, 2011
Revisions of previous estimates
Improved recovery
Extensions and discoveries
Purchases of proved reserves
Sales of proved reserves
Production
Balance at December 31, 2012
Revisions of previous estimates
Improved recovery
Extensions and discoveries
Purchases of proved reserves
Sales of proved reserves
Production
Balance at December 31, 2013
42
42
47
32
24
16
21
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
3
2
2
—
—
2
2
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
45
44
49
32
24
18
23
San Joaquin
Los Angeles
Sacramento
Ventura
Basin
Basin
(In billions of cubic feet (Bcf))
Basin
Total
Basin
1,170 
(357)  
 
39 
 
35 
 
1 
— 
 
(80)
808 
 
(150)  
100 
 
 
6 
 
2 
— 
 
(74)
692
(4)  
 
47 
 
— 
— 
 
— 
 
(66)
669
12 
 
5 
 
— 
 
— 
 
9 
— 
 
(1)
25 
 
(6)  
1 
 
 
— 
 
— 
— 
 
(1)
19 
 
(4)  
 
3 
 
— 
— 
 
— 
 
(1)
17
39 
(1)  
 
1 
 
— 
 
1 
— 
 
(4)
36 
 
(3)  
9 
 
 
— 
 
— 
— 
 
(4)
38 
 
(1)  
 
2 
 
— 
— 
 
— 
 
(4)
35
3 
4 
6 
— 
38
(10)
1,224 
(349)
 
46 
 
35 
 
 
49 
  — 
(95)
910 
41 
 
(168)
(9)  
111 
1 
 
12 
 
6 
 
154 
156 
  — 
  
(93)
(14)
928 
179 
 
(47)
(38)  
 
— 
52 
  — 
— 
— 
  — 
  — 
— 
(95)
(24)
117
838
PROVED DEVELOPED RESERVES
December 31, 2010
December 31, 2011
December 31, 2012
December 31, 2013(a)
PROVED UNDEVELOPED RESERVES
December 31, 2010
December 31, 2011
December 31, 2012
December 31, 2013
(a)
Approximately 8 percent of the proved developed reserves at December 31, 2013 are nonproducing.
F-35
Table of Contents
Total Reserves
PROVED DEVELOPED AND UNDEVELOPED RESERVES
Balance at December 31, 2010
Revisions of previous estimates
Improved recovery
Extensions and discoveries
Purchases of proved reserves
Sales of proved reserves
Production
Balance at December 31, 2011
Revisions of previous estimates
Improved recovery
Extensions and discoveries
Purchases of proved reserves
Sales of proved reserves
Production
Balance at December 31, 2012
Revisions of previous estimates
Improved recovery
Extensions and discoveries
Purchases of proved reserves
584
548
473
459
586
260
219
210
San Joaquin
Basin
9
19
14
11
3
6
5
6
31
31
28
25
8
5
10
10
3
41
147
116
—
—
32
1
627
639
662
611
597
271
266
227
Los Angeles
Basin(b)
Ventura
Basin
(In MMBoe(a))
Sacramento
Basin
Total
606 
 
(122)  
 
61 
 
15 
 
16 
— 
 
(39)
537 
 
(83)  
 
65 
 
5 
 
1 
— 
 
(39)
486 
4 
61
—
112 
 
1 
 
12 
 
— 
 
17 
— 
 
(7)
135 
 
— 
 
16 
 
— 
 
— 
 
— 
(9)
142 
2 
25
—
52 
 
(2)  
 
3 
 
1 
— 
 
— 
 
(2)
52 
 
(4)  
 
13 
 
1 
 
— 
— 
 
(4)
58 
 
(3)  
3
—
— 
— 
1 
— 
6 
— 
(2)
770 
  (123)
77 
 
 
16 
 
39 
  — 
(50)
729 
5 
(88)
(1)  
94 
 
— 
7 
 
1 
 
25 
26 
  — 
— 
(54)
(2)
28 
(6)  
—
714 
(3)
89
—
—
Purchases of proved reserves
Sales of proved reserves
Production
Balance at December 31, 2013
PROVED DEVELOPED RESERVES
December 31, 2010
December 31, 2011
December 31, 2012
December 31, 2013(c)
PROVED UNDEVELOPED RESERVES
December 31, 2010
December 31, 2011
December 31, 2012
December 31, 2013
(a)
(b)
(c)
— 
— 
 
(40)
— 
— 
 
(10)
— 
— 
 
(3)
511
402
372
341
349
204
165
145
162
159
84
100
106
111
28
35
36
48
55
39
40
38
35
13
12
20
20
— 
— 
(3)
— 
  — 
(56)
19
744
—
525
5
517
23
508
19
514
—
245
—
212
5
206
—
230
Natural gas volumes have been converted to Boe based on energy content of six Mcf of gas to one Bbl of oil. Barrels of oil equivalence does not necessarily result in
price equivalence. The price of natural gas on a barrel of oil equivalent basis is currently substantially lower than the corresponding price for oil and has been similarly
lower for a number of years. For example, in 2013, the average prices of West Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil and NYMEX natural gas were $97.97 per Bbl and $3.66 per
Mcf, respectively, resulting in an oil to gas ratio of over 25 to 1.
Includes proved reserves related to economic arrangements similar to PSCs of 102 MMBbl, 98 MMBbl, 92 MMBbl and 89 MMBbl at December 31, 2013, 2012, 2011 and
2010, respectively.
Approximately 9 percent of the proved developed reserves at December 31, 2013 are nonproducing.
F-36
Table of Contents
Capitalized Costs
Capitalized costs relating to oil and gas producing activities and related accumulated DD&A were as follows:
December 31, 2013
Proved properties
Unproved properties
San Joaquin
Los Angeles
Basin
Basin
$
15,592  $
584
Ventura
Basin
(In millions)
2,487  $ 1,479  $
105
91
Sacramento
Basin
Total
542  $ 20,100 
872 
92
Total capitalized costs(a)
Accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization
Net capitalized costs
December 31, 2012
Proved properties
Unproved properties
Total capitalized costs(a)
Accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization
Net capitalized costs
December 31, 2011
Proved properties
Unproved properties
Total capitalized costs(a)
Accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization
Net capitalized costs
(a)
$
$
$
$
$
16,176 
 
(5,923)
2,592 
(571)
1,570
(342)
634 
(128)
20,972 
(6,964)
10,253  $
2,021  $ 1,228  $
506  $ 14,008
10,417  $
1,647  $ 1,147  $
288  $ 13,499
14,817  $
639
15,456 
 
(5,039)
12,611  $
641
13,252 
 
(4,214)
1,974  $ 1,327  $
97
92
2,071 
(424)
1,419
(272)
1,904  $ 1,227  $
52
12
1,956 
(405)
1,239
(279)
286  $ 18,404 
920 
92
378 
(90)
19,324 
(5,825)
199  $ 15,941 
69 
774
268 
(39)
16,715 
(4,937)
9,038  $
1,551  $
960  $
229  $ 11,778
Includes acquisition costs, development costs and asset retirement obligations.
F-37
Table of Contents
Costs Incurred
Costs incurred includes capital expenditures, exploration (whether expensed or capitalized), acquisitions, and asset retirement obligations, as follows:
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2013
Property acquisition costs
Proved properties
Unproved properties
Exploration costs
Development costs
Costs incurred
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
Property acquisition costs
Proved properties
Unproved properties
Exploration costs
Development costs
Costs incurred
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2011
Property acquisition costs
Proved properties
Unproved properties
San Joaquin
Basin
Los Angeles
Basin
Sacramento
Basin
Total
Ventura
Basin
(In millions)
 
  
 
  
1  $
 
9 
 
— 
371
—  $
 
1 
 
1 
110
14  $
 
23 
 
127 
1,092
20 
5  $
33 
 
— 
 
3 
131 
  1,588 
15
1,256  $
381  $
112  $
23  $ 1,772
83  $
 
30 
153 
 
1,732
8  $
 
1 
4 
 
348
—  $
 
— 
1 
 
124
274  $
365 
 
10 
41 
1 
 
159 
  2,230 
26
1,998  $
361  $
125  $
311  $ 2,795
351  $
438
413  $
—
106  $
6
149  $ 1,019 
68 
512
$
$
$
$
$
Exploration costs
Development costs
Costs incurred
Table of Contents
Results of Operations
$
146 
1,703
29 
207
9 
54
2,638  $
649  $
175  $
1 
40
185 
 
  2,004
258  $ 3,720
F-38
Our oil and gas producing activities, which exclude items such as asset dispositions and corporate overhead, were as follows:
San Joaquin
Los Angeles
Basin
Basin
Sacramento
Basin
Total
89  $ 4,285 
27 
  1,066 
 
18 
246 
  1,144 
97 
185 
 
10 
116 
8
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2013
Revenues(a)
Production costs(b)
Other operating expenses
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Taxes other than on income
Exploration expenses
Pretax income
Income tax expense
Results of operations
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
Revenues(a)
Production costs(b)
Other operating expenses
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Taxes other than on income
Asset impairments and related items
Exploration expenses
Pretax income
Income tax expense
Results of operations
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2011
Revenues(a)
Production costs(b)
Other operating expenses
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Taxes other than on income
Exploration expenses
Pretax income
Income tax expense
Results of operations
(a)
(b)
Revenues are net of royalty payments.
$
$
$
$
$
$
Ventura
Basin
(In millions)
968  $
306 
 
 
56 
 
108 
 
43 
1
259  $
75 
 
 
19 
 
73 
 
9 
13
2,969  $
658 
153 
866 
123 
94
1,075 
428
454 
181
70 
28
(71)   1,528 
609 
(28)
647  $
273  $
42  $
(43) $
919
2,843  $
885 
138 
742 
114 
31 
112
821 
335
921  $
 
331 
 
52 
 
79 
37 
 
 
10 
29
383 
156
262  $
 
81 
 
18 
 
61 
9 
 
 
— 
1
92 
38
46  $ 4,072 
  1,314 
17 
218 
 
10 
926 
 
44 
7 
 
167 
41 
 
— 
148 
6
(38)   1,258 
514 
(15)
486  $
227  $
54  $
(23) $
744
2,898  $
721 
127 
543 
101 
113
1,293 
528
766  $
 
264 
 
50 
 
58 
 
29 
—
365 
149
231  $
 
77 
 
13 
 
44 
 
8 
—
89 
36
765  $
216  $
53  $
43  $ 3,938 
  1,074 
12 
196 
 
6 
675 
 
30 
143 
 
5 
1 
 
114
(11)   1,736 
709 
(4)
(7) $ 1,027
Production costs are the costs incurred in lifting the oil and gas to the surface and include gathering, processing, field storage and insurance on proved properties, but do
not include DD&A, royalties, income taxes and general and administrative expenses.
Table of Contents
Results per Unit of Production
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2013
Revenue from each barrel of oil equivalent ($/Boe)(a)(b)
Production costs
Other operating expenses
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Taxes other than on income
Exploration expenses
Pretax income
Income tax expense
Results of operations
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
Revenue from each barrel of oil equivalent ($/Boe)(a)(b)
Production costs
Other operating expenses
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Taxes other than on income
Asset impairments and related items
Exploration expenses
Pretax income
Income tax expense
Results of operations
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2011
Revenue from each barrel of oil equivalent ($/Boe)(a)(b)
Production costs
Other operating expenses
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Taxes other than on income
Exploration expenses
Pretax income
Income tax expense
Results of operations
(a)
(b)
F-39
San Joaquin
Los Angeles
Basin
Basin
Ventura
Basin
Sacramento
Basin
Total
$
$
$
$
$
$
75.58  $
 
16.75 
 
3.89 
22.05 
 
 
3.13 
2.39
27.37 
10.90
101.17  $ 79.28  $
 
31.98 
 
5.85 
11.29 
 
 
4.49 
0.10
22.96 
 
5.82 
  22.34 
2.75 
 
3.98
22.09  $ 76.32 
  18.99 
6.70 
 
4.47 
4.38 
24.08 
  20.38 
3.29 
 
2.48 
2.07 
1.99
47.46 
18.92
21.43 
8.57
(17.63)   27.21 
(6.95)   10.85
16.47  $
28.54  $ 12.86  $
(10.68) $ 16.36
71.96  $
 
22.40 
 
3.49 
 
18.78 
 
2.89 
 
0.78 
2.83
20.79 
8.48
102.45  $ 81.85  $
 
36.82 
 
5.78 
 
8.79 
 
4.12 
 
1.11 
3.23
25.30 
 
5.62 
  19.06 
2.81 
 
— 
 
 
0.31
20.09  $ 75.42 
  24.34 
7.42 
 
4.37 
4.04 
  17.15 
19.21 
3.09 
 
3.06 
0.76 
 
— 
2.62 
 
2.74
42.60 
17.35
28.75 
  11.87
(16.59)   23.30 
9.52 
(6.55)
12.31  $
25.25  $ 16.88  $
(10.04) $ 13.78
75.10  $
 
18.68 
3.29 
 
 
14.07 
 
2.62 
2.93
33.51 
13.68
103.99  $ 82.38  $
 
35.84 
6.79 
 
 
7.87 
 
3.94 
—
27.46 
 
4.64 
  15.69 
2.85 
 
—
25.67  $ 78.08 
  21.30 
7.16 
3.58 
 
3.89 
  13.38 
17.91 
2.84 
 
2.99 
2.26 
0.60
49.55 
20.23
31.74 
  12.84
(6.57)   34.41 
(2.39)   14.06
19.83  $
29.32  $ 18.90  $
(4.18) $ 20.35
Natural gas volumes have been converted to Boe based on energy content of six Mcf of gas to one barrel of oil. Barrels of oil equivalence does not necessarily result in
price equivalence. The price of natural gas on a barrel of oil equivalent basis is currently substantially lower than the corresponding price for oil and has been similarly
lower for a number of years. For example, in 2013, the average prices of WTI oil and NYMEX natural gas were $97.97 per Bbl and $3.66 per Mcf, respectively, resulting
in an oil to gas ratio of over 25 to 1.
Revenues are net of royalty payments.
F-40
Table of Contents
Standardized Measure, Including Year-to-Year Changes Therein, of Discounted Future Net Cash Flows
For purposes of the following disclosures, future cash flows were computed by applying to our proved oil and gas reserves the unweighted arithmetic average of the first-
day-of-the-month price for each month within the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The realized prices used to calculate future cash flows vary by
producing area and market conditions. Future operating and capital costs were forecast using the current cost environment applied to expectations of future operating and
development activities. Future income tax expenses were computed by applying, generally, year-end statutory tax rates (adjusted for permanent differences, tax credits and
allowances) to the estimated net future pre-tax cash flows. The discount was computed by application of a 10-percent discount factor. The calculations assumed the
continuation of existing economic, operating and contractual conditions at December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011. Such assumptions, which are prescribed by regulation, have not
always proven accurate in the past. Other valid assumptions would give rise to substantially different results.
Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net Cash Flows
AT DECEMBER 31, 2013
Future cash inflows
Future costs
Production costs and other operating expenses
Development costs(a)
Future income tax expense
Future net cash flows
Ten percent discount factor
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows
AT DECEMBER 31, 2012
Future cash inflows
Future costs
Production costs and other operating expenses
Development costs(a)
Future income tax expense
Future net cash flows
Ten percent discount factor
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows
AT DECEMBER 31, 2011
Future cash inflows
Future costs
Production costs and other operating expenses
Development costs(a)
Future income tax expense
Future net cash flows
Ten percent discount factor
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows
(a)
Includes asset retirement costs.
Table of Contents
F-41
Changes in the Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net Cash Flows From Proved Reserve Quantities
Beginning of year
Total
(In millions)
$
$
$
$
$
$
60,884 
  
(29,523)
(6,327)
(8,213)
16,821 
(7,598)
9,223
57,468 
  
(26,968)
(5,961)
(8,059)
16,480 
(7,407)
9,073
60,872 
  
(26,642)
(5,015)
(9,925)
19,290 
(8,943)
10,347
2013
2012
For the years ended December 31,
 
 
  $ 9,073  $ 10,347  $ 7,051
(In millions)
2011
Sales and transfers of oil and gas produced, net of production costs and other operating expenses
Net change in prices received per Bbl, net of production costs and other operating expenses
Extensions, discoveries and improved recovery, net of future production and development costs
Change in estimated future development costs
Revisions of quantity estimates
Previously estimated development costs incurred during the period
Accretion of discount
Net change in income taxes
Purchases and sales of reserves in place, net
Changes in production rates and other
(3,082)  
 
575 
 
1,914 
(688)  
(62)  
 
 
(95)
1,185 
1,292
(2,695)  
(1,431)  
1,897 
 
(1,526)  
(1,405)  
 
1,039 
 
1,512 
984
(2,840)
4,837 
2,662 
(1,015)
(1,839)
869 
1,048 
(1,960)
4
(893)
221 
130
1,065 
469
Net change
End of year
150
(1,274)
3,296
$ 9,223  $ 9,073  $ 10,347
F-42
Table of Contents
Oil, NGLs and Natural Gas Production Per Day
The following table set forth the production volumes of oil, NGLs and natural gas per day for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2013.
Oil (MBbl/d)
San Joaquin Basin(b)
Los Angeles Basin(c)
Ventura Basin
Sacramento Basin
Total
NGLs (MBbl/d)
San Joaquin Basin(b)
Los Angeles Basin
Ventura Basin
Sacramento Basin
Total
Natural gas (MMcf/d)
San Joaquin Basin(b)
Los Angeles Basin(c)
Ventura Basin
Sacramento Basin
Total
Total Production (MBoe/d)(a)
(a)
(b)
(c)
2013   2012   2011  
  
 
  
 
58 
56 
 
 
19 
26 
 
 
6 
 
5 
 
  — 
  —
58 
 
24 
 
6 
 
  —
90
88
80
19 
  — 
 
1 
  —
16 
  — 
 
1 
  —
14 
  — 
 
1 
  —
20
17
15
182 
2 
 
11 
 
 
65
204 
3 
 
12 
 
 
37
220 
 
1 
12 
 
 
27
260
256
260
154
148
138
Natural gas volumes have been converted to Boe based on energy content of six Mcf of gas to one barrel of oil. Barrels of oil equivalence does not necessarily result in
price equivalence The price of natural gas on a barrel of oil equivalent basis is currently substantially lower than the corresponding price for oil and has been similarly
lower for a number of years. For example, in 2013, the average prices of WTI oil and NYMEX natural gas were $97.97 per Bbl and $3.66 per Mcf, respectively, resulting
in an oil to gas ratio of over 25 to 1.
Includes daily production from Elk Hills field of 26 MBbl oil, 18 MBbl NGLs and 145 MMcf gas in 2013; 29 MBbl oil, 15 MBbl NGLs and 168 MMcf gas in 2012; and
30 MBbl oil, 14 MBbl NGLs and 174 MMcf gas in 2011.
Includes daily production from Wilmington field of 22 MBbl Oil in 2013; 21 MBbl Oil in 2012 and 19 MBbl Oil 2011.
F-43