
S-8 1 stockplan2005.htm VICI 2005 STOCK PLAN vici 2005 stock plan
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM S-8
000-30237
(Commission File Number)
REGISTRATION STATEMENT FILED PURSUANT TO THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
Date of Report: October 21, 2005
VICTOR INUDSTRIES, INC.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Idaho
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
91-0784114
(IRS Employer
Identification Number)
2005 STOCK INCENTIVE PLAN
(Full Title of Plan)
180 Southwest Higgins Ave
Missoula, MT 59803
(Address of principal executive offices including zip code)
(Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)
(406) 549-2261
(Former Name or Former Address, if Changed Since Last Report)
n/a
with a copy to:
Wade D. Huettel, Esq.
Law Office of Wade D. Huettel, Esq.
3580 Utah Street
San Diego, CA 92104
(619) 892-3006
Title of securities
to be registered
Amount to be
Registered
Proposed
maximum
offering price
per share (1)
Common Stock
Proposed maximum
Aggregate offering Price
for this amended Form S-8
filing
Amount of
Registration fee
($.0001 par value)
100,000,000
$.009
$900,000
$114.03
(1)
Bona fide estimate of maximum offering price solely for calculating the registration fee
pursuant to Rule 457(h) of the Securities Act of 1933, based on the closing price of the
registrant's common stock as of October 18, 2005, a date within five business days
prior to the date of filing of this registration statement.
PART I - INFORMATION REQUIRED IN THE SECTION 10(a) PROSPECTUS
The  document(s)  containing  the  information  specified  in  this  Part  I  will  be  sent  or  given  to
employees  as  specified  by  Rule  428(b)(1).  Such  documents  need  not  be  filed  with  the
Commission  either  as  part  of  this  registration  statement  or  as  prospectuses  or  prospectus
supplements  pursuant  to  Rule  424.  These  documents  and  the  documents  incorporated  by
reference in the registration statement pursuant to Item 3 of Part II of this form, taken together,
constitute a prospectus that meets the requirements of Section 10(a) of the Securities Act.
 
Item 1. Plan Information.
Not required to be filed with this Registration Statement.
 
Item 2. Registrant Information and Employee Plan Annual Information.
Not required to be filed with this Registration Statement.
PART II - INFORMATION REQUIRED IN THE REGISTRATION STATEMENT
Item 3. Incorporation of Documents by Reference
The following documents filed by Victor Industries, Inc. (the “Company”) with the Securities and
Exchange Commission (the “Commission”) are incorporated herein by this reference:
(1)  The Company’s Annual Report filed on Form 10-KSB on July 27, 2005, and as amended on
October 21, 2005;
(2)  The Company’s Quarterly Report for the quarter ended June 30, 2005 filed on Form 10-QSB
on August 8, 2005, and as amended on October 21, 2005; and
(3)  The Company’s Quarterly Report for the quarter ended March 30, 2005 filed on Form 10-QSB
on August 8, 2005, and as amended on August 9, 2005 and October 21, 2005.
Any statement contained in a document incorporated or deemed incorporated by reference in this
registration  statement  shall  be  deemed  to  be  modified  or  superseded  for  purposes  of  this
registration  statement  to  the  extent  that  a  statement  contained  herein  or  in  any  other
subsequently filed document which also is or is deemed to be incorporated by reference herein
modifies or supersedes such statement. Any such statement so modified or superseded shall not
be  deemed,  except  as  so  modified  or  superseded,  to  constitute  a  part  of  this  registration
statement.
Item 4. Description of Securities
Securities are registered under Section 12(g) of the Exchange Act.
Item 5. Interests of Named Experts and Counsel
Not Applicable
Item 6. Indemnification of Directors and Officers:
As  permitted  by  the  provisions  of  the  Idaho  General  Business  Corporation  Law  (the  Idaho
Code"), the Company has the power to indemnify an officer or director who, in their capacity as
such, is made a party to any suit or proceeding, whether criminal, administrative or investigative,
if such officer or director acted in good faith and in a manner reasonably believed to be in or not
opposed to the best interests of the Company and, in the case of any criminal proceeding, the
person  had  no  reasonable  cause  to  believe  their  conduct  was  unlawful.  An  officer  or  director
shall be indemnified against expenses to the extent they have been successful on the merits or
otherwise in defense of any action, suit or proceeding. Indemnification or advance expenses to
an officer or director is available only to the extent as permitted under Sections 30-1-850 through
30-1-859  of  the  Idaho  Code.  Further,  the  Idaho  Code  permits  a  corporation  to  purchase  and
maintain liability insurance on behalf of its officers and directors. Presently, the Company does
not carry such insurance.
Item 7. Exemption From Registration Claimed
Not Applicable.
Item 8. Exhibits
The following is a list of exhibits filed as part of this Registration Statement:
4.1 2005 Stock Option Plan
5.1  Opinion of the Law Office of Wade D. Huettel, Esq.
23.1  Consent of the Law Office of Wade D. Huettel, Esq. (included in Exhibit 5.1)
23.2  Consent of Peterson Sullivan
Item 9. Undertakings
(a) The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes:
(1) To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment
to this registration statement:
(i) To include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933;
(ii)To reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of the
registration statement (or the most recent post-effective amendment thereof) which,
individually or in the aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information set forth in
the registration statement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or decrease in volume
of securities offered (if the total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed that which
was registered) and any deviation from the low or high end of the estimated maximum offering
range may be reflected in the form of prospectus filed with the Commission pursuant to Rule
424(b) if, in the aggregate, the changes in volume and price represent no more than a 20
percent change in the maximum aggregate offering price set forth in the Calculation of
Registration Fee table in the effective registration statement.
(iii)To include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously
disclosed in the registration statement or any material change to such information in the
registration statement; provided, however, that paragraphs (1)(a)(i) and (1)(a)(ii) do not apply
if the registration statement is on Form S-3, Form S-8 or Form F-3, and the information
required to be included in a post-effective amendment by those paragraphs is contained in
periodic reports filed with or furnished to the Commission by the registrant pursuant to
Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 that are incorporated by
reference in the registration statement.
(2)That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each such
post-effective amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the
securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be
the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(3)To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities
being registered which remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
(b)The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes that, for purposes of determining a liability
under the Securities Act of 1933, each filing of the registrant's annual report pursuant to
Section 13(a) or Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (and, where applicable,
each filing of an employee benefit plan's annual report pursuant to Section 15(d) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934) that is incorporated by reference in the registration
statement shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities offered
therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona
fide offering thereof.
(c)Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 may be
permitted to directors, officers, and controlling persons of the registrant pursuant to the
foregoing provisions, or otherwise, the registrant has been advised that in the opinion of the
Securities and Exchange Commission such indemnification is against public policy as
expressed in the Act and is, therefore, unenforceable. In the event that a claim for
indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by the registrant of expenses
incurred or paid by a director, officer or controlling person of the registrant in the successful
defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted by such director, officer or controlling
person in connection with the securities being registered, the registrant will, unless in the
opinion of its counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of
appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by it is against public policy
as expressed in the Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
SIGNATURES
The Registrant. Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant certifies
that it has reasonable grounds to believe that it meets all the requirements for filing on Form S-8
and has duly caused this registration statement to be signed on its behalf of the undersigned,
thereunto duly authorized, in the City of Missoula, Montana, on October 21, 2005.
Victor Industries, Inc.
 
By: /s/ Lana Pope
CEO, Chairman & CFO
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been
signed below by the following persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/s/ Lana Pope
Title
Date
Chairman of the Board, Chief
Executive Officer (Principal
Financial and Accounting
Officer)
October 21, 2005