
EX-99.1 3 d242333dex991.htm EX-99.1 EX-99.1
Exhibit 99.1
W&T Offshore Announces Extension of Early Participation Date,
Elimination of the Minimum Tender Condition and Increase in
Consideration for Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation
HOUSTON, August 16, 2016 – W&T Offshore, Inc. (NYSE: WTI) (the “Company”) today
announced that, with respect to its previously announced exchange offer and consent solicitation
to eligible holders of its outstanding 8.500% Senior Notes due 2019 (the “Existing Notes”), it has
(i) extended the Early Participation Date to 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on August 30, 2016 (as
extended, the “Early Participation Date”), (ii) eliminated the Minimum Tender Condition (as
defined in the Offering Documents (as defined below)) and (iii) increased the maximum
consideration being offered to (i) 76,590,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.00001 per
share, of the Company (the “Shares”) (increased from 62,100,000 Shares), (ii) $202.5 million
aggregate principal amount of its new Senior Second Lien PIK Toggle Notes due 2020 (the “New
Second Lien Notes”) and (iii) $180.0 million aggregate principal amount of its new Senior Third
Lien PIK Toggle Notes due 2021 (the “New Third Lien Notes” and, together with the New Second
Lien Notes, the “New Notes”; the New Notes and the Shares, the “New Securities”) pursuant to
the terms of the offering memorandum and consent solicitation statement and the related letter of
transmittal and consent, as amended by a supplement setting forth the modifications described
above (together, the “Offering Documents”). The New Third Lien Notes will be issued in lieu of
the unsecured Senior PIK Toggle Notes due 2021 described in the Offering Documents,
regardless of the percentage of principal amount of Existing Notes that are tendered.
Concurrently with the exchange offer, the Company is soliciting consents from holders of the
Existing Notes to a proposed amendment to the indenture governing the Existing Notes in order
to permit the issuance of the New Second Lien Notes and the New Third Lien Notes. The
following table sets forth the increased consideration to be offered to eligible holders of the
Existing Notes in the exchange offer:
Total Exchange
Consideration for
Exchange
each $1,000
Consideration for
Principal Amount
each
Existing Notes
to be Exchanged
of
Existing Notes if
Tendered Prior to
Aggregate
or
Principal Amount
on the Early
(CUSIP No. / ISIN)
8.500% Senior Notes due 2019
Outstanding
$900,000,000
Participation Date  
(i) 85.1 Shares; (ii)
(92922P AC0 / US92922PAC05)
$225 principal
$1,000 Principal
Amount of
Existing
Notes if Tendered
After the Early
Participation Date
(i) 85.1 Shares;
(ii) $200 principal
amount of New
amount of New
Second Lien Notes;
Second Lien Notes;
and (iii) $200
principal amount of
New Third Lien
Notes
and
(iii) $200 principal
amount of New
Third Lien Notes
The total exchange consideration to be received by eligible holders of Existing Notes who validly
tender their Existing Notes prior to the Early Participation Date will include an early tender
premium equal to $25 principal amount of New Second Lien Notes per $1,000 principal amount
of Existing Notes accepted for exchange.
For Existing Notes validly tendered after the Early Participation Date and on or before the
Expiration Date (as defined below), the eligible holders of Existing Notes accepted for exchange
will receive the exchange consideration set forth above, which does not include the early tender
premium. Eligible holders of Existing Notes accepted for exchange will also receive a cash
payment equal to the accrued and unpaid interest in respect of such Existing Notes from June 15,
2016 (the most recent interest payment date) to, but not including, the date the exchange offer is
settled (the “Settlement Date”). Interest on the New Notes will accrue from the Settlement Date.
Certain holders of the Existing Notes (the “Participating Holders”) entered into a Support
Agreement, dated July 11, 2016 (the “Support Agreement”). Pursuant to the Support Agreement,
the Participating Holders agreed to tender their Existing Notes in the exchange offer, subject to
various conditions, including a limitation on the Company’s ability to reduce the Minimum Tender
Condition to a threshold lower than 85% of the aggregate principal amount of the outstanding
Existing Notes (the “Threshold Limitation”). Certain of the Participating Holders have entered into
an amendment to the Support Agreement (the “Amendment”) whereby they have agreed to
eliminate the Threshold Limitation. In addition, the Company has waived the Minimum Tender
Condition that was originally set forth in the Offering Documents. Therefore, the exchange offer is
no longer subject to the Minimum Tender Condition. The Amendment also provides for certain
limitations on the Company’s ability to consummate future exchanges or repurchases of the
Existing Notes on terms more favorable than the terms provided in the exchange offer for the life
of the Existing Notes.
As previously announced, the exchange offer and consent solicitation will expire at 5:00 p.m.,
New York City time, on September 1, 2016, unless extended or earlier terminated by the
Company (the “Expiration Date”). The right to withdraw tenders of Existing Notes and related
consents terminated at 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on August 8, 2016 (the “Withdrawal
Deadline”). Accordingly, Existing Notes and related consents tendered before the Withdrawal
Deadline remain tendered and may not be withdrawn or revoked, except in certain limited
circumstances where additional withdrawal rights are required by law. Tenders submitted after
the Withdrawal Deadline and on or before the Expiration Date in the exchange offer and related
consents will be irrevocable, except in the same limited circumstances. The act of tendering
Existing Notes pursuant to the exchange offer constitutes a consent to the proposed amendment
to the indenture governing the Existing Notes. The exchange offer is conditioned on the
satisfaction or waiver of certain additional conditions, as described in the Offering Documents.
The exchange offer and consent solicitation for the Existing Notes may be further amended,
extended or terminated.
The exchange offer and consent solicitation is only being made, and copies of the Offering
Documents will only be made available, to holders of the Existing Notes who complete and
submit an eligibility form confirming that they are (1) “qualified institutional buyers” within the
meaning of Rule 144A under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) or
(2) not “U.S. persons” and are outside of the United States within the meaning of Regulation S
under the Securities Act (such persons, “eligible holders”). Holders who desire to obtain and
complete an eligibility form should contact the information agent, D.F. King & Co., Inc., at
(877) 536-1561 (toll-free) or (212) 269-5550 (for banks and brokers), or via the following website:
www.dfking.com/wti.
Eligible holders are urged to carefully read the Offering Documents before making any decision
with respect to the exchange offer and consent solicitation. None of the Company, the sole dealer
manager, the information agent or the exchange agent makes any recommendation as to
whether eligible holders should tender or refrain from tendering their Existing Notes. Eligible
holders must make their own decision as to whether to tender Existing Notes and, if so, the
principal amount of Existing Notes to tender.
The New Securities offered by the Company have not been registered under the Securities Act,
or any state securities laws and, unless so registered, may not be offered or sold in the United
States except pursuant to an applicable exemption from the registration requirements of the
Securities Act and applicable state securities laws. The exchange offer and consent solicitation
is not being made to holders of Existing Notes in any jurisdiction in which the making or
acceptance thereof would not be in compliance with the securities, blue sky or other laws of such
jurisdiction. This press release is for informational purposes only and is not an offer to purchase,
a solicitation of an offer to purchase or a solicitation of consents with respect to, any securities.
Evercore Group L.L.C. is acting as the sole dealer manager in the Exchange Offer.
About W&T Offshore
W&T Offshore, Inc. is an independent oil and natural gas producer with operations offshore in the
Gulf of Mexico and has grown through acquisitions, exploration and development. The Company
currently has working interests in approximately 54 fields in federal and state waters (50
producing and four fields capable of producing) and has under lease approximately 750,000
gross acres, including approximately 450,000 gross acres on the Gulf of Mexico Shelf and
approximately 300,000 gross acres in the deepwater. A majority of the Company’s daily
production is derived from wells it operates. For more information on W&T Offshore, please visit
the Company’s website at www.wtoffshore.com.
Forward-Looking Statements
This press release contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the
Securities Act and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. These
forward-looking statements reflect the Company’s current views with respect to future
events, based on what it believes are reasonable assumptions. No assurance can be given,
however, that these events will occur. These statements are subject to risks and uncertainties
that could cause actual results to differ materially including, among other things, market
conditions, oil and gas price volatility, uncertainties inherent in oil and gas production operations
and estimating reserves, unexpected future capital expenditures, competition, the success of the
Company’s risk management activities, governmental regulations, uncertainties and other factors
discussed in W&T Offshore’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2015 and subsequent Form 10-Q reports found at www.sec.gov or at the Company’s website at
www.wtoffshore.com under the Investor Relations section. Investors are urged to consider
closely the disclosures and risk factors in these reports.
# # #