
S-1/A 1 s1aa092514_s1z.htm FORM S-1/A REGISTRATION STATEMENT FORM S-1/A Registration
Statement
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on September ____, 2014
Registration No. 333-197642
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549
FORM S-1/A
REGISTRATION STATEMENT UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
ALPHA ENERGY, INC.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Colorado
(State or other jurisdiction
of
1311
(Primary standard
industrial
90-1020566
(IRS employer
identification number)
incorporation or
organization)
classification code
number)
600 17th Street, 2800 South
Denver, CO 80202
303-563-5340
Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of registrant’s principal
executive offices)
(Name, address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of agent for service)
Reginald A. Kemp
8471 Pebble Court
Wellington, CO 80549
(970) 227-0549
Copies to:
Harold P. Gewerter, Esq.
Harold P. Gewerter, Esq. Ltd.
5536 S. Ft. Apache #102
Las Vegas, NV 89148
(702) 382-1714
Fax: (702) 382-1759
Email: harold@gewerterlaw.com
Approximate  date  of  commencement  of  proposed  sale  to  the  public:  As  soon  as  practicable  after  this
Registration Statement is declared effective.
If any of the securities being registered on this Form are to be offered on a delayed or continuous basis
pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act, check the following box.  X .
If  this  form  is  filed  to  register  additional  securities  for  an  offering  pursuant  to  Rule  462(b)  under  the
Securities Act, please check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of
the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.      .
If this form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act, check the
following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration
statement for the same offering.      .
If this form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act, check the
following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration
statement for the same offering.      .
Indicate  by  check  mark  whether  the  registrant  is  a  large  accelerated  filer,  an  accelerated  filer,  a  non-
accelerated  filer,  or  a  smaller  reporting  company.  See  the  definitions  of  “large  accelerated  filer,”
“accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. (Check one):
Large  accelerated
filer
Non-accelerated
filer
.
Accelerated filer
.
. (Do not check if a smaller reporting
company)
Smaller 
company
reporting
X .
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Title of Each Class of
Securities to be Registered
Units(1) for sale by Our
Company
Selling Shareholders–
Common Stock
Proposed
Maximum
Amount to be
Registered
Offering Price
per Share
Proposed
Maximum Offering
Price(2)
Amount of
Registration
Fee(3)
400,000
331,070
$0.25
$0.25
$100,000.00
$12.88
$82,767.50
$10.66
(1)
1 common share and 1 warrant exercisable at $0.50.
(2)
Estimated solely for the purpose of calculating the registration fee pursuant to Rule 457(c).
(3)
Estimated solely for the purpose of computing the amount of the registration fee pursuant to Rule 457(o)
under the Securities Act.
The registrant hereby amends this registration statement on such date or dates as may be necessary to
delay its effective date until the registrant shall file a further amendment which specifically states that this
registration statement shall thereafter become effective in accordance with Section 8(a) of the Securities Act
of  1933  or  until  this  registration  statement  shall  become  effective  on  such  date  as  the  Securities  and
Exchange Commission, acting pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine.
The issuer and the selling shareholders will sell the common stock being registered in this offering at a
fixed price of $0.25 per share. It is possible that the Company’s shares may never be quoted on the OTC
Bulletin Board or listed on an exchange.
2
SUBJECT TO COMPLETION, DATED ____________ __, 2014.
The information in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed. We may not sell these securities
until  the  registration  statement  filed  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  is  effective.  This
prospectus is not an offer to sell these securities and we are not soliciting offers to buy these securities in
any state where the offer or sale is not permitted.
PROSPECTUS
ALPHA ENERGY, INC.
331,070 Shares of Common Stock and 400,000 Units
This prospectus will also allow us to issue up to 400,000 Units consisting of 1 share of our common stock
and 1 warrant exercisable at $0.50(“Units” or “Securities”) in our initial public offering. The proceeds from
the sale of these Units will be available for use by the company. The shares in the IPO are being sold by
our officers and directors. This prospectus will also allow 19 selling shareholders to sell 331,070shares of
common stock which proceeds will not be available for use by the company. The securities being registered
in this offering may be illiquid because they are not listed on any exchange or quoted on the OTC Bulletin
Board and no market for these securities may develop. The issuer and the selling shareholders will sell the
common stock being registered in this offering at a fixed price of $0.25 per share. The company’s shares
may never be quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board or listed on an exchange.
Per Unit (Initial Public
Offering)
Per Share (Selling
Shareholders)
Total
Offering
Price per
Unit
0.25
0.25
Gross
Proceeds to
Our Company
0.25
0.00
Offering
Expenses(1)
(2)
0.02
0.00
Net Proceeds
Net Proceeds to
to Our
Selling
Company
Shareholders
0.23
0.00
0.00
0.25
$182,767.50 $100,000.00
$8,000
$92,000
$82,767.50
(1)
Estimated  expenses  to  be  paid  by  the  Issuer  including  payment  of  any  underwriting  or  placement
commissions, discounts or expense.
(2)
Selling shareholders shall not pay any expenses of offering their shares. All expenses of this offering shall
be borne by the Issuer.
The Company is an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business
Startups Act
Our Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm has raised substantial doubts about our ability
to continue as a going concern.
The securities offered in this prospectus involve a high degree of risk. You should consider the risk
factors beginning on page 3 before purchasing our common stock.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has
approved or disapproved of these securities or passed upon the adequacy or accuracy of this
prospectus. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
The date of this prospectus is September ___, 2014.
3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Prospectus Summary
Risk Factors
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
Use of Proceeds
Capitalization
Dilution
Market for Common Equity and Related Stockholder Matters
Description of Business and Property
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations
Our Management
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management
Certain Relationships and Related Party Transactions
Description of Capital Stock
Selling Stockholders
Plan of Distribution
Disclosure of Commission Position on Indemnification for Securities Act
Liabilities
Legal Opinion
Experts
Interests of Named Experts and Counsel
Additional Information
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Part II – Information Not Required in Prospectus
Signatures
5
6
12
12
13
13
15
15
16
19
21
22
22
24
25
29
29
29
29
30
F-2
II-1
II-4
Unless otherwise specified, the information in this prospectus is set forth as of September __, 2014,
and we anticipate that changes in our affairs will occur after such date. We have not authorized any
person  to  give  any  information  or  to  make  any  representations,  other  than  as  contained  in  this
prospectus, in connection with the offer contained in this prospectus. If any person gives you any
information or makes representations in connection with this offer, do not rely on it as information
we have authorized. This prospectus is not an offer to sell our common stock in any state or other
jurisdiction to any person to whom it is unlawful to make such offer.
4
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
The following summary highlights selected information from this prospectus and may not contain all the
information that is important to you. To understand our business and this offering fully, you should read this
entire prospectus carefully, including the financial statements and the related notes beginning on page F-1.
This  prospectus  contains  forward-looking  statements  and  information  relating  to  Alpha  Energy,  Inc.  See
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements on page 8.
Our Company
The  Company  was  formed  on  September  26,  2013  in  the  State  of  Colorado.  The  Company  is  a
development stage company and our auditors have issued a going concern opinion.
Business Strategy
The Company was incorporated in September 2013. The current market for oil and gas exploration and
development of new and existing oil and gas projects is very favorable for Alpha Energy, Inc. at this time. It
is  our  business  strategy  to  capitalize  on  new  drilling technology  such  as  directional  drilling,  horizontal
drilling, hydraulic fracturing and new monitoring technologies available while drilling which shortens drilling
time and reduces costs. The Company will use this new drilling technology along with new advanced 3-D
seismic  surveys to  pursue  existing  and  by-passed  opportunities which  could  not  have  been  located  or
produced  previously without this new technology. Since the Company is debt free with low  overhead our
highly  experienced  team  is  ideally  suited  to  take  maximum  advantage  of  the  opportunities  that  may  be
uneconomical to larger or heavily leveraged oil and gas companies who have significant overhead costs in
conducting multiple ongoing operations.
The purpose of the company is to be an active participant in the oil and gas industry by acquiring existing
oil  and  gas  assets  and  developing  new  exploration  opportunities.  Two  primary  approaches  are  being
followed  to  accomplish  this  goal.  The  first  is  to  own  oil  and  gas  production  either  by  buying  existing
production with potential for upside through more drilling or by employing enhanced recovery methods. The
second approach is to purchase oil and gas leases with good seismic data located in close proximity or
covering  existing  fields  with  good  drilling  and  development  potential.  These  are  opportunities  are
unattractive to the large organizations, but ideal for our operational approach.
In the initial phase of the company, we will concentrate on obtaining existing gas production in Colorado,
western Kansas and Wyoming that can be enhanced over time and with the added potential of additional
future  drilling.  These  wells  would  target  shallower  formations  resulting  in  lower  operating  costs,  higher
profitability and lower risk. In the second phase we will seek opportunities to acquire existing production
with potential for in-field development or new exploratory drilling in Oklahoma and Texas. As the company
grows, our plans include entry into the gas marketing business focusing on marketing direct to end users,
and  expanding  our  areas  of  interest  for  purchasing producing  properties  that  the  Company  will  operate
along with localized field gas gathering systems. We are confident that with the experience of our corporate
personnel and our contract personnel the company will thrive.
Our executive offices are located at 600 17th Street, Suite 2800 South, Denver CO 80202. Our telephone
number is 303-563-5340.
The Company is an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business
Startups Act
The Company shall continue to be deemed an emerging growth company until the earliest of--
(A)
the  last  day  of  the  fiscal  year  of  the  issuer  during  which  it  had  total  annual  gross  revenues  of
$1,000,000,000 (as such amount is indexed for inflation every 5 years by the Commission to reflect the
change in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics,
setting the threshold to the nearest 1,000,000) or more;
(B)
the  last  day  of  the  fiscal  year  of  the  issuer  following  the  fifth  anniversary  of  the  date  of  the  first  sale  of
common equity securities of the issuer pursuant to an effective registration statement under this title;
(C)
the date on which such issuer has, during the previous 3-year period, issued more than $1,000,000,000 in
non-convertible debt; or
(D)
the date on which such issuer is deemed to be a ‘large accelerated filer’, as defined in section 240.12b-2 of
title 17, Code of Federal Regulations, or any successor thereto.’.
As an emerging growth company the company is exempt from Section 404(b) of Sarbanes Oxley. Section
404(a) requires Issuers to publish information in their annual reports concerning the scope and adequacy of
the internal control structure and procedures for financial reporting. This statement shall also assess the
effectiveness of such internal controls and procedures.
5
Section 404(b) requires that the registered accounting firm shall, in the same report, attest to and report on
the assessment on the effectiveness of the internal control structure and procedures for financial reporting.
As  an  emerging  growth  company  the  company  is  exempt  from  Section  14A  and  B  of  the  Securities
Exchange  Act  of  1934  which  require  the  shareholder  approval  of  executive  compensation  and  golden
parachutes.
The Company has irrevocably opted out of the extended transition period for complying with new or revised
accounting standards pursuant to Section 107(b) of the Act.
The Offering
This prospectus covers up to 400,000 Units consisting of 1 common share and 1 warrant exercisable at
$0.50 to be issued and sold by the company at a price of $0.25 per share in a direct public offering and
331,070shares held by selling shareholders to be sold at $0.25 per share.
ABOUT THIS OFFERING
Securities Being
Offered
Initial Offering Price
Up to 400,000 Units of Alpha Energy, Inc. to be sold by the company at a
price  of  $0.25  per  share  and  331,070  shares  of  common  stock  of  Alpha
Energy, Inc. to be sold by selling shareholders at a price of $0.25 per share.
 
The company will sell up to 400,000 Units at a price of $0.25 per share and
the selling shareholders will sell up to 331,070 shares at a price of $0.25
per share.
Terms of the Offering
The company will offer and sell the Units of its common stock at a price of
The company will offer and sell the Units of its common stock at a price of
$0.25 per share in a direct offering to the public. The selling shareholders
will offer and sell the shares of their common stock at a price of $0.25 per
share.
 
The offering by the company will conclude when the company has sold all
of the 400,000 Units of common stock offered by it. The company may, in its
sole discretion, decide to terminate the registration of the shares offered by
the  company. The  selling  shareholder  offering  will  remain  open  until  all
selling shareholder shares registered hereunder have been sold.
 
An  investment  in  our  common  stock  is  highly  speculative  and  involves  a
high degree of risk. See Risk Factors beginning on page 3.
Terms of the Offering
Termination of the
Offering
Risk Factors
RISK FACTORS
An investment in our common stock is highly speculative, involves a high degree of risk, and should be
made only by investors who can afford a complete loss. You should carefully consider the following risk
factors, together with the other information in this prospectus, including our financial statements and the
related notes, before you decide to buy our common stock. If any of the following risks actually occur, our
business, financial condition, or results of operations could be materially adversely affected, the trading of
our common stock could decline, and you may lose all or part of your investment therein.
Risks Relating to the Early Stage of our Company
We are at a very early operational stage and our success is subject to the substantial risks inherent
in the establishment of a new business venture.
The implementation of our business strategy is in a very early stage. Our business and operations should
be considered to be in a very early stage and subject to all of the risks inherent in the establishment of a
new business venture. Accordingly, our intended business and operations may not prove to be successful
in the near future, if at all. Any future success that we might enjoy will depend upon many factors, several of
which  may  be  beyond  our  control,  or  which  cannot  be  predicted  at  this  time,  and  which  could  have  a
material adverse effect upon our financial condition, business prospects and operations and the value of an
investment in our company.
6
We  have  a  very  limited  operating  history  and  our  business  plan  is  unproven  and  may  not  be
successful.
Our company was formed in September 2013 but we have not yet begun full scale operations. We have not
yet acquired producing oil and gas assets, nor have we initiated oil and gas drilling operations We have not
proven that our business model will allow us to generate a profit.
We have suffered operating losses since inception and we may not be able to achieve profitability.
We  had  an  accumulated  deficit  of  ($19,935)  as  of  March  31,  2014  and  we  expect  to  continue  to  incur
significant set up expenses in the foreseeable future related to acquisitionand development of oil and gas
properties acquired. As a result, we are sustaining substantial operating and net losses, and it is possible
that we will never be able to sustain or develop the revenue levels necessary to attain profitability.
We may have difficulty raising additional capital, which could deprive us of necessary resources.
We expect to continue to devote significant capital resources to locate and fund acquisitions of oil and gas
properties.  In  order  to  support  the  initiatives  envisioned  in  our  business  plan,  we  will  need  to  raise
additional  funds  through  public  or  private  debt  or  equity  financing,  collaborative  relationships  or  other
arrangements.  Our  ability  to  raise  additional  financing  depends  on  many  factors  beyond  our  control,
including  the  state  of  capital  markets  and  the  market  price  of  our  common  stock.  Because  our  common
stock is not listed on a major stock market, many investors may not be willing or allowed to purchase it or
may demand steep discounts. Sufficient additional financing may not be available to us or may be available
only on terms that would result in further dilution to the current owners of our common stock.
We expect to raise additional capital during 2014 but we do not have any firm commitments for funding. If
we are unsuccessful in raising additional capital, or the terms of raising such capital are unacceptable, we
may  have  to  modify  our  business  plan  and/or  significantly  curtail  our  planned  activities  and  other
operations.
There are substantial doubts about our ability to continue as a going concern and if we are unable
to continue our business, our shares may have little or no value.
The company’s ability to become a profitable operating company is dependent upon its ability to generate
revenues and/or obtain financing adequate to fulfill our requirements to complete evaluations of oil and gas
acquisitons  and  drilling  opportunitiesand  to  achieve  a  level  of  revenues  adequate  to  support  our  cost
structure has raised substantial doubts about our ability to continue as a going concern. We plan to attempt
to raise additional equity capital by selling shares in this offering and, if necessary, through one or more
private placement or public offerings. However, the doubts raised, relating to our ability to continue as a
going  concern,  may  make  our  shares  an  unattractive  investment  for  potential  investors.  These  factors,
among others, may make it difficult to raise any additional capital.
Failure  to  effectively  manage  our  growth  could  place  strains  on  our  managerial,  operational  and
financial resources and could adversely affect our business and operating results.
Our growth has placed, and is expected to continue to place, a strain on our managerial, operational and
financial resources. Further, if our business grows, we will be required to manage multiple relationships.
Any further growth by us, or an increase in the number of our strategic relationships will increase this strain
on our managerial, operational and financial resources. This strain may inhibit our ability to achieve the
rapid execution necessary to implement our business plan, and could have a material adverse effect upon
our financial condition, business prospects,operations and the value of an investment in our company.
Risks Relating to Our Business
Competition in the oil and gas industry is highly competitive and there is no assurance that we will
be successful in acquiring viable leases.
The oil and gas industry is intensely competitive. We compete with numerous individuals and companies,
including  many  major  oil  and  gas  companies  which  have  substantially  greater  technical,  financial  and
operational resources and staffs. Accordingly, there is a high degree of competition for desirable oil and gas
leases, suitable properties for drilling operations and necessary drilling equipment, as well as for access to
funds. We cannot predict if the necessary funds can be raised or that any projected work will be completed.
7
Oil and gas exploration are highly speculative ventures and it is highly probable that no reserves will
be discovered and any funds spent on exploration will be lost.
Drilling for oil and gas involves numerous risks, including the risk that we will not encounter commercially
productive oil reservoirs. The wells we drill or participate in may not be productive and we may not recover
all or any portion of our investment in those wells. The seismic data and other technologies we use do not
allow us to know conclusively prior to drilling a well that crude is present or may be produced economically.
The costs of drilling, completing and operating wells are often uncertain, and drilling operations may be
curtailed, delayed or canceled as a result of a variety of factors including, but not limited to:
·
unexpected drilling conditions;
·
pressure or irregularities in formations;
·
equipment failures or accidents;
·
mechanical difficulties, such as lost or stuck oil field drilling and service tools;
·
fires, explosions, blowouts and surface cratering;
·
uncontrollable flows of oil and formation water;
·
environmental hazards, such as oil spills, pipeline ruptures and discharges of toxic gases;
·
other adverse weather conditions; and
·
increase in the cost of, or shortages or delays in the availability of drilling rigs and equipment.
Certain  future  drilling  activities  may  not  be  successful  and,  if  unsuccessful,  this  failure  could  have  an
adverse  effect  on  our  future  results  of  operations  and  financial  condition.  While  all  drilling,  whether
developmental or exploratory, involves these risks, exploratory drilling involves a greater risks of drilling dry
holes or failure to find commercial quantities of hydrocarbons.
Our future operating revenue is dependent upon the performance of the properties we lease for Oil
and Gas.
Our future operating revenue depends upon our ability to profitably operate our existing oil and gas leases
by drilling and completing wells that produce commercial quantities of oil and gas and our ability to expand
our  operations  through  the  successful  implementation  of  our  plans  to  explore,  acquire  and  develop
additional  properties.  The  successful  development  of  oil  and  gas  properties  requires  an  assessment  of
potential recoverable reserves, future oil and gas prices, operating costs, potential environmental and other
liabilities and other factors. Such assessments are necessarily inexact. No assurance can be given that we
can  produce  sufficient  revenue  to  operate  our  existing  properties  or  acquire  additional  oil  and  gas
producing properties and leases. We may not discover or successfully produce any recoverable reserves in
the future, or we may not be able to make a profit from the reserves that we may discover. In the event that
we are unable to produce sufficient operating revenue to fund our future operations, we will be forced to
seek additional third-party funding, if such funding can be obtained. Such options would possibly include
debt financing, sale of equity interests in our Company, joint venture arrangements or the sale of oil and gas
interests. If we are unable to secure such financing on a timely basis, we could be required to delay or scale
back  our  operations.  If  such  unavailability  of  funds  continued  for  an  extended  period  of  time,  this  could
result in the termination of our operations and the loss of an investor’s entire investment.
The unavailability or high cost of drilling rigs, equipment, supplies, personnel and oil field services
could  adversely  affect  our  ability  to  execute  our  exploration  and  development  plans  on  a  timely
basis and within our budget.
Our industry is cyclical and, from time to time, there is a shortage of drilling rigs, equipment, supplies or
qualified personnel. During these periods, the costs and delivery times of rigs, equipment and supplies are
substantially greater. In addition, the demand for, and wage rates of, qualified drilling rig crews rise as the
number of active rigs in service increases. As a result of increasing levels of exploration and production in
response to strong prices of oil and natural gas, the demand for oilfield services and equipment has risen,
and the costs of these services and equipment are increasing. If the unavailability or high cost of drilling
rigs, equipment, supplies or qualified personnel were particularly severe in areas where we operate, we
could be materially and adversely affected.
Market  factors  in  the  oil  and  gas  business  are  out  of  our  control  and  so  we  may  not  be  able  to
profitably sell any reserves that we find.
The potential profitability of oil and gas properties is dependent upon many factors beyond our control. For
instance, world prices and markets for oil and gas are unpredictable, highly volatile, potentially subject to
governmental  fixing,  pegging,  controls  or  any  combination  of  these  and  other  factors,  and  respond  to
changes  in  domestic,  international,  political,  social  and  economic  environments.  Additionally,  due  to
worldwide economic uncertainty, the availability and cost of funds for production and other expenses have
become increasingly difficult, if not impossible, to project. These changes and events may materially affect
our future financial performance. These factors cannot be accurately predicted and the combination of these
factors may result in our Company not receiving an adequate return on invested capital.
8
Title to the properties in which we have an interest may be impaired by title defects.
No  assurance  can  be  given  that  we  will  not  suffer  a  monetary  loss  from  title  defects  or  title  failure.
Additionally, undeveloped acreage has greater risk of title defects than developed acreage. If there are any
title defects or defects in assignment of leasehold rights in properties in which we hold an interest, we will
suffer a financial loss.
We are subject to risks arising from the failure to fully identify potential problems related to acquired
reserves or to properly estimate those reserves.
Although  we  perform  a  review  of  the  acquired  properties  that  we  believe  is  consistent  with  industry
practices,  such  reviews  are  inherently  incomplete.  It  generally  is  not  feasible  to  review  in  depth  every
individual property involved in each acquisition. Ordinarily, we will focus our review efforts on the higher-
value properties and will sample the remainder, and depend on the representations of previous owners.
However, even a detailed review of records and properties may not necessarily reveal existing or potential
problems, nor will it permit a buyer to become sufficiently familiar with the properties to assess fully their
deficiencies  and  potential.  Inspections  may  not  always  be  performed  on  every  well,  and  environmental
problems, such as ground water contamination, are not necessarily observable even when an inspection is
undertaken. Even when problems are identified, we often assume certain environmental and other risks and
liabilities in connection with acquired properties. There are numerous uncertainties inherent in estimating
quantities of proved oil reserves and actual future production rates and associated costs with respect to
acquired properties, and actual results may vary substantially from those assumed in the estimates. There
are no proved reserves on the properties acquired to date.
A substantial or extended decline in oil and gas prices may adversely affect our business, financial
condition,  cash  flow,  liquidity  or  results  of  operations  as  well  as  our  ability  to  meet  our  capital
expenditure obligations and financial commitments to implement our business plan.
Any revenues, cash flow, profitability and future rate of growth we achieve will be greatly dependent upon
prevailing prices for oil and gas. Our ability to maintain or increase our borrowing capacity and to obtain
additional capital on attractive terms is also expected to be dependent on oil and gas prices. Historically, oil
and gas prices and markets have been volatile and are likely to continue to be volatile in the future. Prices
for oil and gas are subject to potentially wide fluctuations in response to relatively minor changes in supply
of and demand for oil and gas, market uncertainty, and a variety of additional factors beyond our control.
Those factors include:
·
the domestic and foreign supply of oil and natural gas;
·
the ability of members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and other producing countries
to agree upon and maintain oil prices and production levels;
·
political instability, armed conflict or terrorist attacks, whether or not in oil or natural gas producing regions;
·
the level of consumer product demand;
·
the growth of consumer product demand in emerging markets, such as China and India;
·
weather  conditions,  including  hurricanes  and  other  natural  occurrences  that  affect  the  supply  and/or
demand of oil and natural gas;
·
domestic and foreign governmental regulations and other actions;
·
the price and availability of alternative fuels;
·
the price of foreign imports;
·
the availability of liquid natural gas imports; and
·
worldwide economic conditions.
These external factors and the volatile nature of the energy markets make it difficult to estimate future prices
of oil and natural gas. Lower oil and natural gas prices may not only decrease our revenues on a per unit
basis,  but  may  also  reduce  the  amount  of  oil  we  can  produce  economically,  if  any.  A  substantial  or
extended decline in oil and natural gas prices may materially affect our future business, financial condition,
results of operations, liquidity and borrowing capacity. While our revenues may increase if prevailing oil and
gas  prices  increase  significantly,  exploration  and  production  costs  and  acquisition  costs  for  additional
properties and reserves may also increase.
9
Current  and  future  governmental  and  environmental  regulations  could  adversely  affect  our
business.
Our business is subject to federal, state and local laws and regulations on taxation, the exploration for and
development,  production  and  marketing  and  safety  matters.  Many  laws  and  regulations  require  drilling
permits and govern the spacing of wells, rates of production, prevention of waste, unitization and pooling of
properties and other matters. These laws and regulations have increased the costs of planning, designing,
drilling, installing, operating and abandoning our oil wells and other facilities. In addition, these laws and
regulations, and any others that are passed by the jurisdictions where we have production, could limit the
total  number  of  wells  drilled  or  the  allowable  production  from  successful  wells,  which  could  limit  our
revenues.
Our  operations  are  also  subject  to  complex  environmental  laws  and  regulations  adopted  by  the  various
jurisdictions in which we have or expect to have operations. We could incur liability to governments or third
parties  for  any  unlawful  discharge  of  pollutants  into  the  air,  soil  or  water,  including  responsibility  for
remedial costs. We could potentially discharge these materials into the environment in any of the following
ways:
·
from a well or drilling equipment at a drill site;
·
from gathering systems, pipelines, transportation facilities and storage tanks;
·
damage to oil wells resulting from accidents during normal operations; and
·
blowouts, cratering and explosions.
Because the requirements imposed by laws and regulations are frequently changed, no assurance can be
given that laws and regulations enacted in the future, including changes to existing laws and regulations,
will not adversely affect our business. In addition, because we acquire interests in properties that have been
operated in the past by others, we may be liable for environmental damage caused by the former operators.
Risks Relating to our Stock
The Offering price of $0.25 per Unit is arbitrary.
The Offering price of $0.25 per Unit has been arbitrarily determined by our management and does not bear
any  relationship  to  the  assets,  net  worth  or  projected  earnings  of  the  Company,  or  any  other  generally
accepted criteria of value.
We have no firm commitments to purchase any shares.
We have no firm commitment for the purchase of any shares. Therefore there is no assurance that a trading
market will develop or be sustained. The Company has not engaged a placement agent or broker for the
sale of the shares. The Company may be unable to identify investors to purchase the shares and may have
inadequate capital to support its ongoing business obligations.
Our selling shareholder offering may make it more difficult to sell the Company’s offering.
The Company may experience difficulty raising proceeds in our offering in light of the selling shareholder
offer of shares concurrently with our offering as this will make additional shares for purchase and investors
may  choose  to  buy  from  a  selling  shareholder  thus  lessening  the  sales  and  thus  the  proceeds  to  the
Company.
All proceeds from the sale of shares offered by the company will be immediately available for use by
the company.
There is no minimum offering amount and we have not established an escrow to hold any of the proceeds
from the sale of the shares offered by the company. As a result, all proceeds from the sale of shares offered
by the company will be available for immediate use by the company. The proceeds of the sale may not be
sufficient to implement the company’s business strategy.
Our shares are not currently traded on any market or exchange. We will apply to have our common
stock traded over the counter; there is no guarantee that our shares will ever be quoted on the OTC
Bulletin Board or listed on an exchange, which could severely impact their liquidity.
Currently our shares are not traded on any market or exchange. We will apply to have our common stock
quoted  via  the  OTC  Electronic  Bulletin  Board.  Therefore,  our  common  stock  is  expected  to  have  fewer
market makers, lower trading volumes and larger spreads between bid and asked prices than securities
listed on an exchange such as the New York Stock Exchange or the NASDAQ Stock Market. These factors
may result in higher price volatility and less market liquidity for the common stock. It is possible that the
company’s shares may never be quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board or listed on an exchange.
10
A low market price would severely limit the potential market for our common stock.
Our common stock is expected to trade at a price substantially below $5.00 per share, subjecting trading in
the  stock  to  certain  SEC  rules  requiring  additional  disclosures  by  broker-dealers.  These  rules  generally
apply  to  any  non-NASDAQ  equity  security  that  has  a  market  price  share  of  less  than  $5.00  per  share,
subject to certain exceptions (a “penny stock”). Such rules require the delivery, prior to any penny stock
transaction, of a disclosure schedule explaining the penny stock market and the risks associated therewith
and impose various sales practice requirements on broker-dealers who sell penny stocks to persons other
than  established  customers  and  institutional  or  wealthy  investors.  For  these  types  of  transactions,  the
broker-dealer  must  make  a  special  suitability  determination  for  the  purchaser  and  have  received  the
purchaser’s written consent to the transaction prior to the sale. The broker-dealer also must disclose the
commissions payable to the broker-dealer, current bid and offer quotations for the penny stock and, if the
broker-dealer is the sole market maker, the broker-dealer must disclose this fact and the broker-dealer’s
presumed control over the market. Such information must be provided to the customer orally or in writing
before  or  with  the  written  confirmation  of  trade  sent  to  the  customer.  Monthly  statements  must  be  sent
disclosing recent price information for the penny stock held in the account and information on the limited
market in penny stocks. The additional burdens imposed upon broker-dealers by such requirements could
discourage broker-dealers from effecting transactions in our common stock.
FINRA sales practice requirements may also limit a stockholders ability to buy and sell our stock.
In  addition  to  the  penny  stock  rules  promulgated  by  the  SEC,  which  are  discussed  in  the  immediately
preceding risk factor, FINRA rules require that in recommending an investment to a customer, a broker -
dealer must have reasonable grounds for believing that the investment is suitable for that customer. Prior to
recommending speculative, low-priced securities to their non-institutional customers, broker-dealers must
make reasonable efforts to obtain information about the customer’s financial status, tax status, investment
objectives and other information. Under interpretations of these rules, FINRA believes that there is a high
probability that speculative low-priced securities will not be suitable for at least some customers. FINRA
requirements make it more difficult for broker-dealers to recommend that their customers buy our common
stock, which may limit the ability to buy and sell our stock and have an adverse effect on the market value
for our shares.
An investor’s ability to trade our common stock may be limited by trading volume.
A consistently active trading market for our common stock may not occur on the OTCBB. A limited trading
volume may prevent our shareholders from selling shares at such times or in such amounts as they may
otherwise desire. The company’s shares may never be quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board or listed on an
exchange.
We have not voluntarily implemented various corporate governance measures, in the absence of
which,  shareholders  may  have  more  limited  protections  against  interested  director  transactions,
conflicts of interest and similar matters.
Recent  federal  legislation,  including  the  Sarbanes-Oxley  Act  of  2002,  has  resulted  in  the  adoption  of
various corporate governance measures designed to promote the integrity of the corporate management
and the securities markets. Some of these measures have been adopted in response to legal requirements;
others have been adopted by companies in response to the requirements of national securities exchanges,
such as the NYSE or the NASDAQ Stock Market, on which their securities are listed. Among the corporate
governance measures that are required under the rules of national securities exchanges and NASDAQ, are
those that address the board of Directors independence, audit committee oversight, and the adoption of a
code  of  ethics.  We  have  not  yet  adopted  any  of  these  corporate  governance  measures,  and  since  our
securities are not listed on a national securities exchange or NASDAQ, we are not required to do so. It is
possible that if we were to adopt some or all of these corporate governance measures, shareholders would
benefit  from  somewhat  greater  assurances  that  internal  corporate  decisions  were  being  made  by
disinterested directors and that policies had been implemented to define responsible conduct. For example,
in  the  absence  of  audit,  nominating  and  compensation  committees  comprised  of  at  least  a  majority  of
independent directors, decisions concerning matters such as compensation packages to our senior officers
and recommendations for director nominees, may be made by a majority of directors who have an interest
in the outcome of the matters being decided. Prospective investors should bear in mind our current lack of
corporate governance measures in formulating their investment decisions.
Because  we  will  not  pay  dividends  in  the  foreseeable  future,  stockholders  will  only  benefit  from
owning common stock if it appreciates.
We have never paid dividends on our common stock and we do not intend to do so in the foreseeable
future. We intend to retain any future earnings to finance our growth. Accordingly, any potential investor who
anticipates the need for current dividends from his investment should not purchase our common stock.
11
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This  prospectus  contains  forward-looking  statements.  We  have  based  these  forward-looking  statements
largely on our current expectations and projections about future events and financial trends affecting the
financial  condition  of  our  business.  These  forward-looking  statements  are  subject  to  a  number  of  risks,
uncertainties and assumptions, including, among other things:
Factors that might cause these differences include the following:
·
the ability of the company to offer and sell the shares of common stock offered hereby;
·
the integration of multiple technologies and programs;
·
the  ability  to  successfully  complete  development  and  commercialization  of  sites  and  our  company’s
expectations regarding market growth;
·
changes in existing and potential relationships with collaborative partners;
·
the ability to retain certain members of management;
·
our expectations regarding general and administrative expenses;
·
our  expectations  regarding  cash  balances,  capital  requirements,  anticipated  revenue  and  expenses,
including infrastructure expenses; and
·
other factors detailed from time to time in filings with the SEC.
In  addition,  in  this  prospectus,  we  use  words  such  as  “anticipate,”  “believe,”  “plan,”  “expect,”  “future,”
“intend,” and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements.
In  light  of  these  risks  and  uncertainties,  the  forward-looking  events  and  circumstances  discussed  in  this
prospectus may not occur and actual results could differ materially from those anticipated or implied in the
forward-looking statements. The Company will be required to update any forward looking statements as
required by law.
USE OF PROCEEDS
With  respect  to  up  to  400,000  shares  of  common  stock  to  be  sold  by  the  Company,  unless  we  provide
otherwise  in  a  supplement  to  this  prospectus,  we  intend  to  use  the  net  proceeds  from  the  sale  of  our
securities for general corporate purposes, which may include one or more of the following:
·
working capital;
·
set up and marketing activities to locate and define new prospects ;
·
capital expenditures for prospect acquisitions
It is anticipated that the proceeds from this offering will fund the company for approximately 12 months.
Our management will have broad discretion in the allocation of the net proceeds of any offering, however,
the  following  table  outlines  management’s  current  anticipated  use  of  proceeds  given  that  the  offering  is
being completed on a best-efforts basis and may not result in the Company receiving the entire offering
amount. In the event that 100% of the funds are not raised, management has outlined how they perceive the
funds  will  be  allocated,  at  various  funding  levels.  The  offering  scenarios  are  presented  for  illustrative
purposes only and the actual amount of proceeds, if any, may differ. The offering expenses of any selling
shareholders are not included in this table, and any such expenses that were to be incurred would be paid
out of General Operating Expenses. The table is set out in the perceived order of priority of such purposes,
provided however; management may reallocate such proceeds among purposes as the situation dictates.
Pending such uses, we intend to place such funds in an FDIC insured bank account.
12
USE OF PROCEEDS *
 
% of Shares Sold
# of Shares Sold
 
Gross Proceeds
 Less: Offering Expenses*
 
Net Proceeds to the Company
 
Use of Proceeds:
 Legal & Accounting
 General Operational Expenses
 Production & Development
 
Total
25%
50%
100,000 200,000
$25,000 $50,000
1,000
500
$24,500 $49,000
10,000
0
14,500
10,000
14,000
25,000
75%
300,000
100%
400,000
$75,000 $100,000
2,000
1,500
$73,500
10,000
13,500
50,000
$98,000
10,000
13,000
75,000
$24,500 $49,000
$73,500
$98,000
* Offering Expenses $0.02/share of gross proceeds.
CAPITALIZATION
The following table sets forth our capitalization as of December 31, 2013 and June 30, 2014:
Current Assets
Current liabilities
Stockholder’s deficit:
$
December 31,
June 30, 2014
2013
2,684 $
3,275
17,162
5,275
Stockholder’s deficit:
 
 
 
 Common stock
 
 Additional paid-in capital  
 Accumulated deficit
 
Total stockholders’ equity  
 
 
Total capitalization
$
816 
40,482 
(17,889) 
23,409
23,409 $
836
70,462
(35,411)
35,887
35,887
DILUTION
The net tangible book value of our company as of June  30, 2014  was ($35,887) or ($0.00) per share of
common stock. Net tangible book value per share is determined by dividing the tangible book value of the
company (total tangible assets less total liabilities) by the number of outstanding shares of our common
stock on June 30, 2014.
Our net tangible book value and our net tangible book value per share will be impacted by the 400,000
shares of common stock which may be sold by our company. The amount of dilution will depend on the
number of shares sold by our company. The following example shows the dilution to new investors at an
assumed offering price of $0.25 per share.
13
We are registering 400,000 shares of common stock for sale by our company. If all shares are sold at the
offering  price  of  $0.25  per  share  less  estimated  offering  expenses,  our  net  tangible  book  value  and  per
share dilution under various offering scenarios as of March 31, 2014, is illustrated in the following table:
Number of current shares held
Number of new shares issued
Total number of new shares held
 
Net tangible book value before this
offering
Net proceeds to the company
Net tangible book value after this offering
 
Assumed public offering price per share
Net tangible book value per share before
$100,000
Offering
(100%)
$75,000
Offering
(75%)
$50,000
Offering
(50%)
$25,000
Offering
(25%)
400,000
8,357,000  8,357,000  8,357,000  8,357,000
 
100,000
  8,757,000  8,657,000  8,557,000  8,457,000
300,000
200,000
$
$
$
37,863
98,000
37,863
73,500
$ 135,863 $ 111,363 $
$
$
0.25 $
0.25 $
$
0.00
$
0.00
$
37,863
49,000 
86,863 $
0.25 $
$
0.00
37,863
24,500
62,363
0.25
0.00
Net tangible book value per share before
this offering
Increase attributable to new investors
Net tangible book value per share after
this offering
Dilution per share to new stockholders
 
Current Shareholders % after offering
Purchasers % after offering
$
$
$
$
$
0.00
0.02 $
$
0.02
0.23 $
$
0.00
0.01 $
$
0.01
0.24 $
$
0.00
0.0 1 $
$
0.01
0.24 $
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.24
95.4% 
4.6%
96.5% 
3.5%
97.6% 
2.4%
98.7%
1.3%
14
Control
The  issuer  is  registering  331,070  shares  of  common  stock  that  is  collectively  held  by  19  shareholders.
These  shareholders  will  continue  to  own  the  majority  of  the  issuer’s  registered  common  stock  after  the
offering, and will continue to control the issuer.
MARKET FOR COMMON EQUITY AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
Our  common  stock  is  not  currently  traded  on  any  exchange.  We  cannot  assure  that  any  market  for  the
shares will develop or be sustained.
We have not paid any dividends on our common stock and do not anticipate paying cash dividends in the
foreseeable  future.  We  intend  to  retain  any  earnings  to  finance  the  growth  of  our  business.  We  cannot
assure you that we will ever pay cash dividends. Whether we pay cash dividends in the future will be at the
discretion  of  our  Board  of  Directors  and  will  depend  upon  our  financial  condition,  results  of  operations,
capital  requirements  and  any  other  factors  that  the  Board  of  Directors  decides  are  relevant.  See
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
As  of  May  15,  2014,  the  Company  has  nineteen  (19)  shareholders  who  hold  100%  of  its  issued  and
outstanding common stock.
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS AND PROPERTY
Our Company
The Company was formed on September 26, 2013 in the State of Colorado.
Business Strategy
The Company was incorporated in September 2013. Our business model is to purchase or trade stock for
oil and gas properties to be held as long term assets. Oil and gas commodity pricing has stabilized under
the current economic market conditions bringing the U.S. to become the number one producer in the world.
The momentum to drill using enhanced drilling technology in previously undeveloped areas assures the
continued value of these properties. Our lean operating structure positions us well to compete in this very
competitive market. Our strategy is to acquire producing properties that the Company can operate which
 have proven un-drilled locations available for further development. At this time the Company is reviewing
several properties but have no contractual commitments to date.  Our management’s years of experience
and knowledge of the oil and gas industry leads us to believe that there  are an abundance of good drilling
prospects available that have either been overlooked or are not big enough for the larger companies. In the
process  of  identifying  these  drilling  prospects,  the  Company  will  utilize  the  expertise  of  existing
management and employ the highest caliber contract engineering firms available to further evaluate the
properties. To qualify for acquisition, the calculated cash flow after taxes and operating expenses, including
ten  percent  (10%)  interest  per  year,  will  recover  the  acquisition  cost  in  22  to  30  months.  The  cash  flow
calculation will be based conservatively on $70 per barrel of oil and $3.00 per MCF of gas. In addition, the
selection criteria will require the life of current producing wells to be 7 years or longer and the field must
have a minimum total life of 15 years.
In the first phase we will be concentrating on prospects in eastern  Colorado, western Kansas and southern
Wyoming. The depth of the wells in the target areas average from 1500 ft. for the Niobrara formation to a
total depth of 5800 ft. for the Topeka, Heebner, Lansing-Kansas City, Marmaton, Cherokee, Atoka, Morrow,
Mississippian, Spergen, and Osage formations. By concentrating our initial efforts on shallower prospects
we minimize drilling and operating costs. As we grow we plan to expand into the Front Range (Northern
Front Range Outcrop) and Denver Basin Province (D-J Basin, Wattenberg) of Colorado and into western
Kansas (Hugoton Embayment Anadarko Basin – Central Kansas Uplift). The wells in these areas range
from 4,000 ft. to 10,000 ft. Such wells are more expensive to drill and operate, but also offer bigger returns.
Some of the formations in these areas are the Sussex, Niobrara, Codell, J Sand and the D Sand formations.
   The Company  will develop prospects and will obtain partners to participate in the costs of drilling or
acquisitions  with  the  Company    serving  as  the  designated  Operator.    The  Company    will  also  retain  a
royalty or working interest in the wells drilled or acquired.
In the second phase of operations, we will expand into Oklahoma, Texas, and eastern Kansas. We will then
place a great deal of emphasis on natural gas production and the transportation of natural gas. We believe
natural  gas  will  be  the  fuel  of  the  future  for  automobiles,  trucks  and  buses  because  of  the  clean-air
standards that are proposed and will soon be going into effect, and now is an ideal time to acquire natural
gas assets due to the current pricing matrix. The Company also plans on acquiring field transportation and
short  haul  lines  as  part  of  our  future  business  plan  expansion.  Acquiring  these  types  of  company  lines,
specifically  in  the  areas  where  the  company  will  have  production  located,  will  be  advantageous  due  to
savings in internal transportation costs, and the profitability margins of operating the lines and marketing
natural gas. Managing the transportation system, in conjunction with field operations, will enhance cash
flow. After obtaining the transportation lines, we hope to then develop our own end-users for natural gas.
This will further enhance the profit margin of the company.
15
The  Company  is  an  “emerging  growth  company,”  as  defined  in  the  Jumpstart  Our  Business
Startups Act
The Company shall continue to be deemed an emerging growth company until the earliest of--
(A)
the  last  day  of  the  fiscal  year  of  the  issuer  during  which  it  had  total  annual  gross  revenues  of
$1,000,000,000 (as such amount is indexed for inflation every 5 years by the Commission to reflect the
change in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics,
setting the threshold to the nearest 1,000,000) or more;
(B)
the  last  day  of  the  fiscal  year  of  the  issuer  following  the  fifth  anniversary  of  the  date  of  the  first  sale  of
common equity securities of the issuer pursuant to an effective registration statement under this title;
(C)
the date on which such issuer has, during the previous 3-year period, issued more than $1,000,000,000 in
non-convertible debt; or
(D)
the date on which such issuer is deemed to be a ‘large accelerated filer’, as defined in section 240.12b-2 of
title 17, Code of Federal Regulations, or any successor thereto.’.
As an emerging growth company the company is exempt from Section 404(b) of Sarbanes Oxley. Section
404(a) requires Issuers to publish information in their annual reports concerning the scope and adequacy of
the internal control structure and procedures for financial reporting. This statement shall also assess the
effectiveness of such internal controls and procedures.
Section 404(b) requires that the registered accounting firm shall, in the same report, attest to and report on
the assessment on the effectiveness of the internal control structure and procedures for financial reporting.
As  an  emerging  growth  company  the  company  is  exempt  from  Section  14A  and  B  of  the  Securities
Exchange  Act  of  1934  which  require  the  shareholder  approval  of  executive  compensation  and  golden
parachutes.
The Company has irrevocably opted out of the extended transition period for complying with new or revised
accounting standards pursuant to Section 107(b) of the Act.
The Company is also eligible for the above exemptions as a Smaller Reporting Company and therefore the
Company will not lose such exemptions if it loses its emerging growth company status unless it also ceases
to be a Smaller Reporting Company.
Employees
As of June 1, 2014, we have no employees, but have four (4) officers and directors who are non-employee
Directors.  We  have  no  agreements  with  any  of  our  management/subcontractors  for  any  services.  We
consider our relations with our subcontractors to be good.
Description of Property
We currently lease office space at 600 17th Street, 2800 South, Denver Colorado 80202 as our principal
offices. We believe these facilities are in good condition, but that we may need to expand our leased space
as our business efforts increase.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF
OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction
with (i) our audited financial statements as of December 31, 2013 that appear elsewhere in this registration
statement. This registration statement contains certain forward-looking statements and our future operating
results could differ materially from those discussed herein. Such forward-looking statements involve known
and  unknown  risks,  uncertainties  and  other  factors  which  may  cause  our  actual  results,  performance  or
achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or
implied by such forward-looking statements. Given these uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place
undue reliance on such forward-looking statements. We disclaim any obligation to update any such factors
or to announce publicly the results of any revisions of the forward -looking statements contained herein to
reflect  future  events  or  developments.  For  information  regarding  risk  factors  that  could  have  a  material
adverse effect on our business, refer to the Risk Factors section of this prospectus beginning on page 6.
16
Going Concern
The  future  of  our  company  is  dependent  upon  its  ability  to  obtain  financing  and  upon  future  profitable
operations.  Management  has  plans  to  seek  additional  capital  through  a  private  placement  and  public
offering of its common stock, if necessary.  Our  auditors  have  expressed  a  going  concern  opinion  which
raises substantial doubts about the Issuers ability to continue as a going concern.
Plan of Operation
The Company was incorporated in September 2013. Our business model is to purchase or trade stock for
oil and gas properties to be held as long term assets. Oil and gas commodity pricing has stabilized under
the current economic market conditions bringing the U.S. to become the number one producer in the world.
The momentum to drill using enhanced drilling technology in previously undeveloped areas assures the
continued value of these properties. Our lean operating structure positions us well to compete in this very
competitive market. Our strategy is to acquire producing properties, which have proven un-drilled locations
available for further development. There are an abundance of good drilling prospects available that have
either been overlooked or are not big enough for the larger companies. In the process of identifying these
drilling prospects, the Company will utilize the expertise of existing staff and employ the highest caliber
contract  engineering  firms  available  to  further  evaluate  the  properties.  To  qualify  for  acquisition,  the
calculated cash flow after taxes and operating expenses, including ten percent (10%) interest per year, will
recover the acquisition cost in 22 to 30 months. The cash flow calculation will be based conservatively on
$70  per  barrel  of  oil  and  $3.00  per  MCF  of  gas.  In  addition,  the  selection  criteria  will  require  the  life  of
current producing wells to be 7 years or longer and the field must have a minimum total life of 15 years.
In the first phase we will be concentrating on prospects in eastern  Colorado, western Kansas and southern
Wyoming. The depth of the wells in the target areas average from 1500 ft. for the Niobrara formation to a
total depth of 5800 ft. for the Topeka, Heebner, Lansing-Kansas City, Marmaton, Cherokee, Atoka, Morrow,
Mississippian, Spergen and Osage formations. By concentrating our initial efforts on shallower prospects
we minimize drilling and operating costs. As we grow we plan to expand into the Front Range (Northern
Front Range Outcrop) and Denver Basin Province (D-J Basin, Wattenberg) of Colorado and into western
Kansas (Hugoton Embayment Anadarko Basin – Central Kansas Uplift). The wells in these areas range
from 4,000 ft. to 10,000 ft. Such wells are more expensive to drill and operate, but also offer bigger returns.
Some of the formations in these areas are the Sussex, Niobrara, Codell, J Sand and the D Sand formations
  The  Company    will  develop  prospects  and  will  obtain  partners  to  participate  in  the  costs  of  drilling  or
acquisitions  with  the  Company    serving  as  the  designated  Operator.    The  Company    will  also  retain  a
royalty or working interest in the wells drilled or acquired.
We  anticipate  our  second  phase  to  begin  within  approximately  two  (2)  years  after  we  have  reached
revenues  sufficient  to  cover  expansion  costs. In  the  second  phase  of  operations,  we  will  expand  into
Oklahoma,  Texas,  and  eastern  Kansas.  We  will  then  place  a  great  deal  of  emphasis  on  natural  gas
production and the transportation of natural gas. We believe natural gas will be the fuel of the future for
automobiles, trucks and buses because of the clean-air standards that are proposed and will soon be going
into effect, and now is an ideal time to acquire natural gas assets due to the current pricing matrix. The
Company also plans on acquiring field transportation and short haul lines as part of our future business
plan expansion. Acquiring these types of company lines, specifically in the areas where the company will
have  production  located,  will  be  advantageous  due  to  savings  in  internal  transportation  costs,  and  the
profitability margins of operating the lines and marketing natural gas. Managing the transportation system,
in  conjunction  with  field  operations,  will  enhance  cash  flow.  After  obtaining  the  transportation  lines,  we
hope to then develop our own end-users for natural gas. This will further enhance the profit margin of the
company.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2013 we had current assets $2,684, consisting of $2,229 in cash and $455 in prepaid
expenses. Current liabilities at December 31, 2013, totaled $3,275. As of June  30, 2014 we had current
assets of $17,162, consisting of $16,707 in cash and $455 in prepaid expenses. Current liabilities at June
30, 2014, totaled $5,275.
We have no material commitments for the next twelve months. We will however require additional capital to
meet  our  liquidity  needs.  Currently,  the  Company  has  determined  that  its  anticipated  monthly  cash  flow
needs should not exceed $8,000 per month for the last 6 months of 2014.
The  Company’s  projected  capital  needs  and  its  projected  increase  in  expenses  are  based  upon  the
Company’s projected acquisition of oil and gas interests over the coming twelve months; however, in the
event that the full offering proceeds are not raised, the Company would acquire the oil and gas interests at a
slower pace and/or focus its energies on the refinement of existing properties to maximum their productivity.
The Company’s success does not depend on a scheduled acquisition and therefore it has flexibility to scale
back its expenses to meet actual income.
17
We  anticipate  that  we  will  receive  sufficient  proceeds  from  investors  through  this  offering,  to  continue
operations for at least the next twelve months; however, there is no assurance that such proceeds will be
received and there are no agreements or understandings currently in effect from any potential investors. It is
anticipated  that  the  Company  will  receive  increasing  revenues  from  operations  in  the  coming  year;
however, since the Company has a short history of revenues, it is difficult to anticipate what those revenues
might be, if any, and therefore, management has assumed for planning purposes only that it may need to
sell  common  stock,  take  loans  or  advances  from  officers,  directors  or  shareholders  or  enter  into  debt
financing agreements in order to meet our cash needs over the coming twelve months. The Issuer has no
agreements or understandings for any of the above-listed financing options.
The  Use  of  Proceeds  section  includes  a  detailed  description  of  the  use  of  proceeds  over  the  differing
offering scenarios of 100%, 75%, 50% and 25%. As the Company’s expenses are relatively stable, unless
additional websites are rolled out, the Company believes it can fund its present operations with projected
revenues together with offering proceeds under any of the offering scenarios. The Company will consider
raising additional funds during 2014 and 2015 through sales of equity, debt and convertible securities, if it is
deemed necessary.
Alpha Energy has no intention in investing in short-term or long-term discretionary financial programs of any
kind.
Results of Operations
We have generated limited revenue from September 26, 2013 (inception) to June 30, 2014. As a result, we
have reported a net loss of $17,889 for the period ended December 31, 2013 and $35,411 through June 30,
2014.
Our independent registered public accounting firm has expressed a going concern opinion which raises
substantial  doubts  about  our  ability  to  continue  as  a  going  concern.  Due  to  the  limited  nature  of  the
Company’s operations to date, the Company does not believe that past performance is any indication of
future performance. The impact on the Company’s revenues of recognized trends and uncertainties in our
market will not be recognized until such time as the Company has had sufficient operations to provide a
baseline.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or
future  effect  on  our  financial  condition,  changes  in  financial  condition,  revenues  or  expenses,  results  of
operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies
The  methods,  estimates  and  judgments  we  use  in  applying  our  accounting  policies  have  a  significant
impact on the results we report in our financial statements, which we discuss under the heading "Results of
Operations" following this section of our MD&A. Some of our accounting policies require us to make difficult
and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently
uncertain.
We set forth below those material accounting policies that we believe are the most critical to an investor’s
understanding of our financial results and condition and that require complex management judgment.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of the Company’s financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally
accepted  in  the  United  States  requires  management  to  make  estimates  and  assumptions  that  affect  the
reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of
the financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Actual  results  could  differ  from  those  estimates.  The  Company’s  periodic  filings  with  the  Securities  and
Exchange Commission include, where applicable, disclosures of estimates, assumptions, uncertainties and
markets that could affect the financial statements and future operations of the Company.
Revenue Recognition
The company recognizes revenue under ASC 605 “Revenue Recognition.” Revenue is recognized when it
is invoiced to the customer.
18
OUR MANAGEMENT
Executive Officers
Name
 
Michael D. Davis
 
Karen Ziegler
 
Fred L. Croci
54
Age   Position
Chief Executive Officer & Director
   
  President, CFO, CAO, Treasurer
   
  Vice President, Asset Advisor
67
67
Reginald A. Kemp
78
Corporation Secretary and Office
Manager
Manager
Directors, Executive Officers, Promoters and Control Persons
Michael D. Davis – Chief Executive Officer & Director
Mr. Davis has over 32 years of experience in the oil and gas industry. Prior to joining Alpha Energy, Inc., Mr.
Davis served as Chief Executive Officer of CREDO Petroleum Corporation (Denver, CO), a publically held
oil and gas exploration company (NASDAQ “CRED”) from 2011 to 2013. While leading CREDO as CEO,
the  company  was  recognized  as  ”#10  of  Top  Oil  and  Gas  Companies”  in  Denver  –  Denver  Business
Journal, 2012; and also received the distinction of being included within the Russell 2000 Index for 2012 of
companies nationwide. In October 2012, Mr. Davis was instrumental in the sale and merger of CREDO to
Forestar  Group,  Inc.  (NYSE  “FOR”)  for  a  premium  all-cash  transaction  of  $148  million.  Before  joining
CREDO, from 2009 to 2011 Mr. Davis served as Manager of Acquisitions & Divestitures at privately held
Aviva, Inc. (Denver, CO) where he managed acquisitions and divestitures covering over 6,000 properties
throughout 26 states - representing 24 separate business unit partnerships. From 2006 to 2009 Mr. Davis
also served as Vice President of Land & Business Development at DRM Energy Corporation (Denver, CO)
where he was responsible for business development and strategic planning for new ventures in oil and gas
exploration and production on behalf of a multi-billion dollar international joint venture group comprised of
Neumin Production Company (USA), Formosa Petrochemical Corporation (FPCC-Taiwan) and Formosa
Plastics (FPC-USA). Mr. Davis was responsible for procuring new acquisitions on behalf of the Formosa
group which included evaluations of acquisitions valued at over $1 billion for a single transaction. He was
also instrumental in the development and allocation of the joint venture group’s combined annual drilling
budget which reached in excess of $200 million. Mr. Davis has held several other senior-level positions
with energy companies located in the Rocky Mountain Region, including Cimarex Energy (Denver, CO)
and Anschutz Exploration Corporation (Denver, CO). From 2009 to present Mr.  Davis has also served as
Executive Member of BlackRock Oil and Gas, LLC (Denver, CO), a company engaged in evaluations and
acquisitions of oil and gas leases, royalty, mineral and working interest. He has been involved in private
ownership  and  operations  of  various  other  entities  which  include  real  estate  development,  construction
management and oil and gas investments.
Mr. Davis received his Bachelor of Science Degree in Business Administration - Industrial Relations from
Colorado State University, and he completed the Energy Executive Management Program at the University
of Oklahoma, Price College of Business. Mr. Davis was awarded the honorable designation of “Who’s Who
in  Energy”  in  the  Denver  Business  Journal  in  November  2012.  He  has  also  been  acknowledged  in  the
annual  publication  of  the  Oil  and  Gas  Investor  magazine  edition  of  “Who’s  Who  in  Exploration  and
Production – Acquisitions & Divestitures” from 2010 through 2013.
Karen Ziegler – President, CFO, CAO, Treasurer
Ms. Ziegler,  from  2001  to  2006 has  participated  in  a  variety  of  roles  in  major  real  estate  development
projects.  These  involved  simultaneous  projects  for  multiple  residential  developments,  major  water  and
sewer infrastructure improvement projects and multiple commercial development projects.
In addition, from 2005 to present, she has served in several administrative activities in various oil and gas
ventures.  In  these  capacities,  she  has  performed  analytical,  accounting,  cost  projections,  budgeting,
scheduling and profit and loss analysis functions.
19
Fred L. Croci – Vice President, Asset Advisor Manager
Mr. Croci’s 43 year business career has spanned many facets of the real estate and oil and gas industries.
A graduate of Iowa State University in 1969. He obtained his firt real estate license in 1970, and has held
brokerage licenses in Iowa, Illinois, Wyoming and Colorado and has been involved in the brokerage, sales,
leasing, development, and construction activities of, or provided consulting services on hundreds of millions
of dollars’ worth of development properties, most recently in Northern Colorado, including a wide variety of
project types. He started Wheeler Commercial Property Services, LLC in March of 1995 and was manager
of that company until it sold in February of 2006. He then started Commercial Broker’s Alliance, LLC in
March of 2006 and is still operating and managing that commercial real estate brokerage and development
consulting company.
He also had extensive experience with oil and gas marketing and oil operating companies during the mid
1980’s. This  includes  participation  with  gas  and  oil  drilling  programs  over  several  central  and  western
states  involving  multiple  drilling  rigs.  His  focus  was  on  renovation,  rework  and  improvement  of  old
producing  fields.  This  focus  included  a  major  emphasis  on  waterflood  projects  where  old  producing  oil
fields were reworked to improve production via water - flooding the permeable sandstone formations.
As  president  of  a  professional  management  firm since  February  of  1998  called Wolverine  Management
Group, Inc., Mr. Croci oversees other entities including corporations, limited liability companies and limited
liability limited partnerships.
Reginald A. Kemp – Corporation Secretary and Office Manager
Mr. Kemp is a seasoned manager with more than 40 years’ experience in large international aerospace and
private  engineering  and  manufacturing  companies  and  emerging  divisions  of  such  operations.  His
involvement  with  human  resources,  procurement,  material/production  control,  cost  accounting,  contracts
management, project management and governmental entity interface activities uniquely equip him to serve
Alpha Energy.
From 2007 through 2013 Mr. Kemp was involved with a major expansion of a small private engineering and
manufacturing company. In this position, he facilitated government permitting approvals for physical plant
and  site  expansions,  coordinated  construction,  oversaw  major  subcontractors  involved  with  the  project,
maintained schedules and budgets and oversaw local governmental inspections throughout the project’s
construction and completion.
Executive Compensation
Summary  Compensation  Table.  The  following  table  sets  forth  certain  information  concerning  the  annual
compensation of our Chief Executive Officer and our other executive officers during the last two fiscal years.
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(a)
Name
and
$0
0
$0
0
0
2013
2014
2014
Principal
Position YearSalary*Bonus
Michael D.
Davis,
Chief
Executive
Officer &
Director
 
Karen
Ziegler
President 2013
 
Fred L.
Croci
Vice
President
 
Reginald A.
Kemp
Secretary 2013
2014
2014
2013
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Stock
Option
Awards
Awards
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Non-equity
incentive plan
compensation
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20
(h)
Nonqualified
deferred
(i)
(j)
compensation
All Other
Total
earnings
Compensation
Compensation
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
$0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year End. There were no outstanding equity awards as of June 1,
2014.
Compensation of Non-Employee Directors. We currently have only non-employee directors and no
compensation was paid to non-employee directors in the period ended December 31, 2013 or thru June 1,
2014. We intend to identify qualified candidates to serve on the Board of Directors and to develop a
compensation package to offer to members of the Board of Directors and its Committees. The following
Board members will devote time to the company as needed, which at this time is estimated to be as follows:
 Mr. Davis 10% up to full time as needed;  Mr. Croci 5%up to full time as needed; Ms Ziegler 25% up to full
time as needed and Mr. Kemp 20% up to full time as needed
Audit, Compensation and Nominating Committees. As noted above, we intend to apply for listing our
common stock on the OTC Electronic Bulletin Board, which does not require companies to maintain audit,
compensation or nominating committees. The company’s shares may never be quoted on the OTC Bulletin
Board  or  listed  on  an  exchange.  Considering  the  fact  that  we  are  an  early  stage  company,  we  do  not
maintain standing audit, compensation or nominating committees. The functions typically associated with
these committees are performed by the entire Board of Directors which currently consists of three members
who are not considered independent.
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT
Security  Ownership  of  Principal  Stockholders,  Directors,  Nominees  and  Executive  Officers  and  Related
Stockholder Matters
The  following  table  sets  forth,  as  of  May  15,  2014,  certain  information  with  respect  to  the  beneficial
ownership of shares of our common stock by: (i) each person known to us to be the beneficial owner of
more than five percent (5%) of our outstanding shares of common stock, (ii) each director or nominee for
director of our Company, (iii) each of the executives, and (iv) our directors and executive officers as a group.
Unless  otherwise  indicated,  the  address  of  each  shareholder  is  c/o  our  company  at  our  principal  office
address:
Beneficial Owner
Arrow Consulting LLP
Address
PO Box 1397
Angela Stevens, Vice President
Ballycastle Living Trust
Kyle Anderson, Trustee
AG Management Associates
Geraldine Weiss, Trustee
Black Rock Oil and Gas, LLC
Wellington, CO
80549
  1500 Cliff Branch
Drive
Henderson, NV
89014
   PO Box 1397
Wellington, CO
80549
  P. O. Box 372041
Michael Davis, Executive
Denver, CO 80237
Number of
Shares
Beneficially
Owned (*)
Percent of
Class (**)
2,050,000
24.5%
3,000,000
1,150,000
35.8%
13.8%
650,000
7.8%
Member
Croci Land Holding, LLC
Fred Croci, Manager
Reginald A. Sr., Frances H.
Kemp
All Directors and Officers as a
Group
(1 persons)
PMB 330 1540 Main
Street #218
Windsor, CO 80550
  PO Box 205
Wellington, CO
80549
650,000
7.8%
500,000
6.0%
500,000
6.0%
500,00
6.0%
(*) Beneficial ownership is determined in accordance with the rules of the SEC which generally attribute
Beneficial ownership of securities to persons who possess sole or shared voting power and/or investment
power  with  respect  to  those  securities.  Unless  otherwise  indicated,  voting  and  investment  power  are
exercised solely by the person named above or shared with members of such person’s household. This
includes any shares such person has the right to acquire within 60 days.
(**)  Percent  of  class  is  calculated  on  the  basis  of  the  number  of  shares  outstanding  on  June  1,  2014
(8,357,000).
21
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
It  is  our  practice  and  policy  to  comply  with  all  applicable  laws,  rules  and  regulations  regarding  related
person transactions, including the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. A related person is an executive officer,
director or more than 5% stockholder of Alpha Energy, Inc., including any immediate family members, and
any entity owned or controlled by such persons. Our Board of Directors (excluding any interested director) is
charged  with  reviewing  and  approving  all  related-person  transactions,  and  a  special  committee  of  our
Board of Directors is established to negotiate the terms of such transactions. In considering related-person
transactions, our Board of Directors takes into account all relevant available facts and circumstances.
The Company received advances from related parties totaling $275 during the period ended December 31,
2013. The advances from related parties are due on demand with no interest incurred.
Director Independence
Our  Board  of  Directors  has  adopted  the  definition  of  “independence”  as  described  under  the  Sarbanes
Oxley Act of 2002 (Sarbanes-Oxley) Section 301, Rule 10A-3 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
(the Exchange Act) and NASDAQ Rules 4200 and 4350. Our Board of Directors has determined that its
members do not meet the independence requirements.
DESCRIPTION OF CAPITAL STOCK
Title of Class
 
Common stock, $0.001 par value
per share
Preferred stock, $0.001 par value
per share
Common stock
Authorized and Issued Stock
Number of Shares at June 1,
2014
Authorized   Outstanding
65,000,000
8,357,000
10,000,000
0
Dividends. Each share of common stock is entitled to receive an equal dividend, if one is declared, which
is  unlikely.  We  have  never  paid  dividends  on  our  common  stock  and  do  not  intend  to  do  so  in  the
foreseeable future. We intend to retain any future earnings to finance our growth. See Risk Factors.
Liquidation.  If  our  company  is  liquidated,  any  assets  that  remain  after  the  creditors  are  paid,  and  the
owners  of  preferred  stock  receive  any  liquidation  preferences,  will  be  distributed  to  the  owners  of  our
common stock pro-rata.
Voting Rights. Each share of our common stock entitles the owner to one vote. There is no cumulative
voting. A simple majority can elect all of the directors at a given meeting and the minority would not be able
to elect any directors at that meeting.
Preemptive Rights. Owners of our common stock have no preemptive rights. We may sell shares of our
common stock to third parties without first offering it to current stockholders.
Redemption  Rights.  We  do  not  have  the  right  to  buy  back  shares  of  our  common  stock  except  in
extraordinary transactions such as mergers and court approved bankruptcy reorganizations. Owners of our
common stock do not ordinarily have the right to require us to buy their common stock. We do not have a
sinking fund to provide assets for any buy back.
Conversion Rights. Shares of our common stock cannot be converted into any other kind of stock except
in extraordinary transactions, such as mergers and court approved bankruptcy reorganizations.
22
Limitations on Stockholder Actions
Title 7 of the Colorado Revised Statutes ("CRS") provides that a corporation may indemnify any person
who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or completed action,
suit or proceeding whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative (other than an action by or in the
right of the corporation) by reason of the fact that he is or was a director, officer, employee or agent of the
corporation, or is or was serving at the request of the corporation as a director, officer, employee or agent of
another  corporation,  partnership,  joint  venture,  trust  or  other  enterprise,  against  expenses  (including
attorneys' fees), judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement actually and reasonably incurred by him
in connection with such action, suit or proceeding if he is not liable or acted in good faith and in a manner
he reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the corporation, and, with respect to
any criminal action or proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe his conduct was unlawful. Title 7 of
the Colorado Revised Statutes further provides that a corporation similarly may indemnify any such person
serving in any such capacity who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened,
pending or completed action or suit by or in the right of the corporation to procure a judgment in its favor by
reason of the fact that he is or was a director, officer, employee or agent of the corporation or is or was
serving at the request of the corporation as a director, officer, employee or agent of another corporation,
partnership, joint venture, trust or other enterprise, against expenses (including attorneys' fees) actually and
reasonably incurred in connection with the defense or settlement of such action or suit if he is not liable
pursuant to Title 7 of the Colorado Revised Statutes or acted in good faith and in a manner he reasonably
believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the corporation and except that no indemnification
shall be made in respect of any claim, issue or matter as to which such person shall have been adjudged to
be  liable  to  the  corporation  unless  and  only  to  the  extent  that  the  court  or  other  court  of  competent
jurisdiction  in  which  such  action  or  suit  was  brought  shall  determine  upon  application  that,  despite  the
adjudication  of  liability  but  in  view  of  all  of  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  such  person  is  fairly  and
reasonably entitled to indemnity for such expenses which the court or other court of competent jurisdiction
shall deem proper.
Our bylaws provide that it may indemnify its officers, directors, agents and any other persons to the fullest
extent permitted by the CRS.
23
SELLING STOCKHOLDERS
The following table presents information regarding the selling stockholders and the shares that may be sold
by  them  pursuant  to  this  prospectus.  See  also  Security  Ownership  of  Certain  Beneficial  Owners  and
Management. These selling shareholders are Underwriters for this offering.
Number of Shares
of Common Stock
Beneficially
Owned Prior to
Offering (1)
Number of
Shares of
Common
Stock Being
Offered
Name
AG Management
Associates
1,150,000
Shares of
Common Stock
Percentages
Beneficially
Beneficially
Owned After the
Owned After the
Offering
Offering (1)
11,500
1,138,500
13.6%
Geraldine Weiss,
Trustee
Arrow Consulting,
LLP
Angela Stevens,
VP
Ballycastle Living
Trust
Kyle Anderson,
Trustee
CBK Management
Assoc.
Cindy Nider,
Trustee
Grant Ziegler
Black Rock Oil and
Gas, LLC
Michael Davis,
Executive Member
Croci Land
Holding, LLC
Fred Croci,
Manager
Reginald A. Sr.
and Frances H.
Kemp
Angela Stevens
Delmer E. &
Sharon K Zeigler
Southwest
2,050,000
20,500
2,029,500
24.2%
3,000,000
30,000
2,970,000
35.5%
72,000
720
71,280
0.8%
50,000 
650,000
500 
6,500
49,500 
643,500
0.5%
7.7%
500,000
5,000
495,000
5.9%
500,000
5,000
495,000
50,000 
40,000
30,000
500 
400
300
49,500 
39,600
29,700
5.9%
0.5%
0.4%
0.3%
Southwest
Business Services,
LLC
30,000
300
29,700
0.3%
Theresa
Calabrese,
Manager
Dennis Arends
 
Joshua Haveman  
Margaret H. Kantes 
 
Bonita Walker
Kayleigh S. Hewtt
 
 
Deron Horne
Reginald A. Kemp
 
& Sherry Kemp
Margaret R.
Christie
Croci Land
Holding, LLC
Fred Croci,
Manager
Reginald A. Sr.
and Frances H.
Kemp
(1)
15,000 
20,000 
10,000 
10,000 
20,000 
40,000 
20,000
30,000
83,333
150 
20,000 
10,000 
10,000 
20,000 
40,000 
20,000
30,000
83,333
16,667
16,667
14,850 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
0
0
0
8,357,000
331,070
8,025,930
0.2%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
96%
The  number  of  shares  listed  in  these  columns  includes  all  shares  beneficially  owned  by  the  selling
stockholder.
24
The ownership percentages listed in these columns include only shares beneficially owned by the listed
selling  stockholder.  Beneficial  ownership  is  determined  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  the  SEC.  In
computing the percentage of shares beneficially owned by a selling stockholder, shares of common stock
subject to options or warrants, or debt convertible into common stock held by that selling stockholder that
was  exercisable  on  or  within  60  days  after  June  1,  2014,  were  deemed  outstanding  for  the  purpose  of
computing the percentage ownership of that selling stockholder. The ownership percentages are calculated
based on the 8,357,000 shares of common stock were outstanding on June 1, 2014.
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
By Selling Stockholders
The  selling  stockholders  and  any  of  its  pledgees,  donees,  transferees,  assignees  and  successors-in-
interest may, from time to time, sell any or all of its shares of common stock on any stock exchange, market
or trading facility on which the shares are traded or in private transactions. These sales may be at fixed
prices.. The selling stockholder may use any one or more of the following methods when selling shares:
·
ordinary brokerage transactions and transactions in which the broker-dealer solicits investors;
·
block trades in which the broker-dealer will attempt to sell the shares as agent but may position and resell a
portion of the block as principal to facilitate the transaction;
·
purchases by a broker-dealer as principal and resale by the broker-dealer for its account;
·
an exchange distribution in accordance with the rules of the applicable exchange;
·
privately negotiated transactions;
·
to  cover  short  sales  made  after  the  date  that  this  Registration  Statement  is  declared  effective  by  the
Commission;
·
broker-dealers  may  agree  with  the  selling  stockholder  to  sell  a  specified  number  of  such  shares  at  a
stipulated price per share;
·
a combination of any such methods of sale; and
·
any other method permitted pursuant to applicable law.
The  selling  stockholder  may  also  sell  shares  under  Rule  144  promulgated  under  the  Securities  Act,  or
another  exemption  from  the  registration  requirements  under  the  Securities  Act,  if  available,  rather  than
under this prospectus.
The issuer and the selling shareholders will sell the common stock being registered in this offering at a
fixed price of $0.25 per share. The company’s shares may never be quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board or
listed on an exchange.
Broker-dealers engaged by the selling stockholders may arrange for other brokers-dealers to participate in
sales. Broker-dealers may receive commissions or discounts from the selling stockholder (or, if any broker-
dealer acts as agent for the purchaser of shares, from the purchaser) in amounts to be negotiated.
The  selling  stockholders  may  from  time  to  time  pledge  or  grant  a  security  interest  in  some  or  all  of  the
Shares  owned  by  it  and,  if  it  defaults  in  the  performance  of  their  secured  obligations,  the  pledgees  or
secured parties may offer and sell shares of common stock from time to time under this prospectus, or under
an amendment to this prospectus under Rule 424(b)(3) or other applicable provision of the Securities Act of
1933 amending the list of selling stockholders  to  include  the  pledgee,  transferee  or  other  successors  in
interest as selling stockholders under this prospectus.
Upon the company being notified in writing by a selling stockholder that any material arrangement has been
entered  into  with  a  broker-dealer  for  the  sale  of  common  stock  through  a  block  trade,  special  offering,
exchange distribution or secondary distribution or a purchase by a broker or dealer, a supplement to this
prospectus will be filed, if required, pursuant to Rule 424(b) under the Securities Act, disclosing (i) the name
of each such selling stockholder and of the participating broker-dealer(s), (ii) the number of shares involved,
(iii) the price at which such the shares of common stock were sold, (iv) the commissions paid or discounts or
concessions  allowed  to  such  broker-dealer(s),  where  applicable,  (v)  that  such  broker  -dealer(s)  did  not
conduct any investigation to verify the information set out or incorporated by reference in this prospectus,
and (vi) other facts material to the transaction. In addition, upon the company being notified in writing by a
selling  stockholder  that  a  donee  or  pledgee  intends  to  sell  more  than  500  shares  of  common  stock,  a
supplement to this prospectus will be filed if then required in accordance with applicable securities law.
The  selling  stockholder  also  may  transfer  the  shares  of  common  stock  in  other  circumstances,  in  which
case  the  transferees,  pledgees  or  other  successors  in  interest  will  be  the  selling  beneficial  owners  for
purposes of this prospectus.
25
The  selling  stockholders  and  any  broker-dealers  or  agents  that  are  involved  in  selling  the  shares  are
“underwriters” within the meaning of the Securities Act in connection with such sales. In such event, any
commissions  received  by  such  broker-dealers  or  agents  and  any  profit  on  the  resale  of  the  shares
purchased by them may be deemed to be underwriting commissions or discounts under the Securities Act.
Because the selling stockholders are an underwriter within the meaning of the Securities Act, they will be
subject to the prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act. Discounts, concessions, commissions
and similar selling expenses, if any, that can be attributed to the sale of Securities will be paid by the selling
stockholder and/or the purchasers. The selling stockholder has represented and warranted to the company
that  it  acquired  the  securities  subject  to  this  registration  statement  in  the  ordinary  course  of  the  selling
stockholder’s business and, at the time of its purchase of such securities the selling stockholder had no
agreements or understandings, directly or indirectly, with any person to distribute any such securities.
The company has advised the selling stockholders that it may not use shares registered on this Registration
Statement to cover short sales of common stock made prior to the date on which this Registration Statement
shall have been declared effective by the Commission. If the selling stockholder uses this prospectus for
any sale of the common stock, it will be subject to the prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities
Act. The selling stockholder will be responsible to comply with the applicable provisions of the Securities
Act and Exchange Act, and the rules and regulations thereunder promulgated, including, without limitation,
Regulation  M,  as  applicable  to  such  selling  stockholder  in  connection  with  re-sales  of  their  respective
shares under this Registration Statement.
The company is required to pay all fees and expenses incident to the registration of the shares, but the
company will not receive any proceeds from the sale of the common stock by selling stockholders. The
company  has  agreed  to  indemnify  the  selling  stockholder  against  certain  losses,  claims,  damages  and
liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act.
By Our Company
We may sell the Units subject to this prospectus from time to time in any manner permitted by the Securities
Act, including any one or more of the following ways:
·
directly to investors;
·
to investors through agents;
·
to dealers; and/or
·
through one or more underwriters.
Any underwritten offering may be on a best efforts or a firm commitment basis. We may also make direct
sales through subscription rights distributed to our stockholders on a pro rata basis, which may or may not
be transferable. In any distribution of subscription rights to stockholders, if all of the underlying securities are
not subscribed for, we may then sell the unsubscribed securities directly to third parties or may engage the
services  of  one  or  more  underwriters,  dealers  or  agents,  including  standby  underwriters,  to  sell  the
unsubscribed securities to third parties. Under agreements into which we may enter, underwriters, dealers
and  agents  who  participate  in  the  distribution  of  the  shares  of  common  stock  may  be  entitled  to
indemnification by us against some liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act, or contribution
from  us  to  payments  which  the  underwriters,  dealers  or  agents  may  be  required  to  make.  Underwriters,
dealers and agents may engage in transactions with us or perform services for us from time to time in the
ordinary course of business.
The distribution of the Units may be effected from time to time in one or more transactions:
·
at a fixed price or prices.
Shares sold as part of the Units sold pursuant to the registration statement of which this prospectus is a part
may not be listed or traded on any exchange or automated quotations system, but may be listed on the OTC
Electronic Bulletin Board. The company’s shares may never be quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board or listed
on an exchange. In the sale of the shares, underwriters or agents may receive compensation from us or
from purchasers of the shares, for whom they may act as agents, in the form of discounts, concessions or
commissions.  Underwriters  may  sell  the  shares  to  or  through  dealers,  and  such  dealers  may  receive
compensation  in  the  form  of  discounts,  concessions  or  commissions  from  the  underwriters  and/or
commissions from the purchasers for whom they may act as agents. Underwriters, dealers and agents that
participate in the distribution of the securities will be underwriters under the Securities Act of 1933, and any
discounts or commissions they receive from us and any profit on the resale of securities they realize may be
deemed to be underwriting discounts and commissions under the Securities Act.
26
Each  time  we  sell  Units,  we  will  describe  the  method  of  distribution  of  the  Units  in  the  prospectus
supplement relating to such transaction. The applicable prospectus supplement will, where applicable:
·
identify any such underwriter or agent;
·
describe any compensation in the form of discounts, concessions, commissions or otherwise received from
us by each such underwriter or agent and in the aggregate to all underwriters and agents;
·
identify the amounts underwritten; and
·
identify the nature of the underwriter’s obligation to take the shares.
If underwriters are utilized in the sale of the securities, the Units may be acquired by the underwriters for
their own account and may be resold from time to time in one or more transactions, including negotiated
transactions, at fixed public offering prices or at varying prices determined by the underwriters at the time of
the  sale.  We  may  offer  the  shares  to  the  public  either  through  underwriting  syndicates  represented  by
managing underwriters or directly by the managing underwriters. If any underwriters are utilized in the sale
of  the  securities,  unless  otherwise  stated  in  the  applicable  prospectus  supplement,  the  underwriting
agreement will provide that the obligations of the underwriters are subject to specified conditions precedent
and that the underwriters with respect to a sale of the shares will be obligated to purchase all of the shares
offered if any are purchased.
Until the distribution of the securities is completed, rules of the SEC may limit the ability of any underwriters
and  selling  group  members  to  bid  for  and  purchase  the  securities.  As  an  exception  to  these  rules,
underwriters are permitted to engage in some transactions that stabilize the price of the securities, such as
over  allotment,  stabilizing  transactions,  short  covering  transactions  and  penalty  bids  in  accordance  with
Regulation M under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Over allotment involves sales in excess of the
offering  size  which  create  a  short  position.  Stabilizing  transactions  consist  of  bids  or  purchases  for  the
purpose  of  pegging,  fixing  or  maintaining  the  price  of  the  securities.  Short  covering  transactions  involve
purchases of the securities in the open market after the distribution is completed to cover short positions.
The underwriters may also impose a penalty bid, under which selling concessions allowed to syndicate
members or other broker-dealers for securities sold in the offering for their account may be reclaimed by the
syndicate  if  the  securities  are  repurchased  by  the  syndicate  in  stabilizing  or  covering  transactions.  In
general, purchases of a security for the purpose of stabilization or to reduce a short position could cause the
price of the security to be higher than it might be in the absence of such purchases. The imposition of a
penalty bid might also have an effect on the price of a security to the extent that it were to discourage re-
sales of the security before the distribution is completed.
We  do  not  make  any  representation  or  prediction  as  to  the  direction  or  magnitude  of  any  effect  that  the
transactions described above might have on the price of the securities. In addition, we do not make any
representation  that  underwriters  will  engage  in  such  transactions  or  that  such  transactions,  once
commenced, will not be discontinued without notice.
Underwriters,  dealers  and  agents  may  engage  in  transactions  with  us  or  perform  services  for  us  in  the
ordinary course of business.
If indicated in the applicable prospectus supplement, we will authorize underwriters or other persons acting
as our agents to solicit offers by particular institutions to purchase shares from us at the public offering price
set forth in such prospectus supplement pursuant to delayed delivery contracts providing for payment and
delivery on the date or dates stated in such prospectus supplement. Each delayed delivery contract will be
for an amount no less than, and the aggregate principal amounts of securities sold under delayed delivery
contracts  shall  be  not  less  nor  more  than,  the  respective  amounts  stated  in  the  applicable  prospectus
supplement. Institutions with which such contracts, when authorized, may include commercial and savings
banks, insurance companies, pension funds, investment companies, educational and charitable institutions
and others, but will in all cases be subject to our approval. The obligations of any purchaser under any such
contract will be subject to the conditions that (a) the purchase of the shares shall not at the time of delivery
be prohibited under the laws of any jurisdiction in the United States to which the purchaser is subject, and
(b) if the shares are being sold to underwriters, we shall have sold to the underwriters the total principal
amount of the shares less the principal amount thereof covered by the contracts. The underwriters and such
other agents will not have any responsibility in respect of the validity or performance of such contracts.
To  comply  with  applicable  state  securities  laws,  the  shares  offered  by  this  prospectus  will  be  sold,  if
necessary, in such jurisdictions only through registered or licensed brokers or dealers. In addition, shares
may not be sold in some states unless they have been registered or qualified for sale in the applicable state
or an exemption from the registration or qualification requirement is available and is complied with.
27
How to Invest:
Subscriptions for purchase of shares offered by this prospectus can be made by completing, signing and
delivering to us, the following:
1)
an executed copy of the Subscription Agreement, available from the company; and
2)
a  check  payable  to  the  order  of  Alpha  Energy,  Inc.  in  the  amount  of  $0.25  for  each  share  you  want  to
purchase.
OTC Electronic Bulletin Board Considerations
We intend to apply to have our stock traded on the OTC Electronic Bulletin Board. The company’s shares
may never be quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board or listed on an exchange. The OTC Electronic Bulletin
Board is separate and distinct from the NASDAQ stock market and other stock exchanges. NASDAQ has
no business relationship with issuers of securities quoted on the OTC Electronic Bulletin Board. The SEC’s
order handling rules, which apply to NASDAQ-listed securities, do not apply to securities quoted on the
OTC Electronic Bulletin Board.
Although the NASDAQ stock market has rigorous listing standards to ensure the high quality of its issuers,
and can delist issuers for not meeting those standards, the OTC Electronic Bulletin Board has no listing
standards.  Rather,  it  is  the  market  maker  who  chooses  to  quote  a  security  on  the  system,  files  the
application, and is obligated to comply with keeping information about the issuer in its files. FINRA cannot
deny an application by a market maker to quote the stock of a company. The only requirement for inclusion
in the OTC Electronic Bulletin Board is that the issuer be current in its reporting requirements with the SEC.
Investors must contact a broker-dealer to trade OTC Electronic Bulletin Board securities. Investors do not
have  direct  access  to  the  bulletin  board  service.  For  bulletin  board  securities,  there  only  has  to  be  one
market maker. Bulletin board transactions are conducted almost entirely manually. Because there are no
automated systems for negotiating trades on the bulletin board, they are conducted via telephone. In times
of heavy market volume, the limitations of this process may result in a significant increase in the time it
takes to execute investor orders. Therefore, when investors place market orders — an order to buy or sell a
specific number of shares at the current market price — it is possible for the price of a stock to go up or
down significantly during the lapse of time between placing a market order and getting execution.
Because bulletin board stocks are usually not followed by analysts, there may be lower trading volume than
for NASDAQ-listed securities.
DISCLOSURE OF COMMISSION POSITION ON INDEMNIFICATION FOR SECURITIES ACT
LIABILITIES
Title  7  of  the  CRS  provides  that  directors  and  officers  of  Colorado  corporations  may,  under  certain
circumstances, be indemnified against expenses (including attorneys‘ fees) and other liabilities actually and
reasonably incurred by them as a result of any suit brought against them in their capacity as a director or
officer, if they acted in good faith and in a manner they reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the
best  interests  of  the  corporation,  and,  with  respect  to  any  criminal  action  or  proceeding,  if  they  had  no
reasonable cause to believe their conduct was unlawful. CRS also provides that directors and officers may
also  be  indemnified  against  expenses  (including  attorneys‘  fees)  incurred  by  them  in  connection  with  a
derivative suit if they acted in good faith and in a manner they reasonably believed to be in or not opposed
to the best interests of the corporation, except that no indemnification may be made without court approval if
such person was adjudged liable to the corporation.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 may be permitted to the
directors,  officers,  and  controlling  persons  of  the  registrant  pursuant  to  the  foregoing  provisions,  or
otherwise, the registrant has been advised that in the opinion of the Commission such indemnification is
against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and is, therefore, unenforceable.
In the event that a claim for indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by the small
business  issuer  of  expenses  incurred  or  paid  by  a  directors,  officers  or  controlling  person  of  the  small
business issuer in the successful defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted by such director,
officer, or controlling person in connection with the securities being registered, the registrant will, unless in
the opinion of counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of appropriate
jurisdiction  the  question  whether  such  indemnification  by  it  is  against  public  policy  as  expressed  in  the
Securities Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
28
LEGAL OPINION
The  validity  of  the  shares  offered  hereby  has  been  passed  upon  for  us  by  Harold  P.  Gewerter,  Esq.  of
Harold P. Gewerter, Esq. Ltd., 5536 S. Ft. Apache #102, Las Vegas, NV 89148, (702) 382-1714, Fax: (702)
382-1759, E-mail: harold@gewerterlaw.com.
EXPERTS
The consolidated financial statements included in this prospectus for the period from inception (September
26,  2013)  and  ended  December  31,  2013  have  been  audited  by  Malone  Bailey,  LLP  an  independent
registered  public  accounting  firm  to  the  extent  and  for  the  periods  set  forth  in  their  report  appearing
elsewhere herein and are included in reliance upon such report given upon the authority of said firm as
experts in auditing and accounting.
INTERESTS OF NAMED EXPERTS AND COUNSEL
No experts or counsel to the company have any shares or other interests in Alpha Energy, Inc.
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
The issuer is not party to any pending material legal proceedings.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
We will be subject to the reporting requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and
will file reports, proxy statements and other information with the SEC. These reports, proxy statements and
other information may be inspected and copied at the public reference facilities maintained by the SEC at
100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549 and at the SEC’s regional offices located at the Northwestern
Atrium  Center,  500  West  Madison  Street,  Suite  1400,  Chicago,  Illinois  60661,  and  233  Broadway,  New
York, New York 10279. You can obtain copies of these materials from the Public Reference Section of the
SEC upon payment of fees prescribed by the SEC. You may obtain information on the operation of the
Public  Reference  Room  by  calling  the  SEC  at  1-800-SEC-0330.  The  SEC’s  Web  site  contains  reports,
proxy and information statements and other information regarding registrants that file electronically with the
SEC. The address of that site is http://www.sec.gov.
We have filed a Registration Statement on Form S-1 with the SEC under the Securities Act of 1933, as
amended, with respect to the securities offered in this prospectus. This prospectus, which is filed as part of
a  Registration  Statement,  does  not  contain  all  of  the  information  set  forth  in  the  Registration  Statement,
some portions of which have been omitted in accordance with the SEC’s rules and regulations. Statements
made in this prospectus as to the contents of any contract, agreement or other document referred to in this
prospectus  are  not  necessarily  complete  and  are  qualified  in  their  entirety  by  reference  to  each  such
contract,  agreement  or  other  document  which  is  filed  as  an  exhibit  to  the  Registration  Statement.  The
Registration Statement may be inspected without charge at the public reference facilities maintained by the
SEC,  and  copies  of  such  materials  can  be  obtained  from  the  Public  Reference  Section  of  the  SEC  at
prescribed rates.
29
ALPHA ENERGY, INC.
(A Development Stage Company)
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2013
Report of Independent Registered Accounting Firm
Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2013
Statement of Operations for the Period of September 26, 2013 (Inception) to
December 31, 2013
Statement  of  Changes  in  Stockholders'  Equity  (Deficit)  Cumulative  from
Inception on September 26, 2013 to December 31, 2013
Statement of Cash Flows for the Period of September 26, 2013 (Inception) to
December 31, 2013
Notes to Financial Statements
F-2
F-3
F-4
F-5
F-6
F-7 - F-11
F-1
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors
Alpha Energy, Inc. (a development stage company)
Denver, Colorado
We have audited the accompanying balance sheet of Alpha Energy, Inc. (the “Company”), as of December
31, 2013, and the related statements of operations, changes in stockholders' equity, and cash flows for the
period from September 26, 2013 (inception) through December 31, 2013. These financial statements are
the responsibility of the management of the Company. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these
financial statements based on our audit.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform an audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. The Company is not
required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting.
Our audit included consideration of internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit
procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on
the  effectiveness  of  the  Company’s  internal  control  over  financial  reporting.  Accordingly,  we  express  no
such  opinion.  An  audit  also  includes  examining,  on  a  test  basis,  evidence  supporting  the  amounts  and
disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates
made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that
our audit provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial
position of Alpha Energy, Inc. as of December 31, 2013, and the results of its operations and its cash flows
for  the  period  from  September  26,  2013  (inception)  through  December  31,  2013  in  conformity  with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a
going concern. As discussed in Note 2 to the financial statements, the Company has no operations and no
means  to  generate  positive  cash  flows,  which  raises  substantial  doubt  about  its  ability  to  continue  as  a
going concern. Management's plans regarding these matters also are described in Note 3. The financial
statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
/s/ MALONE BAILEY, LLP
www.malonebailey.com
Houston, Texas
May 6, 2014
F-2
ALPHA ENERGY, INC.
(A DEVELOPMENT STAGE COMPANY)
BALANCE SHEET
DECEMBER 31, 2013
ASSETS
Current assets
  Cash
  Prepaid expenses
Total current assets
Total assets
Unevaluated oil and gas properties (full-cost method
of accounting)
$
$
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDER'S EQUITY
Current liabilities
  Accounts payable
  Notes payable, related party
Total current liabilities
 
Stockholders' equity
$
 
 
 
 
Preferred stock, $0.0001 par value; 10,000,000 shares
authorized;
none issued or outstanding
Common stock, $0.0001 par value; 65,000,000 shares
authorized;
8,157,000 issued and outstanding
Additional paid in capital
  Deficit accumulated during the development stage
Total stockholders' equity
 
Total liabilities and stockholders' equity
$
See accompanying notes to financial statements.
2,229
455
2,684
24 , 000
26,684
3,000
275
3,275
-
816
40,482
(17,889)
23,409
26,684
See accompanying notes to financial statements.
F-3
ALPHA ENERGY, INC.
(A DEVELOPMENT STAGE COMPANY)
STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS
PERIOD FROM SEPTEMBER 26, 2013 (INCEPTION) TO
DECEMBER 31, 2013
Revenues
 
Operating expenses
  Professional services
  General and administrative
Total operating expenses
 
Loss from operations
 
  Provision for income taxes
 
Net loss applicable to common shareholders
 
Net loss per share, basic and diluted
 
Weighted average shares outstanding, basic and
diluted
$
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
$
 
$
-
17,048
841
17,889
(17,889)
-
(17,889)
(0.00)
8,083,633
 
See accompanying notes to financial statements.
F-4
ALPHA ENERGY, INC.
(A DEVELOPMENT STAGE COMPANY)
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS' DEFICIT
PERIOD FROM SEPTEMBER 26, 2013 (INCEPTION) TO DECEMBER 31, 2013
Preferred Stock
Common Stock
Additional
Shares  Amount  Shares   Amount
Paid in
Capital
Accumulated
Deficit
Total
Balance, September
26, 2013 (Inception)
Common stock
issued for services
Common stock
issued for asset
acquisition
Common stock
issued for cash
Net loss, period
ended December
31, 2013
Balance, December
31, 2013
-  $
-
-  $
-  $
-  $
-  $
-
-
-
-
-  7,977,000
-
-
-
50,000
130,000
-
798
5
13
-
-
23,995
16,487
-
-
-
-
(17,889)
-
798
24,000
16,500
(17,889)
-  $
816  $ 40,482  $
 
See accompanying notes to financial statements.
-  8,157,000  $
(17,889)  $
23,409
F-5
ALPHA ENERGY, INC.
(A DEVELOPMENT STAGE COMPANY)
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
PERIOD FROM SEPTEMBER 26, 2013 (INCEPTION) TO DECEMBER 31,
2013
Cash flows from operating activities
Net loss
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in
operating activities:
  Common stock issued for services
Prepaid expenses
  Accounts payable
Changes in operating assets and liabilities
 
 
Net cash used in operating activities
 
Net cash used in investing activities
 
Cash flows from financing activities
Proceeds from related party notes
  Proceeds from sale of common stock
Net cash provided by financing activities
$
(17,889)
798
(455)
3,000
(14,546)
-
275
16,500
16,775
Cash, beginning of period
  Net change in cash
  Cash, end of period
Supplemental disclosure of non-cash investing
activities
Issuance of common stock for unevaluated oil and gas
properties
Supplemental cash flow information
  Cash paid for interest
  Cash paid for income taxes
$
$
 
 
$
$
-
2,229
2,229
24,000
-
-
See accompanying notes to financial statements.
F-6
ALPHA ENERGY, INC.
(A Development Stage Company)
Notes to Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
NOTE 1 – SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
A summary of significant accounting policies of Alpha Energy, Inc. (A Development Stage Company) (the
Company)  is  presented  to  assist  in  understanding  the  Company’s  financial  statements.  The  accounting
policies  presented  in  these  footnotes  conform  to  accounting  principles  generally  accepted  in  the  United
States  of  America  and  have  been  consistently  applied  in  the  preparation  of  the  accompanying  financial
statements. These financial statements and notes are representations of the Company’s management who
are responsible for their integrity and objectivity. The Company has not realized revenues from its planned
principal business purpose and is considered to be in its development stage in accordance with ASC 915,
“Development Stage Entities.”
Organization, Nature of Business and Trade Name
The  Company  was  incorporated  in  the  State  of  Colorado  on  September  26,  2013  for  the  purpose  of
acquiring  and  executing  on  oil  and  gas  leases.  The  Company  has  not  yet  realized  revenues  from  its
planned business activities and is considered a development stage company in accordance with ASC 915
“Development Stage Entities.”
Basis of Presentation and Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported
amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue
and  expenses  during  the  reported  period.  Actual  results  could  differ  from  those  estimates.  Management
further acknowledges that it is solely responsible for adopting sound accounting practices, establishing and
maintaining a system of internal accounting control and preventing and detecting fraud. The Company’s
system  of  internal  accounting  control  is  designed  to  assure,  among  other  items,  that  (1)  recorded
transactions are valid; (2) all valid transactions are recorded and (3) transactions are recorded in the period
in a timely manner to produce financial statements which present fairly the financial condition, results of
operations and cash flows of the company for the respective periods being presented.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
For  purposes  of  the  statement  of  cash  flows,  the  Company  considers  all  short-term  debt  securities
purchased with maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents.
Revenue and Cost Recognition
The Company has been in the developmental stage since inception and has no operations outside of those
organizational in nature to date. The Company has not yet recognized revenues from its planned business
activities.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company applies fair value accounting for all financial assets and liabilities and non-financial assets
and liabilities that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis.
The Company defines fair value as the price that would be received from selling an asset or paid to transfer
a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. When determining
the fair value measurements for assets and liabilities, which are required to be recorded at fair value, the
Company considers the principal or most advantageous market in which the Company would transact and
the market-based risk measurements or assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset
or liability, such as risks inherent in valuation techniques, transfer restrictions and credit risk. Fair value is
estimated by applying the following hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used to measure fair value into
three levels and bases the categorization within the hierarchy upon the lowest level of input that is available
and significant to the fair value measurement:
Level 1 – Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
F-7
ALPHA ENERGY, INC.
(A Development Stage Company)
Notes to Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
NOTE 1 – SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED)
Level  2 – Observable inputs other than quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities,
quoted  prices  for  identical  or  similar  assets  or  liabilities  in  inactive  markets,  or  other  inputs  that  are
observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or
liabilities.
Level  3 –  Inputs  that  are  generally  unobservable  and  typically  reflect  management’s  estimate  of
assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability.
The Company’s valuation techniques used to measure the fair value of money market funds and certain
marketable  equity  securities  were  derived  from  quoted  prices  in  active  markets  for  identical  assets  or
liabilities. The valuation techniques used to measure the fair value of all other financial instruments, all of
which have counterparties with high credit ratings, were valued based on quoted market prices or model
driven valuations using significant inputs derived from or corroborated by observable market data.
In  accordance  with  the  fair  value  accounting  requirements,  companies  may  choose  to  measure  eligible
financial  instruments  and  certain  other  items  at  fair  value.  The  Company  has  not  elected  the  fair  value
option for any eligible financial instruments.
Oil and natural gas properties
We  account  for  our  oil  and  natural  gas  producing  activities  using  the  full  cost  method  of  accounting  as
prescribed by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Under this method, subject
to a limitation based on estimated value, all costs incurred in the acquisition, exploration, and development
of  proved  oil  and  natural  gas  properties,  including  internal  costs  directly  associated  with  acquisition,
exploration, and development activities, the costs of abandoned properties, dry holes, geophysical costs,
and  annual  lease  rentals  are  capitalized  within  a  cost  center.  Costs  of  production  and  general  and
administrative  corporate  costs  unrelated  to  acquisition,  exploration,  and  development  activities  are
expensed as incurred.
Costs  associated  with  unevaluated  properties  are  capitalized  as  oil  and  natural  gas  properties  but  are
excluded  from  the  amortization  base  during  the  evaluation  period. These  costs  are  included  in  the
amortization based when proved reserves can be assigned to such properties, o r when the unevaluated
properties are deemed to be impaired.
We  assess  all  items  classified  as  unevaluated  property  on  at  least  an  annual  basis  for  inclusion  in  the
amortization base. We assess properties on an individual basis or as a group if properties are individually
insignificant. The assessment includes consideration of the following factors, among others: intent to drill;
remaining lease term; geological and geophysical evaluations; drilling results and activity; the assignment
of proved reserves; and the economic viability of development if proved reserves are assigned. During any
period in which these factors indicate that there would be impairment, or if proved reserves are assigned to
a property, the cumulative costs incurred to date for such property are transferred to the amortizable base
and are then subject to amortization.
Capitalized costs included in the amortization base, including estimated asset retirement costs, plus the
estimated  future  expenditures  to  be  incurred  in  developing  proved  reserves,  net  of  estimated  salvage
values. Sales or other dispositions of oil and natural gas properties are accounted for as adjustments to
capitalized  costs,  with  no  gain  or  loss  recorded  unless  the  ratio  of  cost  to  proved  reserves  would
significantly change.
Impairment
The net book value of all capitalized oil and natural gas properties within a cost center, less related deferred
income  taxes,  is  subject  to  a  full  cost  ceiling  limitation  which  is  calculated  quarterly.  Under  the  ceiling
limitation, costs may not exceed an aggregate of the present value of future net revenues attributable to
proved oil and natural gas reserves discounted at 10 percent using current prices, plus the lower of cost or
market  value  of  unproved  properties  included  in  the  amortization  base,  plus  the  cost  of  unevaluated
properties,  less  any  associated  tax  effects.  Any  excess  of  the  net  book  value,  less  related  deferred  tax
benefits, over the ceiling is written off as expense. Impairment expense recorded in one period may not be
reversed in a subsequent period even though higher oil and gas prices may have increased the ceiling
applicable to the subsequent period. At December 31, 2013, the ceiling exceeded the net book value of the
property and it was not necessary to record an impairment charge.
F-8
ALPHA ENERGY, INC.
(A Development Stage Company)
Notes to Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
NOTE 1 – SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (CONTINUED)
Asset retirement obligation
We record the fair value of an asset retirement cost, and corresponding liability as part of the cost of the
related long-lived asset and the cost is subsequently allocated to expense using a systematic and rational
method. We record an asset retirement obligation to reflect our legal obligations related to future plugging
and abandonment of our oil and natural gas wells and gathering systems. We estimate the expected cash
flow associated with the obligation and discount the amount using a credit-adjusted, risk-free interest rate.
At least annually, we reassess the obligation to determine whether a change in the estimated obligation is
necessary. We evaluate whether there are indicators that suggest the estimated cash flows underlying the
obligation  have  materially  changed.  Should  those  indicators  suggest  the  estimated  obligation  may  have
materially changed on an interim basis (quarterly), we will update our assessment accordingly. Additional
retirement  obligations  increase  the  liability  associated  with  new  oil  and  natural  gas  wells  and  gathering
systems as these obligations are incurred.
Capital Stock
The  Company  has  authorized  sixty  five  million  (65,000,000)  shares  of  common  stock  with  $0.0001  par
value and ten million (10,000,000) shares of preferred stock with $0.0001 par value. There were 8,157,000
shares of common stock and no shares of preferred stock issued and outstanding at December 31, 2013.
Income Taxes
The Company recognizes the tax effects of transactions in the year in which such transactions enter into the
determination of net income, regardless of when reported for tax purposes.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Recent accounting pronouncements issued by the FASB (including its Emerging Issues Task Force), the
AICPA,  and  the  SEC  did  not,  or  are  not  believed  by  management  to,  have  a  material  impact  on  the
Company’s present or future financial statements.
NOTE 2 – GOING CONCERN
The Company's financial statements are prepared using accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America applicable to a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and
liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business. However, the Company does not have significant
cash  or  other  current  assets,  nor  does  it  have  an  established  source  of  revenues  sufficient  to  cover  its
operating costs and to allow it to continue as a going concern.
Under  the  going  concern  assumption,  an  entity  is  ordinarily  viewed  as  continuing  in  business  for  the
foreseeable  future  with  neither  the  intention  nor  the  necessity  of  liquidation,  ceasing  trading,  or  seeking
protection from creditors pursuant to laws or regulations. Accordingly, assets and liabilities are recorded on
the basis that the entity will be able to realize its assets and discharge its liabilities in the normal course of
business.
The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon its ability to successfully
accomplish the plan described in the Business paragraph and eventually attain profitable operations. The
accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments that may be necessary if the Company
is unable to continue as a going concern.
During the next year, the Company’s foreseeable cash requirements will relate to continual development of
the  operations  of  its  business,  maintaining  its  good  standing  and  making  the  requisite  filings  with  the
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  and  the  payment  of  expenses  associated  with  research  and
development. The Company may experience a cash shortfall and be required to raise additional capital.
Historically, it has mostly relied upon internally generated funds and funds from the sale of shares of stock
to  finance  its  operations  and  growth.  Management  may  raise  additional  capital  through  future  public  or
private offerings of the Company’s stock or through loans from private investors, although there can be no
assurance that it will be able to obtain such financing. The Company’s failure to do so could have a material
and adverse affect upon it and its shareholders.
F-9
ALPHA ENERGY, INC.
(A Development Stage Company)
Notes to Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
NOTE 3 – INCOME TAXES
We did not provide any current or deferred U.S. federal income tax provision or benefit for any of the periods
presented because we have experienced operating losses since inception. When it is more likely than not
that a tax asset cannot be realized through future income the Company must allow for this future tax benefit.
We provided a full valuation allowance on the net deferred tax asset, consisting of net operating loss carry
forwards, because management has determined that it is more likely than not that we will not earn income
sufficient to realize the deferred tax assets during the carry forward period.
The Company has not taken a tax position that, if challenged, would have a material effect on the financial
statements for the years ended December 2013 applicable under FASB ASC 740. We did not recognize
any adjustment to the liability for uncertain tax position and therefore did not record any adjustment to the
beginning  balance  of  accumulated  deficit  on  the  balance  sheet.  All  tax  returns  for  the  Company  remain
open.
The provision for income taxes differs from the amount computed by applying the statutory federal income
tax rate to income before provision for income taxes. The sources and tax effects of the differences for the
periods presented are as follows:
Income  tax  provision  at  the  federal
statutory rate
Effect on operating losses
39.63%
(39.63%)
-
Changes in the net deferred tax assets consist of the following:
Net operating loss carry forward
Valuation allowance
Net deferred tax asset
2013
17,889
(17,889)
-
A reconciliation of income taxes computed at the statutory rate is as follows:
Tax at statutory rate (39%)
2013
7,089
Tax at statutory rate (39%)
Increase in valuation allowance
Net deferred tax asset
7,089
(7,089)
-
The net federal operating loss carry forward will expire in 2033. This carry forward may be limited upon the
consummation of a business combination under IRC Section 381.
NOTE 4 – STOCK
The  Company  is  authorized  to  issue  up  to  10,000,000  shares  of  $0.0001  par  value  preferred  stock  and
65,000,000 shares of $0.0001 par value common stock.
During the period ended December 31, 2013, the Company issued a total of 7,977,000 common shares in
exchange for services valued at $798; 50,000 common shares for the acquisition of an oil and gas lease
valued at $24,000 and a total of 130,000 common shares for net cash proceeds of $16,500.
The services performed in exchange for the 7,977,000 were completed on September 13, 2013 at which
time the stock was issued. At the time services were performed, the Company had not yet begun issuing
stock for cash or other assets and, as a result, there was an undetermined market price per share. As such,
the shares were valued at par of $0.0001.
The Company also issued 50,000 common shares for the acquisition of an oil and gas lease which was
valued at $0.48 per share for a total of $24,000. The fair value of said shares was determined by a third
party valuation of the acquired lease which represented 240 net acres at $100 per net acre. The fair value of
the  lease  was  estimated  based  on  comparable  leasing  rates  in  the  same  general  area.  As  a  result,  the
company recorded an unproved property asset of $24,000, and no expense was recorded on the income
statement. This transaction was reported as a non-cash item on the Company’s statement of cash flows.
F-10
ALPHA ENERGY, INC.
(A Development Stage Company)
Notes to Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
There were 0 shares of preferred stock and 8,157,000 shares of common stock issued and outstanding at
December 31, 2013, respectively.
NOTE 5 – RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
The Company neither owns nor leases any real or personal property. The officers and directors for the
Company are involved in other business activities and may, in the future, become involved in other
business opportunities. If a specific business opportunity becomes available, such persons may face a
conflict in selecting between the Company and their other business interest. The Company has not
formulated a policy for the resolution of such conflicts.
The Company received advances from related parties totaling $275 during the period ended December 31,
2013. The advances from related parties are due on demand with no interest incurred.
NOTE 6 – SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
Management has evaluated all events subsequent to December 31, 2013 and through May 6, 2014, and
determined that there were no significant items to disclose other than the following.
On various dates in 2014, the Company issued a total of 120,000 shares of $0.0001 par value common
stock for net cash proceeds of $18,000. Additionally, 80,000 shares of $0.0001 par value common stock
were issued in exchange for services valued at $12,000.
F-11
ALPHA ENERGY, INC.
(A Development Stage Company)
Unaudited Condensed Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
F-12
ALPHA ENERGY, INC.
(A Development Stage Company)
Unaudited Condensed Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
Unaudited Condensed Balance Sheets as of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013
 
Unaudited Condensed Statements of Operations for the six months ended June 30, 2014
and the period of September 26, 2013 (inception) to June 30, 2014
 
Unaudited Condensed Statements of Cash Flows for the six months ended June 30, 2014
and the period of September 26, 2013 (inception) to June 30, 2014
 
Notes to the Unaudited Condensed Financial Statements
Page(s)
F-14
F-15
F-16
F-17
F-13
ALPHA ENERGY, INC.
(A DEVELOPMENT STATE COMPANY)
CONDENSED BALANCE SHEETS (UNAUDITED)
June 30,
December 31,
2014
2013
ASSETS
Current assets
  Cash
  Prepaid expenses
  Subscription receivable
Total current assets
Total assets
Unevaluated oil and gas properties (full-cost method
of accounting)
$
$
16,707  $
455 
- 
17,162
24,000
41,162  $
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDER'S EQUITY
Current liabilities
  Accounts payable
  Deferred revenue
  Notes payable, related party
Total current liabilities
 
Stockholders' equity
$
 
 
 
 
 
Preferred stock, $0.0001 par value; 10,000,000 shares
authorized;
-  $
5,000 
275 
5,275
none issued or outstanding
Common stock, $0.0001 par value; 65,000,000 shares
authorized;
-
8,267,000 and 8,157,000 issued and outstanding at
March 31, 2014
and December 31, 2013
  Additional paid in capital
  Deficit accumulated during the development stage
Total stockholders' equity
 
Total liabilities and stockholders' equity
836 
70,462 
(35,411) 
35,887
41,162  $
$
2,229
455
-
2,684
24,000
26,684
3,000
-
275
3,275
-
816
40,482
(17,889)
23,409
26,684
See accompanying notes to unaudited condensed financial statements.
F-14
ALPHA ENERGY, INC.
(A DEVELOPMENT STATE COMPANY)
CONDENSED STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS (UNAUDITED)
Period from
Three months
ended June 30,
2014
Six months ended
June 30, 2014
8,299,088
8,245,398
F-15
$
Revenues
 
Operating expenses
  Professional services
  General and administrative
Total operating expenses
 
Loss from operations
 
  Provision for income taxes
 
Net loss applicable to common
shareholders
 
Net loss per share, basic and
diluted
 
Weighted average shares
outstanding, basic and diluted
$
$
2,743  $
16,862 
1,357 
18,219 
 
(15,476) 
 
-
(15,476)  $
(0.00)  $
September 26,
2013 (Inception)
to June 30, 2014
2,743
34,910
3,244
38,154
(35,411)
-
(35,411)
2,743  $
17,862 
2,403 
20,265 
 
(17,522) 
 
-
(17,522)  $
(0.00)
ALPHA ENERGY, INC.
(A DEVELOPMENT STATE COMPANY)
CONDENSED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS (UNAUDITED)
Period from
Six months
ended June 30,
September 26, 2013
(Inception) to June
$
2014
Net loss
(17,522)  $
Common stock issued for services
Prepaid expenses
  Accounts payable
  Deferred revenue
Cash flows from operating activities
 
  Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in operating activities:
 
 
 
  Changes in operating assets and liabilities
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net cash used in operating activities
 
 
 
Net cash used in investing activities
 
 
 
Cash flows from financing activities
 
 
  Proceeds from related party notes
 
 
 
  Proceeds from sale of common stock
Net cash provided by financing activities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
$
 
 
 
Supplemental cash flow information
 
$
  Cash paid for interest
$
  Cash paid for income taxes
 
 
Supplemental disclosure of non-cash investing activities
$
 
$
Cash, beginning of period
  Net change in cash
  Cash, end of period
12,000 
 
 
 
- 
 
(3,000) 
 
5,000 
 
(3,522) 
 
 
 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
- 
 
18,000 
 
18,000 
 
 
 
2,229 
14,478 
 
16,707  $
 
 
 
 
-  $
-  $
 
 
 
-  $
-  $
Issuance of common stock for intangible asset
Issuance of common stock for receivable
30, 2014
(35,411)
12,798
(455)
-
5,000
(18,068)
-
275
34,500
34,775
-
16,707
16,707
-
-
24,000
-
See accompanying notes to unaudited condensed financial statements.
F-16
ALPHA ENERGY, INC.
(A Development Stage Company)
Notes to Unaudited Condensed Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
NOTE 1 – CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared by the Company without audit.  In the opinion
of management, all adjustments (which include only normal recurring adjustments) necessary to present
fairly the financial position, results of operations, and cash flows as of June 30, 2014, and for all periods
presented herein, have been made.
Certain  information  and  footnote  disclosures  normally  included  in  financial  statements  prepared  in
accordance  with  accounting  principles  generally  accepted  in  the  United  States  of  America  have  been
condensed or omitted.  It is suggested that these condensed financial statements be read in conjunction
with  the  financial  statements  and  notes  thereto  included  in  the  Company’s  December  31,  2013  audited
financial statements.  The results of operations for the period ended march 31, 2014 are not necessarily
indicative of the operating results for the full years.
NOTE 2 – GOING CONCERN
The Company’s financial statements are prepared using generally accepted accounting principles in the
United States of America applicable to a going concern which contemplates the realization of assets and
liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company has not yet established an ongoing
source of revenues sufficient to cover its operating costs and allow it to continue as a going concern. The
ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company obtaining adequate
capital to fund operating losses until it becomes profitable. If the Company is unable to obtain adequate
capital, it could be forced to cease operations.
In  order  to  continue  as  a  going  concern,  the  Company  will  need,  among  other  things,  additional  capital
resources.  Management’s  plan  is  to  obtain  such  resources  for  the  Company  by  obtaining  capital  from
management and significant shareholders sufficient to meet its minimal operating expenses and seeking
equity and/or debt financing. However management cannot provide any assurances that the Company will
be successful in accomplishing any of its plans.
The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon its ability to successfully
accomplish  the  plans  described  in  the  preceding  paragraph  and  eventually  secure  other  sources  of
financing  and  attain  profitable  operations.  The  accompanying  financial  statements  do  not  include  any
adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
NOTE 3 – COMMON STOCK ISSUANCES
During the six months ended June 30, 2014, the Company issued a total of 120,000 shares of its $0.0001
par  value  common  stock  for  total  cash  proceeds  of  $18,000.  Additionally,  the  Company  issued  80,000
shares for services valued at $12,000. There were 8,357,000 shares issued and outstanding at June 30,
2014.
NOTE 4 – SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
Management has evaluated all events subsequent to June 30, 2014 and through September 26, 2014, and
determined that there were no significant items to disclose other than the following.
We have evaluated all events through September 26, 2017 and determined that there were no significant
items to disclose.
F-17
Dealer Prospectus Delivery Obligation
Until ___________ , all dealers that effect transactions in these securities, whether or not participating in
this offering, may be required to deliver a prospectus. This is in addition to the dealers' obligation to deliver
a prospectus when acting as underwriters and with respect to their unsold allotments or subscriptions.
F-18
PART II — INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
Item 13. Other Expenses of Issuance and Distribution
The following table sets forth the expenses expected to be incurred in connection with the issuance and
distribution of the securities being registered (also included in the Use of Proceeds table).
SEC Registration
Legal Fees and Expenses
Accounting Fees*
Miscellaneous*
Total
$
$
272
10,000
5,000
200
15,472
* Estimated
The Issuer will pay all fees and expenses associated with this offering with the Selling Shareholders paying
none of the expenses.
Item 14. Indemnification of Directors and Officers
Our bylaws contains provisions which require that the company indemnify its officers, directors, employees
and agents, in substantially the same language as Title 7 of the CRS. Article 12 of the Company’s Articles
of  Incorporation  provides  for  the  Company’s  ability  to  indemnify  it’s  officers,  directors,  employees  and
agents,  subject  to  the  limitations  provided  in  CRS,  for  expenses  actually  and  reasonably  incurred.  No
indemnification  shall  be  made  if  the  proposed  party  has  been  adjudged  to  be  liable  to  the  company  or
where the matter was settled without court approval. Indemnification must be made upon a determination by
a majority of the uninterested Board, and if not available, by the shareholders or by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
Item 15. Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
Between September 26, 2013 and June 1, 2014, we sold a total of 8,357,000 common shares to eighteen
investors. The issuances of the shares to the investors were exempt from registration under Sections 4(2)
and  4(6)  of  the  Securities  Act  and  Regulation  D.  The  shares  bear  a  restrictive  transfer  legend.  This
transaction (a) involved no general solicitation, (b) involved less than thirty-five non-accredited purchasers,
and (c) relied on a detailed disclosure document to communicate to the investors all material facts about the
issuer including an audited balance sheet and reviewed statements of income, changes in stockholders'
equity and cash flows. Each purchaser was given the opportunity to ask questions of us. Thus, we believe
that the offering was exempt from registration under Regulation D, Rule 505 of the Securities Act of 1933,
as amended.
Name
Number of Shares
of Common Stock
Beneficially
Owned
A.G.Management Associates, Geraldine Weiss,
Trustee
Arrow Consulting, LLP, Angela Stevens, Vice
President
Ballycastle Living Trust, Kyle Anderson, Trustee  
CBK Management Assoc., Cindy Nieder, Trustee 
 
Grant Ziegler
Black Rock Oil and Gas, LLC, Micheal Davis,
 
Executive Member
Croci Land Holding, LLC -Fred Croci, Manager
Reginald A. Sr. and Frances H. Kemp
Angela Stevens
Delmer E. & Sharon K Zeigler
Dennis Arends
Joshua Haveman
Margaret H. Kantes
Bonita Walker
Kayleigh S. Hewtt
Deron Horne
Margaret R. Christie
Southwest Business Services -Theresa
Calabrese, Manager
Reginald & Sherry Kemp
1,150,000
2,050,000
3,000,000
72,000
50,000
650,000
583,333
516,667
50,000
40,000
15,000
20,000
10,000
10,000
20,000
40,000
30,000
30,000
20,000
8,357,000
II-1
Item 16. Exhibits
Exhibit
Exhibit
Number
Exhibit Description
Articles of Incorporation of Alpha Energy, Inc. dated
3.1
3.2
5.1
10.7
14.1
23.1
September 26, 2013
Bylaws dated November 2, 2013
  Opinion of Harold P. Gewerter, Esq.
  Subscription Agreement.
  Code of Ethics
  Consent of Malone Bailey LLP
Item 17. Undertakings
The undersigned hereby undertakes:
(1)
to  file,  during  any  period  in  which  offers  or  sales  are  being  made,  a  post-effective  amendment  to  this
Registration Statement to:
(i)
include any prospectus required by section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933;
(ii)
reflect in the prospectus any facts or events which, individually or together, represent a fundamental change
in  the  information  in  the  information  in  the  registration  statement.  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  any
increase or decrease in volume of securities offered (if the total dollar value of securities offered would not
exceed that which was registered) and any deviation from the low or high end of the estimated maximum
offering range may be reflected in the form of prospectus filed with the Commission pursuant to Rule 424 (b)
if,  in  the  aggregate,  the  changes  in  volume  and  price  represent  no  more  than  a  20%  change  in  the
maximum aggregate offering price set forth in the “Calculation of Registration Fee” table in the effective
registration statement; and
(iii)
include any additional or changed material information on the plan of distribution.
(2)
that  for  determining  liability  under  the  Securities  Act,  to  treat  each  post-effective  amendment  as  a  new
registration statement of the securities offered, and the offering of the securities at that time to be the initial
bona fide offering.
(3)
to file a post-effective amendment to remove from registration any of the securities that remain unsold at the
end of the offering.
(4)
that  for  determining  liability  of  the  undersigned  small  business  issuer  under  the  Securities  Act  to  any
purchaser in the initial distribution of the securities, the undersigned small business issuer undertakes that
in  a  primary  offering  of  securities  of  the  undersigned  small  business  issuer  pursuant  to  this  registration
statement,  regardless  of  the  underwriting  method  used  to  sell  the  securities  to  the  purchaser,  if  the
securities  are  offered  or  sold  to  such  purchaser  by  means  of  any  of  the  following  communications,  the
undersigned small business issuer will be a seller to the purchaser and will be considered to offer or sell
such securities to such purchaser:
(i)
Any preliminary prospectus or prospectus of the undersigned small business issuer relating to the offering
required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424;
(ii)
Any  free  writing  prospectus  relating  to  the  offering  prepared  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  undersigned  small
business issuer or used or referred to by the undersigned small business issuer;
(iii)
The portion of any other free writing prospectus relating to the offering containing material information about
the undersigned small business issuer or its securities provided by or on behalf of the undersigned small
business issuer; and
(iv)
Any other communication that is an offer in the offering made by the undersigned small business issuer to
the purchaser
II-2
(5)
Each  prospectus  filed  pursuant  to  Rule  424(b)  as  part  of  a  registration  statement  relating  to  an  offering,
other than registration statements relying on Rule 430B or other than prospectuses filed in reliance on Rule
430A shall be deemed to be part of and included in the registration statement as of the date it is first used
after effectiveness. Provided, however, that no statement made in a registration statement or prospectus that
is  part  of  the  registration  statement  or  made  in  a  document  incorporated  or  deemed  incorporated  by
reference into the registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement will, as to a
purchaser with a time of contract of sale prior to such first use, supersede or modify any statement that was
made in the registration statement or prospectus that was part of the registration statement or made in any
such document immediately prior to such date of first use.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 may be permitted to the
directors,  officers,  and  controlling  persons  of  the  registrant  pursuant  to  the  foregoing  provisions,  or
otherwise, the registrant has been advised that in the opinion of the Commission such indemnification is
against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and is, therefore, unenforceable.
In the event that a claim for indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by the registrant
of expenses incurred or paid by a directors, officers or controlling person of the registrant in the successful
defense  of  any  action,  suit  or  proceeding)  is  asserted  by  such  director,  officer,  or  controlling  person  in
connection  with  the  securities  being  registered,  the  registrant  will,  unless  in  the  opinion  of  counsel  the
matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of appropriate jurisdiction the question
whether such indemnification by it is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and will be
governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
II-3
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, the registrant has duly caused this
registration statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized in the City of
Denver, CO on September 26, 2014.
Alpha Energy, Inc.
By: /s/ Michael D. Davis
Michael D. Davis, CEO
Chairman of the Board, Principal Executive Officer
By: /s/ Reginald A. Kemp
Reginald A. Kemp, Secretary
By: /s/ Karen Ziegler
Karen Ziegler, President, Chief Accounting Officer, Chief Financial Officer
Pursuant  to  the  requirements  of  the  Securities  Act  of  1933,  as  amended,  this  registration  statement  has
been signed by the following persons in the capacities indicated, on September 26, 2014.
Alpha Energy, Inc.
By: /s/ Michael D. Davis
Michael D. Davis, CEO
Chairman of the Board, Principal Executive Officer
By: /s/ Reginald A. Kemp
Reginald A. Kemp, Secretary
By: /s/ Karen Ziegler
Karen Ziegler, President, Chief Accounting Officer, Chief Financial Officer
II-4