
10-K 1 form10-k.htm FORM 10-K
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
[X]ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
 
  For the fiscal year ended March 31, 2016
Or
[  ]TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
 
  For the transition period from _____________ to _____________
Commission file number: 000-51425
T-REX OIL, INC.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Colorado
State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization
98-0422451
I.R.S. Employer
 
Identification No.
520 Zang Street, Suite 250, Broomfield, CO 80021
(Address of principal executive offices) (Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code:
(720) 502-4483
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class registered
Not Applicable
Name of each
exchange on which
registered
 Not Applicable
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
Common Stock, par value $0.001
(Title of class)
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.
Yes [  ] No [X]
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.
[  ]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such
reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.
Yes [X] No [  ]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Website, if any, every
Interactive Data file required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (section 232.405 of this chapter)
during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files)
Yes [X] No [  ]
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K (ss. 229.405 of this chapter) is not
contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements
incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K.
[  ]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer or a smaller
reporting company. See definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2
of the Exchange Act. (Check One).
Large accelerated filer
Non-accelerated filer
(Do not check if a smaller reporting company)
[  ] Accelerated filer
[  ]
[  ] Smaller reporting company[X]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).
Yes [  ] No [X]
APPLICABLE ONLY TO REGISTRANTS INVOLVED IN BANKRUPTCY
PROCEEDINGS DURING THE PRECEDING FIVE YEARS:
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed all documents and reports required to be filed by Section 12, 13 or 15(d) of
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 subsequent to the distribution of securities under a plan confirmed by a court.
Yes [  ] No [X]
On July 11, 2016, 6,711,770 shares of common stock were held by non-affiliates and had a value of $12,014,068 based on the
average closing bid and ask of $1.79.
There were 15,934,591 shares issued and outstanding of the registrant’s Common Stock as of July 11, 2016.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
None.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I
ITEM 1 Business
ITEM 1 A.Risk Factors
ITEM 1 B.Unresolved Staff Comments
ITEM 2 Properties
ITEM 3
ITEM 4 Mine and Safety Disclosure
Legal Proceedings
3
 14
 21
 21
 26
 26
PART II
ITEM 5 Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities 26
 28
ITEM 6 Selected Financial Data
ITEM 7 Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
 29
 35
ITEM 7 A.Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
 35
ITEM 8 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
 35
ITEM 9 Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
 35
ITEM 9 A.Controls and Procedures
ITEM 9 B Other Information
 36
PART III
ITEM 10 Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
ITEM 11 Executive Compensation
ITEM 12 Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
ITEM 13 Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
ITEM 14 Principal Accounting Fees and Services
PART IV
ITEM 15 Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
SIGNATURES
37
 41
 46
 47
 49
  
  
  
 50
 81
2
Note about Forward-Looking Statements
This Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements, such as statements relating to our financial condition, results of operations,
plans, objectives, future performance and business operations. These statements relate to expectations concerning matters that
are not historical facts. These forward-looking statements reflect our current views and expectations based largely upon the
information currently available to us and are subject to inherent risks and uncertainties. Although we believe our expectations are
based on reasonable assumptions, they are not guarantees of future performance and there are a number of important factors
that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. By
making these forward-looking statements, we do not undertake to update them in any manner except as may be required by our
disclosure obligations in filings we make with the Securities and Exchange Commission under the Federal securities laws. Our
actual results may differ materially from our forward-looking statements.
PART I
ITEM 1. BUSINESS
General
The following is a summary of some of the information contained in this document. Unless the context requires otherwise,
references in this document to “T-Rex” or the “Company” are to T-Rex Oil, Inc.
Corporate History
T-Rex Oil, Inc. was organized under the laws of the State of Nevada as Rancher Energy Corp. (“Rancher”). On October 8, 2014,
as approved by our board of directors and a written consent of our majority shareholder, an amendment to the Articles of
Incorporation was filed in order to authorize a reverse split of the common stock issued and outstanding on a one (1) new share
for three hundred fifty (350) old shares basis. At the same time, the Articles of Incorporation were amended to change our
authorized capital to 275,000,000 shares of $0.001 par value common stock and 50,000,000 shares of $0.01 par value preferred
stock. The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (“FINRA”) approved the amendment, effective October 29, 2014.
On October 17, 2014, we merged into our wholly owned subsidiary, T-Rex Oil, Inc., a Colorado corporation and as a result were
re-domiciled in the state of Colorado.
On October 28, 2015, T-Rex Oil, Inc. (“the Company”) filed an Amendment to its Articles of Incorporation to designate the Series
A Convertible Preferred Stock.
The Amendment designates 5,000,000 shares of the authorized 50,000,000 shares of the Company’s $0.001 par value preferred
stock as the Series A Convertible Preferred Stock (“the Series A Shares.”) The Series A Shares are convertible into common
shares of the Company’s stock 9 months after the date of issuance. Further, the Series A Shares have a conversion price based
upon 80% of the 10 day average of the Company’s closing market price. The Series A Shares do not accrue dividends and have
a deemed purchase price of $2.00 per share.
In October 2015, the Company commenced a private placement financing of $7,000,000 in Units, a Unit consisting of 1 share of
its Series A Shares and a Unit Warrant. The Unit Warrant has an exercise price of $3.00 per share and a term of 3 years. The
Unit Warrant is exercisable 9 months after issuance and is callable by the Company upon the Company’s common stock closing
at a market price of $5.00 or above for a period of 10 days.
At March 31, 2016, the Company had received $793,038 of cash in exchange for the issuance of 409,019 shares of its Series A
Preferred Stock and Unit Warrants exercisable for 409,019 shares of common stock.
3
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE
Part of our strategy includes the use of partnerships to not only own individual projects, but to handle the drilling, completion,
operation and raising of capital for the funding of such prospects. The Company or one of its subsidiaries will then handle the
operation and management of the partnership. T-Rex Oil LLC #1, described below, is one such partnership. It is managed and
operated by Terex.
Terex Energy Corporation
Terex Energy Corporation (“Terex”) was incorporated in the State of Colorado in February 2014. Terex has interests in oil and
gas properties.
On December 22, 2014, we entered into Exchange Agreements with the Terex shareholders for 100% of the shares of Terex.
Pursuant to the Exchange Agreements, we agreed to issue 7,385,700 shares of our restricted common stock for 100% of the
issued and outstanding common stock of Terex. The shares were exchanged on a one for one basis. As a result, Terex became
a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company.
The effective date of the acquisition was December 22, 2014, with T-Rex being the legal acquirer. However, since T-Rex is a
public company, which had nominal activity, the acquisition was treated as a recapitalization of Terex. Though T-Rex was the
legal acquirer in the acquisition, Terex was the accounting acquirer since its shareholders gained control of T-Rex. Therefore, at
the date of the acquisition the historical financial statements of Terex became those of T-Rex. As a result, the historical financial
statements of Terex supersede any prior financial statements of T-Rex.
Prior to the share exchange with T-Rex, Terex had acquired interests in oil and gas prospects and properties discussed herein.
Terex also is an operator of oil and gas properties and as such operates the various properties owned by the Company and its
subsidiaries.
Western Interior Oil & Gas Corporation.
Western Interior Oil & Gas Corporation (“Western Interior”) was incorporated in the State of Wyoming in August 2005. Western
Interior has producing and developmental oil and gas properties in southwest central Wyoming.
4
On February 24, 2015, we entered into a Share Exchange Agreement with Western Interior and the shareholders of Western
Interior. Under the Share Exchange Agreement we exchanged shares of our common stock for 83% of the issued and
outstanding common stock of Western Interior. The acquisition was closed on March 28, 2015 and was effective March 31, 2015.
At the time of closing, we issued 7,465,168 shares of our restricted common stock in exchange for shares of Western Interior.
On March 31, 2015, we entered into an amendment to the Share Exchange Agreement whereby we assumed certain repurchase
agreements between Western Interior and its dissident shareholders and as a result acquired the remaining 17% of Western
Interior. As part of these agreements, we assumed certain promissory notes issued to the dissenting shareholders in the total
amount of $1,770,047 that are collateralized by Western Interior’s assets. As a result, Western Interior has become a wholly-
owned subsidiary of the Company.
JK Minerals, Inc.
In January 2016, we were assigned 100% of the equity interest issued and outstanding in JK Minerals, Inc. (“JK Minerals”) by its
sole shareholder, Blue Tip Energy Wyoming, Inc. At the time of the assignment, JK Minerals had no outstanding liabilities and its
only asset was a license to a 3-D Seismology Report performed in 2004 on the Cole Creek Property acquired by T-Rex #3. JK
Minerals was incorporated in Wyoming in July 1991 and has no operations.
T-Rex Oil LLC #3
T-Rex Oil, LLC #3 (“T-Rex #3”) is a Colorado limited liability company organized in January 2016. T-Rex #3 is managed by the
Company and T-Rex has a 16.67% equity interest in T-Rex #3 with the remaining 83.33% equity interest being owned by Mr.
VanderPloeg who is a director and shareholder of the Company. Per its Operating Agreement, T-Rex #3 acts and is the holder in
title to any and all assets and any related liabilities as well as operations on behalf of the Company.
Therefore, in accordance with authoritative guidance on accounting for consolidation, as set forth in Topic 810-10-15 of the ASC,
the Company has included in these consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended March 31, 2016 any such
assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses of T-Rex #3.
T-Rex #3 owns 13,328 gross, 10,000 net acres in the Powder River Basin of Wyoming (the “Cole Creek Property.”)
T-Rex Oil LLC #1
T-Rex Oil LLC #1 (“T-Rex #1”) is a Colorado limited liability company organized in December 2014. Terex is the Manager of T-
Rex #1 and is the operator of the Sioux County, Nebraska project and the Company has no equity interest in T-Rex #1.
The Company in December 2014 entered into put agreements with the members of T-Rex #1 whereby the Company granted a
right to put the purchase of their interest of T-Rex #1 in the amount of $425,000 back to the Company at an exercise price of
$2.00 per share or a total of 212,500 shares of the Company’s common stock.
Our Company
We are an independent oil and gas exploration and production company focused on the acquisition, enhancement and
development of oil and gas assets primarily in the Rocky Mountain region of Wyoming. Based on a 2007 research study
conducted by the Enhanced Oil Recovery Institute at the University of Wyoming using reservoir production data provided by the
Wyoming Oil and Gas Conservation Commission (“WOGCC”), Wyoming has produced 7,024 million barrels of oil from 1,237
producing fields with the top 400 fields producing 97.7% of the total produced oil, or 6,865 million barrels of oil. A research report
published by the Independent Petroleum Association of America in November 2014 ranked Wyoming as the 9th largest U.S.
state in terms of crude oil production and the 5th largest U.S. state in terms of natural gas production. Our management team has
extensive experience acquiring, enhancing and operating oil and gas assets in Wyoming, which we believe will provide a
competitive advantage in executing the Company’s business strategy.
5
As of October 2015, according to www.drillingedge.com, there are 358 active oil and gas operators in Wyoming, with the largest
producer, EOG Resources, Inc., representing only 9.24% of production, according to the WOGCC. We believe that there remain
several under-developed or mismanaged oil and gas properties in Wyoming that with proper field management, application of
modern exploration and development techniques, enhanced recovery methods and in-field drilling will increase current
production and the ultimate recovery factor of oil and gas reserves from these fields. In addition, while we are focusing on the
acquisition of proven properties that we believe can be economically enhanced in this current commodity price environment, in
certain market conditions, we believe there could be additional upside realized through the development of deeper productive
horizons, or applying tertiary recovery applications to these acquired fields.
To date, we have focused our activities in Eastern Wyoming along the Salt Creek/Big Muddy trend. Starting with the Salt Creek
field in Natrona County, following the Salt Creek/Big Muddy trend down to the South Glenrock field in Converse County, we
believe there are a series of analogous fields that could provide ideal targets for us to execute this business strategy. The
following fields are located along this trend, which we refer to as the “String of Pearls”.
Field
Salt Creek
Operators (1)
  
FDL Operating
Fossil Energy
Teapot Naval Reserve (aka Teapot Dome) Natrona County Holdings
Black Bear Oil Corporation
Chapman
County
Natrona County
Natrona County
Sage Spring Creek
Matrix Production Company
Natrona/Converse County
Burke Ranch
Strachen Exploration Company
  
Griffiths Oil LLC
Natrona County
Cole Creek
Cole Creek South
Big Muddy
Big Muddy East
Glenrock South
Glenrock
Terex Energy Corporation (2)
  
Blue Tip Energy (3)
 
Linc Energy Petroleum WYO
  
Blue Tip Energy (3)
 
Linc Energy Petroleum WYO
  
Vortex Petroleum
Natrona/Converse County
Converse County
Bass Petroleum
Converse County
Linc Energy Petroleum WYO
  
 Linc Energy Petroleum WYO  Converse County
  
Linc Energy Petroleum WYO
 
Muddy Mineral Exploration
  
 Linc Energy Petroleum WYO  Converse County
Converse County
(1)During the year ended December 31, 2015, as identified by the WOGCC website.
  
 (2)Terex Energy Corporation is a wholly-owned subsidiary of T-Rex Oil, Inc.
In January 2016, T-Rex #3, an equity investment, acquired an 82% working interest in the Blue Tip Energy Properties in Cole
Creek and Cole Creek South. In April 2016, T-Rex #3 acquired the remaining 18% working interest in the Blue Tip Energy
Properties in Cole Creek and South Creek. T-Rex #3 holds 100% working interest in these properties.
(3)
According to the WOGCC, these fields range in size, but generally produce from similar stacked horizons ranging from the Deep
Tensleep to the Wall/Creek/Frontier formations.
6
We acquired our first assets in the String of Pearls in 2014 and currently operate wells and properties in the Burke Ranch and
Cole Creek Fields. We have identified areas of enhancements available to increase the production and recovery factors of these
fields, including well recompletion, stimulation activities, pressure maintenance improvement, down spacing and enhanced
recovery. We believe that several other fields in the String of Pearls provide evidence of the potential of these operated assets
given similar geology and productive horizons. For instance, the Salt Creek field has achieved a nearly 40% recovery factor,
developed down to 20 acre spacing utilizing a C02 (Carbon Dioxide) flood. The Cole Creek field by contrast has achieved a
modest 23% recovery factor, based on 80 acre well development. We have identified several behind pipe recompletion
opportunities targeting undeveloped productive formations that are currently producing in the Salt Creek field.
As a result, we believe that there remains significant work to be completed in our currently operated fields that match our
business strategy, while we continue to seek opportunity to acquire additional assets along this trend.
Our Properties
We are initially focused on the Salt Creek/Big Muddy trend in the State of Wyoming, which we refer to as the “String of Pearls”.
This trend covers approximately 8 miles running from Natrona County in the north down to Converse County in the south.
We are attracted to this area based upon the available information of hydrocarbon production, including primary, secondary and
in some cases tertiary recovery results. While the size and recovery factors associated with the various fields within the Sting of
Pearls vary, the general geologic setting is considered to be consistent. We identify the Salt Creek field, which has achieved a
40% recovery factor, as an indicator of the potential of these fields that are less developed at this point in time.
Historical Production of Fields in the “String of Pearls”
Field
Date of 
 
Discovery
Salt Creek
 1889
Teapot Naval Reserve (AKA Teapot Dome) 1922
Sage Spring Creek
 1949
 1938
Cole Creek
 1948
Cole Creek South
 1916
Big Muddy
Glenrock South
 1950
Estimated
  
 
Recovery Factor
Cumulative
 
Production (1)
  710,292,907     ~40
  28,730,483BO    ~25
  17,074,699
    ~30
    ~23
  18,563,064
    ~34
  17,274,800
    ~24
  53,971,243
  75,893,890
    ~20
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
(1)Cumulative Production is from the WOGCC and is as of December 31, 2015.
Cole Creek Oil Field, Wyoming
Located in the southwest margin of the Powder River Basin in Natrona and Converse Counties, approximately 20 miles to the
northeast of Casper, Wyoming. Our Leasehold historically produces from 4 Cretacious sand formations, the Shannon, the
Frontier, the Dakota and the Lakota. Additionally, there is potential in the Muddy and the Tensleep or Minnelusa formations. We
are currently reprocessing and reinterpreting Seismic data previously performed on parts of the property.
Production in the field at this time is from the 2nd Frontier and the Dakota and averages 60 BOPD. We have identified several
behind pipe opportunities and plan to develop them in the near term.
Covering approximately 13,400 gross acres and 19 producing wells and 23 existing well bores.
We intend to focus on the re-development of the Shannon and Frontier formation using new technology and 3-D seismic re-work
methods. We intend to drill edge and infill wells initially then develop the property for tertiary recovery using polymer floods,
surfactants and possibly CO2 injection.
7
Burke Ranch Project, Natrona County, Wyoming
The Burke Ranch Field of Wyoming consists of approximately 4,500 acres located in the southwest corner of the Powder River
Basin. The project has a potential for 40+ development and exploratory wells. Historically, the Dakota Formation has been the
primary objective. The Burke Ranch Unit was originally developed on 80 acre spacing. Downsizing the spacing to 40 acres and
drilling infill and edge wells offers low risk and high potential production.
We are currently permitting a small 3 D seismic project on our acreage to enable us to better define the best development
opportunities. There could be additional potential in the Frontier (Wall Creek), Second Frontier, Niobrara, Mowry, and Tensleep
Formations.
Burke Ranch Field offers a variety of drilling and development opportunities.
●Tensleep Formation - new drilling on seismic anomaly
    
 ●Dakota Formation – additional development of the Dakota Formation to re-work the field to increase existing production
    
 ●Frontier Formation – to recomplete the existing wells to access existing reserves behind pipe.
Big Horn Basin Prospect
The Big Horn Basin, located in north-central Wyoming, is a geological structural basin of sedimentary rocks dating from the
Cambrian to Miocene. The principal productive reservoir of oil in the Big Horn Basin to date has been the Pennsylvanian
Tensleep Formation. Other producing horizons include the Mississippian Madison Limestone, Permian Phosphoria and the
Cretaceous Frontier Sandstone.
Our Big Horn Basin projects currently produce from the Triassic Crow Mountain, Permian Phosphoria and Frontier formations.
They provide us with both development and exploration opportunities.
The Big Horn Basin Prospect properties have a combination of development and exploration projects. We expect to drill, subject
to reasonable financing, between 16 and 36 wells on the properties over the next two years.
Rawhide - This is an opportunity for development of existing production and exploration for deeper reserves. Cumulative
historical production to date is approximately 147.0 MBO.
Meeteetse “Deep” - This is an opportunity to develop a large Phosphoria-Tensleep oil field. This is the largest project in the
Western Interior portfolio. In mid-2008, the Carter 1 discovery well was re-entered and recompleted in the Phosphoria formation
to restore production. Extensive testing and analysis have established Phosphoria 2P reserves on the 240 acre lease block.
Baird Peak - Baird Peak is a well-defined structure with 200’ of closure, with multiple pay objectives. Historically, it has produced
128,000 BO.
8
Nebraska
Sioux and Kimball County, Nebraska
We have development of the project through T-Rex #1. The project consists of:
●We have a 100% WI and a 75% NRI in the well and key acreage of 240 acres.
    
 ●We have sufficient acreage to drill two new wells in an up-dip direction structurally.
    
 ●The Company has a 31.25% WI until payout, at which time the Company would get an additional 25% working interest for a
total of 56.25% in a water injection-disposal project.
    
 ●Water injection well application for permit was submitted and in early April 2015 it was approved for injection rates of 5,000
barrels of water per day, pending appeal.
    
 ●Water injection well has been drilled and cased with 7 inch pipe.
Drilling Program and Field Activities
We initiated our operations in Wyoming with the acquisition of the acreage in the Burke Ranch in 2014. Since closing the Cole
Creek acquisition, we have focused the majority of our activities in this field and developing a recompletion program and 3D
Seismic reprocessing and interpretation program.
We believe there remain a number of activities to complete in the field, including further re-completions, down-spaced drilling and
enhanced oil recovery techniques which will most likely start with CO2 “huff and puff” treatments.
Business Strategies
Our objective is to create shareholder value by identifying and assembling a portfolio of low-risk assets with attractive economic
profiles and leveraging our technical and managerial expertise to deliver industry-leading results. We seek to achieve this
objective by executing the following strategies:
●
Pursue Out of Favor Fields. We believe that many of our peers are currently looking to exit Wyoming to pursue other areas of
operations. We attribute this trend to either the smaller size of their respective holdings, the fact that the majority of these assets
represent conventional oil and/or natural gas production or the possibility that they currently lack the resources to focus on the
best management of these assets. By contrast, given our management experience in this area, we seek to aggregate these
assets, to achieve economies of scale, driving down our per unit operating costs, while increasing production by detailed field
management and enhancement.
●
Seek Held by Production Acreage that Can Provide Future Upside. Our acquisition strategy is based on identifying and
acquiring producing properties that we believe can be enhanced. However, given our experience in Wyoming, we anticipate
that there will be further upside achieved if commodity prices improve through the exploration of deeper productive horizons.
While we do not quantify this upside value, we seek acquisitions where we can secure this upside optionality while executing
our core business strategy.
9
Competitive Strengths
We possess a number of competitive strengths that we believe will allow us to successfully execute our business strategies:
●
Management Experience. Our management has a total combined experience of 100+ years in the oil and gas industry with a
particular focus on Wyoming. We believe that this firsthand knowledge of our management, which includes having drilled
numerous wells in Wyoming, and our ownership of acres of surface land, provide us with a competitive advantage when
executing our acquisition strategy, in addition to our planned field enhancement operations. As a result of this experience, we
believe that we will be able to produce our fields in Wyoming much more efficiently than many of our peers.
●
Multi-Year, Low-Risk Development Drilling Inventory. We have identified a number of field enhancements that could be
conducted across our current asset base including 7 initial recompletions, the development of 61 PUD drilling locations (56 in
Cole Creek and 5 in the Big Horn Basin) and additional locations should we determine to down-space to 40 acre well spacing.
Likewise, we believe there are 18 to 20 behind pipe zones that provide us with additional reserves.
Proven Acquisition Strategy. Given the experience of our management team, we have been successful in identifying and
closing on acquisitions within the Salt Creek/Big Muddy trend that fit our business strategy. This firsthand knowledge provides
us with insight into possible asset transactions before many of our peers are aware of them. Coupled with our knowledge
related to the geologic and operational setting of these assets, we believe we have a strong advantage in determining the price
to pay for these potential acquisitions, while also having a clear understanding of how to enhance value prior to closing the
transaction.
●
COMPETITION, MARKETS, REGULATION AND TAXATION
Competition
There are a large number of companies and individuals engaged in the exploration for oil and gas; accordingly, there is a high
degree of competition for desirable properties. However, the staff at T-Rex is experienced and knowledgeable about the Rocky
Mountain region and can evaluate potential acquisitions and opportunities with greater efficiency.
Markets
The availability of a ready market for newly discovered oil and gas reserves will depend on numerous factors beyond our control,
including the proximity and capacity of refineries and pipelines, the effect of state regulation of production and of federal
regulation of products sold in interstate commerce and recent intrastate sales. The market price of oil and gas is volatile and
beyond our control.
Global Oil Supply
In the last two years, the produced global oil supply is outpacing oil demand which, in part, has resulted in declining oil prices. It
is only in the last several months that production has come into line with demand and pricing has seen a relatively stable period,
though prices have not rebound to pre-2014 levels.
Despite this, the industry continues to work on a production decline curve, and the industry continues to focus on trying to replace
depleting reserves with more conventional and cost effective production techniques.
10
Effect of Changing Industry Conditions on Drilling Activity
Lower oil and gas prices have caused a decline in drilling activity in the U.S. recently. However, such reduced activity will
normally result in a decline in drilling, lease acquisition and equipment costs, and an improvement in the terms under which
drilling prospects are generally available. We cannot predict what oil and gas prices will be in the future and what effect those
prices may have on drilling activity in general, or on our ability to generate economic drilling prospects or to raise the necessary
funds with which to drill them.
Effect of Technology
Evolving scientific and technological developments in the last five years have not only provided access to previously
unreachable and large reserves, but in many cases have made the production of such reserves highly profitable. In addition,
these developments have taken previously shut in fields/wells and made them once again economically viable and in some
cases, greatly so.
Government Regulations
Our operations are subject to various federal, state and local laws and regulations that change from time to time. Many of these
regulations are intended to prevent pollution and protect environmental quality, including regulations related to permit
requirements for the drilling of wells, bonding requirements to drill or operate wells, the location of wells, the method of drilling,
completing and casing wells, the surface use and restoration of properties upon which wells are drilled, the sourcing and
disposal of water used in the drilling and completion process, groundwater testing, air emissions, noise, lighting and traffic
abatement and the plugging and abandonment of wells. Other regulations are intended to prevent the waste of oil and gas and to
protect the rights among owners in a common reservoir. These include regulation of the size of drilling and spacing units or
proration units, the number, or density, of wells which may be drilled in an area, the unitization or pooling of oil and natural gas
wells and regulations that generally prohibit the venting or flaring of natural gas and that impose certain requirements regarding
the ratability or fair apportionment of production from fields and individual wells. In addition, our operations are subject to
regulations governing the pipeline gathering and transportation of oil and natural gas, as well as various federal, state and local
tax laws and regulations.
Failure to comply with applicable laws and regulations can result in substantial penalties. Our competitors in the oil and natural
gas industry are generally subject to the same regulatory requirements and restrictions that affect our operations. The regulatory
burden on the industry increases the cost of doing business and affects profitability. Although we believe we are in substantial
compliance with all applicable laws and regulations, such laws and regulations are frequently amended or reinterpreted.
Therefore, we are unable to predict the future costs or impact of compliance.
Regulation of Production
Federal, state and local agencies have promulgated extensive rules and regulations applicable to our oil and natural gas
exploration, production and related operations. Most states require drilling permits, drilling and operating bonds and the filing of
various reports and impose other requirements relating to the exploration and production of oil and natural gas. Many states also
have statutes or regulations addressing conservation matters including provisions governing the size of drilling and spacing units
or proration units, the density of wells and the unitization or pooling of oil and natural gas properties. Some states like Wyoming
and Colorado allow the forced pooling or integration of tracts to facilitate exploration while other states rely primarily or
exclusively on the voluntary pooling of lands and leases. In areas with voluntary pooling, it may be more difficult to develop a
project if the operator owns less than 100% of the leasehold. The statutes and regulations of some states limit the rate at which
oil and gas is produced from properties, prohibit the venting or flaring of natural gas and impose certain requirements regarding
the ratability of production. This may limit the amount of oil and gas we can produce from our wells and may limit the number of
wells or locations at which we can drill. The federal and state regulatory burden on the oil and natural gas industry increases our
cost of doing business and affects our profitability. Because these rules and regulations are amended or reinterpreted frequently,
we are unable to predict the future cost or impact of complying with these laws.
11
The Wyoming Oil and Gas Conservation Commission is the primary regulator of exploration and production of oil and gas
resources in the principal area in which we operate. The WOGCC regulates oil and gas operators through rules, policies, written
guidance, orders, permits and inspections. Among other criteria, the WOGCC enforces specifications regarding drilling,
development, production, abandonment, enhanced recovery, safety, aesthetics, noise, waste, flowlines and wildlife.
Regulation of sales and transportation of natural gas
Historically, the transportation and sales for resale of natural gas in interstate commerce have been regulated pursuant to the
Natural Gas Act of 1938 (“NGA”), the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978 and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (“FERC”)
regulations. Effective January 1, 1993, the Natural Gas Wellhead Decontrol Act deregulated the price for all “first sales” of natural
gas. Thus, all of our sales of gas may be made at market prices, subject to applicable contract provisions. Sales of natural gas
are affected by the availability, terms and cost of pipeline transportation. Since 1985, the FERC has implemented regulations
intended to make natural gas transportation more accessible to gas buyers and sellers on an open-access, non-discriminatory
basis. We cannot predict what further action the FERC will take on these matters. Some of the FERC’s more recent proposals
may, however, adversely affect the availability and reliability of interruptible transportation service on interstate pipelines. We do
not believe that we will be affected by any action taken materially differently than other natural gas producers, gatherers and
marketers with which we compete.
Regulation of sales and transportation of oil
Our sales of crude oil are affected by the availability, terms and cost of transportation. Interstate transportation of oil by pipeline is
regulated by the FERC pursuant to the Interstate Commerce Act (“ICA”), the Energy Policy Act of 1992 and the rules and
regulations promulgated under those laws. The ICA and its implementing regulations require that tariff rates for interstate service
on oil pipelines, including interstate pipelines that transport crude oil and refined products (collectively referred to as “petroleum
pipelines”) be just and reasonable and non-discriminatory and that such rates and terms and conditions of service be filed with
the FERC.
Intrastate oil pipeline transportation rates are subject to regulation by state regulatory commissions. The basis for intrastate oil
pipeline regulation, and the degree of regulatory oversight and scrutiny given to intrastate oil pipeline rates, varies from state to
state. Insofar as effective interstate and intrastate rates are equally applicable to all comparable shippers, we do not believe that
the regulation of oil transportation rates will affect our operations in any way that is materially different than those of our
competitors who are similarly situated.
Environmental Laws.
Oil and gas exploration and development are specifically subject to existing federal and state laws and regulations governing
environmental quality and pollution control. Such laws and regulations may substantially increase the costs of exploring for,
developing or producing oil and gas and may prevent or delay the commencement or continuation of a given operation.
All of our operations involving the exploration for or the production of any minerals are subject to existing laws and regulations
relating to exploration procedures, safety precautions, employee health and safety, air quality standards, pollution of stream and
fresh water sources, odor, noise, dust and other environmental protection controls adopted by federal, state and local
governmental authorities as well as the right of adjoining property owners. We may be required to prepare and present to federal,
state or local authorities data pertaining to the effect or impact that any proposed exploration for or production of minerals may
have upon the environment. All requirements imposed by any such authorities may be costly and time consuming, and may delay
commencement or continuation of exploration or production operations.
12
It may be anticipated that future legislation will significantly emphasize the protection of the environment, and that, as a
consequence, our activities may be more closely regulated to further the cause of environmental protection. Such legislation, as
well as future interpretation of existing laws, may require substantial increases in equipment and operating costs to us and
delays, interruptions or a termination of operations, the extent of which cannot now be predicted.
Title to Properties.
We are not the record owner of our interest in our properties and rely instead on contracts with the owner or operator of the
property, pursuant to which, among other things, we have the right to have our interest placed of record. As is customary in the oil
and gas industry, a preliminary title examination generally will be conducted prior to the time unproved properties or interests are
acquired by us. Prior to commencement of drilling operations on such acreage and prior to the acquisition of proved properties,
we usually will conduct a thorough title examination and will remedy any significant defects before proceeding with operations or
the acquisition of proved properties, as we may deem appropriate.
Our properties are subject to royalty, overriding royalty and other interests customary in the industry, liens incident to agreements,
current taxes and other burdens, minor encumbrances, easements and restrictions. Although we are not aware of any material
title defects or disputes with respect to our undeveloped acreage, to the extent such defects or disputes exist, we would suffer title
failures.
BACKLOG OF ORDERS.
We currently have no orders for sales.
GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS.
We have no government contracts.
COMPANY SPONSORED RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT.
We are not conducting any research.
NUMBER OF PERSONS EMPLOYED
As of March 31, 2016, T-Rex and its subsidiaries had 8 full-time employees. Jon Nicolaysen, and Allen Heim, officers and
directors of T-Rex, have Employment Agreements with our subsidiary, Terex. Don Walford and Martin Gottlob, officers and
directors of T-Rex, have Employment Agreements with the Company. All officers of the Company work 40 hours a week. All other
employees are at will employees.
OFF BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
13
ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
This document includes forward-looking statements, including, without limitation, statements relating to T-Rex’s plans, strategies,
objectives, expectations, intentions and adequacy of resources. These forward-looking statements involve known and unknown
risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause the Company’s actual results, performance or achievements to be materially
different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. These
factors include, among others, the following: our ability of to implement our business strategy; our ability to obtain additional
financing; T-Rex’s limited operating history; unknown liabilities associated with future acquisitions; our ability to manage growth;
significant competition; our ability to attract and retain talented employees; future government regulations; and other factors
described in this filing or in other of T-Rex’s filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. T-Rex is under no obligation
to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
RISK FACTORS RELATED TO OUR COMPANY
Our business has an operating history of only three years after Bankruptcy emergence and is unproven and therefore risky.
We have only in the last two years begun operations under the business plan discussed herein. Potential investors should be
made aware of the risk and difficulties encountered by a new enterprise in the oil and gas industry, especially in view of the
intense competition from existing businesses in the industry and current industry conditions.
We have a limited revenue history and have a short history of operations.
We have only recently begun operations in the oil and gas industry. During the year ended March 31, 2016, we recognized a net
loss of $15,767,831 compared to $11,043,541 during the year ended March 31, 2015. With our acquisition of Western Interior
effective March 31, 2015, we began to recognize revenues from operations during the first quarter of the fiscal year ended March
31, 2016; however, these are not enough to support operations.
We are not profitable and the business effort is considered to be in an early stage of operations. We must be regarded as a new
or development venture with all of the unforeseen costs, expenses, problems, risks and difficulties to which such ventures are
subject.
We are not diversified and we will be dependent on only one business.
Because of our limited financial resources, it is unlikely that we will be able to diversify our operations. Our probable inability to
diversify our activities into more than one area will subject us to economic fluctuations within the energy industry and therefore
increase the risks associated with our operations due to lack of diversification.
If we complete the proposed transaction with Norris, we will have diversified our operations to include both manufacturing and
threading for both the oil and gas industry and the horizontal directional drilling trenchless industry. However, these operations
will still be reliant on the oil and gas industry and, in addition, there is no assurance that the acquisition will be completed.
We can give no assurance of success or profitability to our investors.
There is no assurance that we will ever operate profitably. There is no assurance that we will generate revenues or profits, or that
the market price of our common stock will be increased thereby.
We may have a shortage of working capital in the future which could jeopardize our ability to carry out our business plan.
Our capital needs consist primarily of expenses related to geological evaluation, general and administrative and potential
exploration participation and could exceed $10,000,000 in the next twelve months. Such funds are not currently committed.
14
If we find oil and gas reserves to exist on a prospect, we will need substantial additional financing to fund the necessary
exploration and development work. Furthermore, if the results of that exploration and development work are successful, we will
need substantial additional funds for continued development. We will need to obtain the necessary funds either through debt or
equity financing, some form of cost-sharing arrangement with others or the sale of all or part of the property. There is no
assurance that we will be successful in obtaining any financing. These various financing alternatives may dilute the interest of
our shareholders and/or reduce our interest in the properties.
We will need additional financing for which we have no commitments, and this may jeopardize execution of our business plan.
We have limited funds, and such funds may not be adequate to carry out the business plan in the oil and gas industry. Our
ultimate success depends upon our ability to raise additional capital. We have not investigated the availability, source or terms
that might govern the acquisition of additional capital and will not do so until we determine a need for additional financing. If we
need additional capital, we have no assurance that funds will be available from any source or, if available, that they can be
obtained on terms acceptable to us. If not available, our operations will be limited to those that can be financed with our modest
capital.
We may in the future issue more shares, which could cause a loss of control by our present management and current
shareholders.
We may issue further shares out of our authorized but unissued common stock that would, upon issuance, represent a majority of
the voting power and equity of our Company. The result of such an issuance would be that those new shareholders and
management would control our Company, and persons unknown could replace our current management. Such an occurrence
would result in a greatly reduced percentage of ownership of our Company by our current shareholders, which could present
significant risks to investors.
We have warrants and options issued and outstanding which are convertible into our common stock. A conversion of such equity
instruments could have a dilutive effect on existing shareholders.
At March 31, 2016, we have warrants issued and outstanding exercisable into 1,351,877 shares of our common stock at ranges
from $0.10 to $3.50 per share and options issued and outstanding exercisable into 1,127,750 shares of common stock at ranges
from $0.10 to $2.00 per share. They are exercisable in whole or in part. The exercise of the warrants and/or options into shares of
our common stock could have a dilutive effect to the holdings of our existing shareholders.
We will depend upon management but we may at times have limited participation of management.
Our directors are also acting as our officers. We will be heavily dependent upon their skills, talents and abilities, as well as
several consultants to us, to implement our business plan, and may, from time to time, find that the inability of the officers,
directors and consultants to devote their full-time attention to our business results in a delay in progress toward implementing our
business plan. Consultants may be employed on a part-time basis under a contract to be determined.
Our directors and officers are, or may become, in their individual capacities, officers, directors, controlling shareholder and/or
partners of other entities engaged in a variety of businesses. Thus, our officers and directors may have potential conflicts
including their time and efforts involved in participation with other business entities. Each officer and director of our business may
be engaged in business activities outside of our business, and the amount of time they devote as officers and directors to our
business will be up to 40 hours per week. Investors in the Company should critically assess all of the information concerning our
officers and directors.
15
We do not know of any reason other than outside business interests that would prevent our officers and directors from devoting
full-time to our Company when the business may demand such full-time participation.
Our officers and directors may have conflicts of interest as to corporate opportunities in which we may not be able or allowed to
participate.
Presently there is no requirement contained in our Articles of Incorporation, Bylaws or minutes which requires officers and
directors of our business to disclose to us business opportunities which come to their attention. Our officers and directors do,
however, have a fiduciary duty of loyalty to us to disclose to us any business opportunities which come to their attention in their
capacity as an officer and/or director or otherwise. Excluded from this duty would be opportunities which the person learns about
through his involvement as an officer and director of another company.
We have agreed to indemnification of officers and directors as is provided by Colorado Statute.
Colorado Revised Statutes provide for the indemnification of our directors, officers, employees and agents, under certain
circumstances, against attorney’s fees and other expenses incurred by them in any litigation to which they become a party arising
from their association with or activities on our behalf. We will also bear the expenses of such litigation for any of our directors,
officers, employees or agents, upon such person’s promise to repay us therefor if it is ultimately determined that any such person
shall not have been entitled to indemnification. This indemnification policy could result in substantial expenditures by us that we
will be unable to recoup.
Our directors’ liability to us and to our shareholders is limited.
Colorado Revised Statutes exclude personal liability of our directors and our shareholders for monetary damages for breach of
fiduciary duty except in certain specified circumstances. Accordingly, we will have a much more limited right of action against our
directors than otherwise would be the case. This provision does not affect the liability of any director under federal or applicable
state securities laws.
RISK FACTORS RELATING TO OUR BUSINESS
Our business, the oil and gas business, has numerous risks which could render us unsuccessful.
The search for new oil and gas reserves frequently results in unprofitable efforts, not only from dry holes, but also from wells
which, though productive, will not produce oil or gas in sufficient quantities to return a profit on the costs incurred. There is no
assurance we will find or produce oil or gas from any of the wells we have acquired or which may be acquired by us, nor are
there any assurances that if we ever obtain any production it will be profitable.
We have substantial competitors who have an advantage over us in resources and management.
We are and will continue to be an insignificant participant in the oil and gas business. Most of our competitors have significantly
greater financial resources, technical expertise and managerial capabilities than us and, consequently, we will be at a
competitive disadvantage in identifying and developing or exploring suitable prospects. Competitors’ resources could overwhelm
our restricted efforts to acquire and explore oil and gas prospects and cause failure of our business plan.
16
We will be subject to all of the market forces in the energy business, many of which could pose a significant risk to our
operations.
The marketing of natural gas and oil which may be produced by our prospects will be affected by a number of factors beyond our
control. These factors include the extent of the supply of oil or gas in the market, the availability of competitive fuels and
alternative energy sources, crude oil imports, the world-wide political situation, price regulation and other factors. Current
economic and market conditions have created dramatic fluctuations in oil prices. Any significant decrease in the market prices of
oil and gas could materially affect our profitability from oil and gas activities.
There generally are only a limited number of gas transmission companies with existing pipelines in the vicinity of a gas well or
wells. In the event that producing gas properties are not subject to purchase contracts or that any such contracts terminate and
other parties do not purchase our gas production, there is no assurance that we will be able to enter into purchase contracts with
any transmission companies or other purchasers of natural gas or regarding the price which such purchasers would be willing to
pay for such gas. There may, on occasion, be an oversupply of gas in the marketplace or in pipelines; the extent and duration of
such oversupply may affect prices adversely. Such oversupply may result in reductions of purchases and prices paid to
producers by principal gas pipeline purchasers. (See “Item 1. Business - Competition, Markets Regulation and Taxation.”)
We believe investors should consider certain negative aspects of our operations.
Dry Holes: We may expend substantial funds acquiring and potentially participating in exploring properties which we later
determine not to be productive. All funds so expended will be a total loss to us.
Technical Assistance: We will find it necessary to employ technical assistance in the operation of our business. As of the date of
this annual report, we have not contracted for any technical assistance. When we need it, such assistance is likely to be available
at compensation levels we would be able to pay. However, there is no assurance that such assistance will be available or, if
available, that it will be at an acceptable compensation level.
Uncertainty of Title: We will attempt to acquire leases or interests in leases by option, lease, farmout or by purchase. The validity
of title to oil and gas property depends upon numerous circumstances and factual matters (many of which are not discoverable of
record or by other readily available means) and is subject to many uncertainties of existing law and our application.
Government Regulations: The area of exploration of natural resources has become significantly regulated by state and federal
governmental agencies, and such regulation could have an adverse effect on our operations. Compliance with statutes and
regulations governing the oil and gas industry could significantly increase the capital expenditures necessary to develop our
prospects.
Nature of our Business: Our business is highly speculative, involves the commitment of high-risk capital and exposes us to
potentially substantial losses. In addition, we will be in direct competition with other organizations which are significantly better
financed and staffed than we are.
General Economic and Other Conditions: Our business may be adversely affected from time to time by such matters as changes
in general economic, industrial and international conditions; changes in taxes, oil and gas prices and costs; excess supplies and
other factors of a general nature.
Our business is subject to significant weather interruptions.
Our activities may be subject to periodic interruptions due to weather conditions. Weather-imposed restrictions during certain
times of the year on roads accessing properties could adversely affect our ability to benefit from production on such properties or
could increase the costs of drilling new wells because of delays.
17
Reserve estimates depend on many assumptions that may turn out to be inaccurate. Any material inaccuracies in these reserve
estimates or underlying assumptions will materially affect the quantities and present value of our reserves. The Company’s
current estimates of reserves could change, potentially in material amounts, in the future, in particular due to the recent significant
decline in commodity prices.
The process of estimating crude oil and natural gas reserves is complex and inherently imprecise. It requires interpretation of
available technical data and many assumptions, including assumptions relating to current and future economic conditions,
production rates, drilling and operating expenses and commodity prices. Any significant inaccuracy in these interpretations or
assumptions could materially affect our estimated quantities and present value of our reserves. See Part I, Item 2 for information
about our estimated crude oil and natural gas reserves, PV-10 and Standardized Measure of discounted future net cash flows as
of March 31, 2016.
In order to prepare reserve estimates, we must project production rates and the amount and timing of development expenditures.
Our booked proved undeveloped reserves must be developed within five years from the date of initial booking under SEC
reserve rules. Changes in the timing of development plans that impact our ability to develop such reserves in the required time
frame could result in fluctuations in reserves between periods as reserves booked in one period may need to be removed in a
subsequent period.
We must also analyze available geological, geophysical, production and engineering data in preparing reserve estimates. The
extent, quality and reliability of this data can vary with the uncertainty of decline curves and the ability to model heterogeneity of
the porosity, permeability and pressure relationships in unconventional resources. The process also requires economic
assumptions, based on historical data but projected into the future, about matters such as crude oil and natural gas prices, drilling
and operating expenses, capital expenditures, taxes and availability of funds.
The prices used in calculating our estimated proved reserves are, in accordance with SEC requirements, calculated by
determining the unweighted arithmetic average of the first-day-of-the-month commodity prices for the preceding 12 months.
Commodity prices declined significantly in the fourth quarter of calendar year 2014 and were unstable during calendar year 2015
and if such prices do not increase significantly, our future calculations of estimated proved reserves will be based on lower
commodity prices which could result in our having to remove non-economic reserves from our proved reserves in future periods.
Actual future production, crude oil and natural gas prices, revenues, taxes, development expenditures, operating expenses and
quantities of recoverable crude oil and natural gas reserves will vary and could vary significantly from our estimates. Any
significant variance could materially affect the estimated quantities and present value of our reserves, which in turn could have an
adverse effect on the value of our assets. In addition, we may adjust estimates of proved reserves, potentially in material
amounts, to reflect production history, results of exploration and development, prevailing crude oil and natural gas prices and
other factors, many of which are beyond our control.
The present value of future net revenues from our proved reserves will not necessarily be the same as the current market value of
our estimated crude oil and natural gas reserves and, in particular, may be reduced due to the recent significant decline in
commodity prices.
You should not assume the present value of future net revenues from our proved reserves is the current market value of our
estimated crude oil and natural gas reserves. In accordance with SEC rules, we base the estimated discounted future net
revenues from proved reserves on the 12-month unweighted arithmetic average of the first-day-of-the-month commodity prices for
the preceding twelve months. Actual future prices may be materially higher or lower than the SEC pricing used in the
calculations. Actual future net revenues from crude oil and natural gas properties will be affected by factors such as:
● the actual prices we receive for sales of crude oil and natural gas;
    
 ● the actual cost and timing of development and production expenditures;
    
 ● the timing and amount of actual production; and
    
 ● changes in governmental regulations or taxation.
18
The timing of both our production and our incurrence of expenses in connection with the development and production of crude oil
and natural gas properties will affect the timing and amount of actual future net revenues from proved reserves, and thus their
actual present value. In addition, the 10% discount factor we use when calculating discounted future net revenues may not be the
most appropriate discount factor based on interest rates in effect from time to time and risks associated with our reserves or the
crude oil and natural gas industry in general.
We may be required to write down the carrying values of our crude oil and natural gas properties if crude oil prices remain at their
current levels or decline further.
Accounting rules require that we periodically review the carrying values of our crude oil and natural gas properties for possible
impairment. Based on specific market factors, prices and circumstances at the time of prospective impairment reviews, and the
continuing evaluation of development plans, production data, economics and other factors, we may be required to write down the
carrying values of our crude oil and natural gas properties. A write-down results in a non-cash charge to earnings. We have
incurred impairment charges in the past and may incur additional impairment charges in the future, particularly if crude oil prices
remain at their currently low levels or decline further, which could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations for
the periods in which such charges are taken.
We are subject to significant operating hazards and uninsured risk in the energy industry.
Our proposed operations will be subject to all of the operating hazards and risks normally incident to exploring, drilling for and
producing oil and gas, such as encountering unusual or unexpected formations and pressures, blowouts, environmental pollution
and personal injury. We will maintain general liability insurance but we have not obtained insurance against such things as
blowouts and pollution risks because of the prohibitive expense. Should we sustain an uninsured loss or liability, or a loss in
excess of policy limits, our ability to operate may be materially adversely affected.
We are subject to federal income tax laws and changes therein which could adversely impact us.
Federal income tax laws are of particular significance to the oil and gas industry in which we engage. Legislation has eroded
various benefits of oil and gas producers and subsequent legislation could continue this trend. Congress is continually
considering proposals with respect to federal income taxation which could have a material adverse effect on our future operations
and on our ability to obtain risk capital which our industry has traditionally attracted from taxpayers in high tax brackets.
We are subject to substantial government regulation in the energy industry which could adversely impact us.
The production and sale of oil and gas are subject to regulation by state and federal authorities, the spacing of wells and the
prevention of waste. There are both federal and state laws regarding environmental controls which may necessitate significant
capital outlays, resulting in extended delays, materially affect our earnings potential and cause material changes in the in our
proposed business. We cannot predict what legislation, if any, may be passed by Congress or state legislatures in the future, or
the effect of such legislation, if any, on us. Such regulations may have a significant effect on our operating results.
19
RISK FACTORS RELATED TO OUR STOCK
The regulation of penny stocks by SEC and FINRA may discourage the tradability of our securities.
We are a “penny stock” company. Our securities are subject to a Securities and Exchange Commission rule that imposes special
sales practice requirements upon broker-dealers who sell such securities to persons other than established customers or
accredited investors. For purposes of the rule, the phrase “accredited investors” means, in general terms, institutions with assets
in excess of $5,000,000, or individuals having a net worth in excess of $1,000,000, excluding the primary residence, or having an
annual income that exceeds $200,000 (or that, when combined with a spouse’s income, exceeds $300,000). For transactions
covered by the rule, the broker-dealer must make a special suitability determination for the purchaser and receive the purchaser’s
written agreement to the transaction prior to the sale. Effectively, this discourages broker-dealers from executing trades in penny
stocks. Consequently, the rule will affect the ability of investors to sell their securities in any market that might develop therefor
because it imposes additional regulatory burdens on penny stock transactions.
In addition, the Securities and Exchange Commission has adopted a number of rules to regulate “penny stocks”. Such rules
include Rules 3a51-1, 15g-1, 15g-2, 15g-3, 15g-4, 15g-5, 15g-6, 15g-7 and 15g-9 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended (the “Exchange Act”). Because our securities constitute “penny stocks” within the meaning of the rules, the rules would
apply to us and to our securities. The rules will further affect the ability of owners of shares to sell our securities in any market that
might develop for them because it imposes additional regulatory burdens on penny stock transactions.
Shareholders should be aware that, according to the Securities and Exchange Commission, the market for penny stocks has
suffered in recent years from patterns of fraud and abuse. Such patterns include (i) control of the market for the security by one or
a few broker-dealers that are often related to the promoter or issuer; (ii) manipulation of prices through prearranged matching of
purchases and sales and false and misleading press releases; (iii) “boiler room” practices involving high-pressure sales tactics
and unrealistic price projections by inexperienced sales persons; (iv) excessive and undisclosed bid-ask differentials and
markups by selling broker-dealers; and (v) the wholesale dumping of the same securities by promoters and broker-dealers after
prices have been manipulated to a desired level and consequent investor losses. Our management is aware of the abuses that
have occurred historically in the penny stock market. Although we do not expect to be in a position to dictate the behavior of the
market or of broker-dealers who participate in the market, management will strive within the confines of practical limitations to
prevent the described patterns from being established with respect to our securities.
We will pay no foreseeable dividends in the future.
We have not paid dividends on our common stock and do not ever anticipate paying such dividends in the foreseeable future.
Our investors may suffer future dilution due to issuances of shares for various considerations in the future.
There may be substantial dilution to our shareholders as a result of future decisions of the Board to issue shares without
shareholder approval for cash, services or acquisitions.
At March 31, 2016, we have warrants issued and outstanding exercisable for 1,351,877 shares of our common stock at ranges
from $0.10 to $3.50 per share. In addition, we have options exercisable into 1,127,750 shares of our common stock at ranges
from $0.10 to $2.00 per share. The warrants and options are exercisable in whole or in part. The exercise of the warrants and/or
options into shares of our common stock could have a dilutive effect to the holdings of our existing shareholders.
Rule 144 sales in the future may have a depressive effect on our stock price.
All of the outstanding shares of common stock held by our present officers, directors, and affiliate shareholders are “restricted
securities” within the meaning of Rule 144 under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. As restricted securities, these shares
may be resold only pursuant to an effective registration statement or under the requirements of Rule 144 or other applicable
exemptions from registration under the Act and as required under applicable state securities laws. Rule 144 provides in essence
that a person who has held restricted securities for six months, under certain conditions, may sell every three months, in
brokerage transactions, a number of shares that does not exceed the greater of 1.0% of the company’s outstanding common
stock or the average weekly trading volume during the four calendar weeks prior to the sale. There is no limit on the amount of
restricted securities that may be sold by a nonaffiliate after the owner has held the restricted securities for a period of six months.
A sale under Rule 144 or under any other exemption from the Act, if available, or pursuant to subsequent registration of shares of
common stock of present shareholders, may have a depressive effect upon the price of the common stock in any market that may
develop.
20
Our common stock may be volatile, which substantially increases the risk that you may not be able to sell your shares at or above
the price that you have paid for the shares.
Because of the limited trading market for our common stock and because of the possible price volatility, you may not be able to
sell your shares of common stock when you desire to do so. The inability to sell your shares in a rapidly declining market may
substantially increase your risk of loss because of such illiquidity and because the price for our securities may suffer greater
declines because of our price volatility.
The price of our common stock that will prevail in the market at any given time may be higher or lower than the price you paid.
Certain factors, some of which are beyond our control, that may cause our share price to fluctuate significantly include, but are not
limited to the following:
●Variations in our quarterly operating results;
    
 ●Loss of a key relationship or failure to complete significant transactions;
    
 ●Additions or departures of key personnel; and
    
 ●Fluctuations in stock market price and volume.
Additionally, in recent years the stock market in general, and the over-the-counter markets in particular, have experienced
extreme price and volume fluctuations. In some cases, these fluctuations are unrelated or disproportionate to the operating
performance of the underlying company. These market and industry factors may materially and adversely affect our stock price,
regardless of our operating performance. In the past, class action litigation often has been brought against companies following
periods of volatility in the market price of those companies’ common stock. If we become involved in this type of litigation in the
future, it could result in substantial costs and diversion of management attention and resources, which could have a further
negative effect on your investment in our stock.
Any new potential investors will suffer a disproportionate risk and there will be immediate dilution of existing investor’s
investments.
Our present shareholders have acquired their securities at a cost significantly less than that which future purchasers in the market
may pay. Therefore, any new potential investors will bear most of the risk of loss.
Our business is highly speculative and the investment is therefore risky.
Due to the speculative nature of our business, it is probable that the investment in shares will result in a total loss to the investor.
Investors should be able to financially bear the loss of their entire investment. Investment should, therefore, be limited to that
portion of discretionary funds not needed for normal living purposes or for reserves for disability and retirement.
ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
Not Applicable.
ITEM 2. PROPERTIES
REAL ESTATE.
None.
21
PATENTS AND PATENT APPLICATIONS.
None.
OIL AND GAS PROPERTIES.
Our oil and natural gas properties are located in the states of Wyoming and Nebraska.
Title to Properties
As is customary in the oil and natural gas industry, we generally conduct a preliminary title examination prior to the acquisition of
properties or leasehold interests. Prior to commencement of operations on such acreage, a thorough title examination will usually
be conducted and any significant defects will be remedied before proceeding with operations. We believe the title to our
leasehold properties is good, defensible and customary with practices in the oil and natural gas industry, subject to such
exceptions that we believe do not materially detract from the use of such properties. With respect to our properties of which we
are not the record owner, we rely instead on contracts with the owner or operator of the property or assignment of leases,
pursuant to which, among other things, we generally have the right to have our interest placed on record.
Our properties are generally subject to royalty, overriding royalty and other interests customary in the industry, liens incident to
agreements, current taxes and other burdens, minor encumbrances, easements and restrictions. We do not believe any of these
burdens will materially interfere with our use of these properties.
Summary of Oil and Natural Gas Reserves
The following disclosures for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2016 include only those reserves attributable to those properties
located in Fremont, Hot Springs and Park Counties in Wyoming and to those properties located in the Cole Creek field in
Natrona and Converse Counties in Wyoming.
Any reserves attributable to our Nebraska, Burke Ranch, Wyoming, and certain undeveloped properties at Western Interior and
the Mondo, Utah project were not considered in the reserve report, as those properties are undeveloped at this time.
Reserves
The following table sets forth our estimated net proved reserves as of March 31, 2016 based upon the reserve report dated July
19, 2016. All such reserves are attributable to those properties located in Fremont, Hot Springs, Park, Sweetwater, Natrona and
Converse Counties in Wyoming.
Oil Reserves (MBbls) 
 2016
 
Gross
 
(100%)
   
  180.4
Net
122.6
   0
   122.6
Estimated Proved Reserves Data:
Proved developed proving (PDP)
Proved undeveloped reserves (PUD)  0
Total Proved Reserves
180.4
22
Proved developed oil reserves are reserves that can be recovered through existing wells with existing equipment and operating
methods.
There are no proved undeveloped oil reserves at March 31, 2016. Proved undeveloped oil reserves are reserves that are
expected to be recovered from new wells on undrilled acreage, or from existing wells where a relatively major expenditure is
required for completion. Proved undeveloped reserves on undrilled acreage are limited to those directly offsetting development
spacing areas that are reasonably certain of production when drilled, unless evidence using reliable technology exists that
establishes reasonable certainty of economic productivity at greater distances. All proved undeveloped locations in our July 19,
2016 Reserves Report are included in our development plan and are scheduled to be drilled within five years from their initial
proved booking date.
Estimates of proved developed and undeveloped reserves are inherently imprecise and are continually subject to revision based
on production history, results of additional exploration and development, price and production cost changes and other factors.
See “— Qualifications of Technical Persons and Internal Controls Over Reserves Estimation Process.”
Qualifications of Technical Persons and Internal Controls Over Reserves Estimation Process
The reserves estimates shown herein have been independently evaluated by Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc. (NSAI), a
worldwide leader of petroleum property analysis for industry and financial organizations and government agencies. NSAI was
founded in 1961 and performs consulting petroleum engineering services under Texas Board of Professional Engineers
Registration No. F-2699. Within NSAI, the technical persons primarily responsible for preparing the estimates set forth in the
NSAI reserves report incorporated herein are Mr. Neil H. Little and Mr. Mike K. Norton. Mr. Little, a Licensed Professional
Engineer in the State of Texas (No. 117966), has been practicing consulting petroleum engineering at NSAI since 2011 and has
over 9 years of prior industry experience. He graduated from Rice University in 2002 with a Bachelor of Science Degree in
Chemical Engineering and from University of Houston in 2007 with a Master of Business Administration Degree. Mr. Norton, a
Licensed Professional Geoscientist in the State of Texas, Geology (No. 441), has been practicing consulting petroleum
geoscience at NSAI since 1989 and has over 10 years of prior industry experience. He graduated from Texas A&M University in
1978 with a Bachelor of Science Degree in Geology. Both technical principals meet or exceed the education, training and
experience requirements set forth in the Standards Pertaining to the Estimating and Auditing of Oil and Gas Reserves Information
promulgated by the Society of Petroleum Engineers; both are proficient in judiciously applying industry standard practices to
engineering and geoscience evaluations as well as applying SEC and other industry reserves definitions and guidelines. The
technologies and economic data used in the estimation of our proved reserves include, but are not limited to, well logs, geologic
maps, well test data, production data, historical price and cost information, and property ownership interests.
Mr. Martin Gottlob, the Company’s Vice President of Geology, is primarily responsible for the determination and the presentation
of the reserves presented by the Company.
The technical persons responsible for preparing the reserves estimates presented herein meet the requirements regarding
qualifications, independence, objectivity and confidentiality set forth in the Standards Pertaining to the Estimating and Auditing of
Oil and Natural Gas Reserves Information promulgated by the Society of Petroleum Engineers.
Our internal staff of geoscience professionals work closely with our independent petroleum engineers to ensure the integrity,
accuracy and timeliness of data furnished to them in their reserves estimation process. We review with them our properties and
discuss methods and assumptions used in their preparation of our fiscal year-end reserves estimates. While we have no formal
committee specifically designated to review reserves reporting and the reserves estimation process, a copy of each of the NSAI
reserve reports is reviewed with representatives of NSAI and our internal technical staff before we disseminate any of the
information. Additionally, our senior management reviews and approves the final reserve report and any significant internally
estimated changes to our proved reserves on an annual basis.
23
Estimates of oil and natural gas reserves are projections based on a process involving an independent third party engineering
firm’s collection of all required geologic, geophysical, engineering and economic data, and such firm’s complete external
preparation of all required estimates and are forward-looking in nature. These reports rely upon various assumptions, including
assumptions required by the SEC, such as constant oil and natural gas prices, operating expenses and future capital costs. The
process also requires assumptions relating to availability of funds and timing of capital expenditures for development of our
proved undeveloped reserves. These reports should not be construed as the current market value of our reserves. The process of
estimating oil and natural gas reserves is also dependent on geological, engineering and economic data for each reservoir.
Because of the uncertainties inherent in the interpretation of this data, we cannot be certain that the reserves will ultimately be
realized. Our actual results could differ materially. See “Note 13 — Supplemental Information Relating to Oil and Natural Gas
Producing Activities (Unaudited)” to our audited consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our oil and
natural gas reserves.
Under SEC rules, proved reserves are those quantities of oil and natural gas, which, by analysis of geoscience and engineering
data, can be estimated with reasonable certainty to be economically producible from a given date forward, from known reservoirs,
and under existing economic conditions, operating methods and government regulations. The term “reasonable certainty” implies
a high degree of confidence that the quantities of oil and/or natural gas actually recovered will equal or exceed the estimate. To
achieve reasonable certainty, NSAI employs technologies consistent with the standards established by the Society of Petroleum
Engineers. The technologies and economic data used in the estimation of our proved reserves include, but are not limited to, well
logs, geologic maps and available downhole and production data, and well test data.
Summary of Oil and Natural Gas Properties and Projects
Production, Price and Cost History
During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2016, we had production from and sold oil from our properties in the Big Horn Basin and
during the fourth quarter of the fiscal year ended March 31, 2016 we recognized production and sales of oil from our properties in
the Cole Creek Field. During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2015, we did not have any production of or sales of oil or natural
gas.
Developed and Undeveloped Acreage
The following table presents our total gross and net developed and undeveloped acreage by region as of March 31, 2016 and
2015:
2016
 
 Developed Acres  Undeveloped Acres  Developed Acres  Undeveloped Acres 
 
 Gross(1)   Net (2)   Gross
Gross
2015
Net
Net
Gross
Net
4,726
   -
   -
425
   -
   -
   4,647    6,514
   -
   4,222
    
    
   160
   80
   -
   26
    
    
   -
   -
   5,178    15,622    26,183     760
2,025
   -
   -
   4,998
   3,378
    
   160
   -
    
   -
480
    160
    -
    -
    -
     
    80
    40
     
    -
425    4,726
 
   4,533
   14
 
   5,995
   -
 
   4,000
   -
 
   -
   4,837
 
    
    
 
   160
   80
 
   -
   26
 
    
    
   -
 
   3,995
   545    28,246    14,414
2,025
   449
   4,345
   2,039
   3,378
    
   160
   -
    
   3,995
Wyoming (3)
   
Big Horn Basin   480
Wind River Basin  -
  -
South Central
  6,057
Cole Creek
Burke Ranch
  -
   
Nebraska (4)
Sioux County
  80
Kimball County   40
Utah (5)
   
Covenant Mondo   -
Total
6,657
24
(1)“Gross” means the total number of acres in which we have a working interest.
  
 (2)“Net” means the sum of the fractional working interests that we own in gross acres.
(3)
Approximately 2,896 gross of the total 4,726 undeveloped gross acres at the Big Horn Basis, are held through leases by
production. The remaining gross acres are held by leases with terms expiring in 2020.
 
The 6,514 gross undeveloped acres at Cole Creek are held by production and the 3,622 gross acres at Burke Ranch are also
held by production.
(4) The 160 acres are held by production.
The undeveloped acres at Covenant Mondo are held by production and two wells were drilled during the year ended March
31, 2015. Both wells were dry holes.
(5)
Productive Wells
The following table presents the total gross and net productive wells by area and by oil or natural gas completion as of March 31,
2016 and 2015:
Natural Gas Wells  Oil Wells
2016
 
 Oil Wells
 
 Gross(1)  Net(2)  Gross
 
 
Wyoming
    
-
Big Horn Basin    6
-
Wind River Basin   -
South Central
   -
-
-
   13
Cole Creek
-
   -
Burke Ranch
 
    
Nebraska
Sioux County
   1
-
-
Kimball County    1
 
Utah
    
-
Covenant Mondo    -
Total
-
6
   
   -
   
   -
   8.66    
   
   -
   
    
   1
   
   
   .65
   
    
   -
   
   16.31
21
2015
Natural Gas Wells 
  Gross
 
  Gross  Net
 
 
   
    
     
 
-
   6
   
    6
 
-
   0.39   
    5
   -
   
-
 
    -
 
-
   
   -
    -
 
-
   
   -
    -
 
 
   
    
     
   1
   
-
 
    1
 
-
   .65    
    1
 
 
   
    
     
 
-
    -
   -
   
    13    8.04   
-
Net
 
     
-
     
-
     
     
-
-
     
-
     
 
     
     
-
-
     
 
     
-
     
     
-
Net
 
     
-
     
-
     
     
-
-
     
-
     
 
     
     
-
-
     
 
     
-
     
     
-
(1)“Gross” means the total number of wells in which we have a working interest.
  
 (2)“Net” means the sum of the fractional working interests that we own in gross wells.
Oil Production, Production Prices and Production Costs
Revenue
For the Fiscal Years Ending 
 
 March 31,
 
 2016
2015
Oil Sales (Bbl)
Net Production Sold
Oil (Bbl)
Costs and expenses (per Bbl)
Lease operating expenses
Transportation and marketing expenses $ -
$ 33.93
  
   16,120
  
 $ 33.48
$
     
     
     
    $
    $
-
 
-
 
-
-
25
Drilling Activity
The Company’s operational activities are focused on re-work of existing wells for production purposes.
During the year ended March 31, 2015, the Company recognized $1,360,119 in exploration expense to drill two wells in the
Covenant Mondo project. Both wells were dry holes.
At March 31, 2016, the Company had no wells being drilled.
ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
T-Rex anticipates that it (including current and any future subsidiaries) will from time to time become subject to claims and legal
proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. It is not feasible to predict the outcome of any such proceedings and we
cannot assure that their ultimate disposition will not have a materially adverse effect on the Company’s business, financial
condition, cash flows or results of operations. The Company is not a party to any pending legal proceedings, nor is the Company
aware of any civil proceeding or government authority contemplating any legal proceeding as of the date of this filing.
ITEM 4. MINING AND SAFETY DISCLOSURE.
Not Applicable.
PART II
ITEM 5. MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER
PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES
Market Information
Our common stock is quoted on the OTCQB and was traded under the symbol “RNCH” from October 28, 2009 to November 25,
2014 when it was changed to “TRXO” as a result of our name change in October 2014.
On October 8, 2014, an amendment to our Articles of Incorporation was filed in order to authorize a reverse split of the common
stock, issued and outstanding, on a one (1) new share for three hundred fifty (350) old shares basis, with fractional shares being
redeemed in cash. FINRA approved the amendment, effective October 29, 2014.
For the periods indicated, the following table sets forth the high and low bid prices per share of our common stock as reported by
the OTCQB for our fiscal years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015. In considering this information, it is important to note that the
historical prices for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2015 and those for the periods prior to October 29, 2014 have been adjusted
to reflect the reverse split.
These prices represent inter-dealer quotations without retail markup, markdown or commission and may not necessarily
represent actual transactions.
HIGH  LOW  
 
 
    
Fiscal Year 2016
    
 
Quarter Ended:
June 30, 2015
 $3.55  $2.15 
September 30, 2015 $3.25  $1.50 
December 31, 2015  $1.75  $1.20 
 $2.40  $1.10 
March 31, 2016
 
    
 
Fiscal Year 2015
    
 
    
Quarter Ended:
 
June 30, 2014
 $3.98  $1.57 
September 30, 2014 $5.20  $2.13 
December 31, 2014  $6.40  $2.05 
 $3.50  $1.54 
March 31, 2015
26
Holders
There are approximately 356 holders of record of T-Rex’s common stock as of March 31, 2016.
Dividend Policy
Holders of the Company’s common stock are entitled to receive such dividends as may be declared by T-Rex’s board of
directors. The Company has not declared or paid any dividends on T-Rex’s common shares and it does not plan on declaring
any dividends in the near future. The Company currently intends to use all available funds to finance the operation and
expansion of its business.
Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
During the fiscal years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015, we made the following sales of our unregistered securities.
The numbers below have been adjusted for the 1 for 350 share reverse split of October 2014.
CONSIDERATION
TITLE OF
 
SECURITIES
  
 Common Shares
DATE OF
SALE
 
August 2014
 
December 2014  Common Shares
December 2014  Common Shares
NO. OF
 
SHARES
  
  371,003   $1,300,000
   
  81,692
7,385,700
March 2015
Common Shares
7,465,168
Recapitalization
   
Shares of Terex Energy
Corporation
   
Shares of Western Interior Oil and
Gas Corporation
   
  $50,000
September 2015  Common Shares
8,000
Payment of $20,000 in Trade
  
Payable
CLASS OF
 
PURCHASER
  
 Terex Energy Corporation
  
 Shareholders
  
Shareholders of Terex Energy
 
Corporation
  
Shareholders of Western Interior Oil and
 
Gas Corporation
  
 Business Associate
  
Business Associate/Existing
 
Shareholders
Business Associate
Business Associates/Existing
 
Shareholders/Director
  
Business Associates/Existing
 
Shareholders/Director
Directors
Common Shares
20,000
Common Shares
664,050   $1,345,000
Series A Preferred
 
Shares
407,094   $682,989
Warrants
407,094   $135,049
Convertible
 
Promissory Notes
-
$100,000
March 2015
 
April –
December 2015
October – March
2016
 
October – March
2016
January 2016
June 2015 -
March 
2016
27
Common Shares
691,536   $536,633
Directors/Business Associates
Exemption From Registration Claimed
Except as noted below, all of the above sales by the Company of its unregistered securities were made by the Company in
reliance upon Rule 506 of Regulation D and Section 4(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “1933 Act”). All of the
individuals and/or entities that purchased the unregistered securities were either existing shareholders, sophisticated
shareholders of the acquirees, Terex and Western Interior, consultants or sophisticated investors known to the Company and its
management through pre-existing business relationships. All purchasers were provided access to all material information which
they requested, and all information necessary to verify such information and were afforded access to management of the
Company in connection with their purchases. All purchasers of the unregistered securities acquired such securities for
investment and not with a view toward distribution, acknowledging such intent to the Company. All certificates or agreements
representing such securities that were issued contained restrictive legends, prohibiting further transfer of the certificates or
agreements representing such securities, without such securities either being first registered or otherwise exempt from
registration in any further resale or disposition.
The April through December 2015 issuance by the Company of its unregistered securities was made by the Company in reliance
upon Regulation S of the 1933 Act. The party that purchased the unregistered securities was known to the Company and its
management through a pre-existing business relationship. The purchaser was provided access to all material information which
they requested and all information necessary to verify such information and was afforded access to management of the Company
in connection with their purchase. The purchaser of the unregistered securities acquired such securities for investment and not
with a view toward distribution, acknowledging such intent to the Company. The certificate representing such securities that was
issued contained a restrictive legend, prohibiting further transfer of the certificate representing such securities, without such
securities either being first registered or otherwise exempt from registration in any further resale or disposition.
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
T-Rex did not repurchase any shares of its common stock during the years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015.
ITEM 6. SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
Not applicable.
28
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and notes thereto included herein.
In connection with, and because we desire to take advantage of, the “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation
Reform Act of 1995, we caution readers regarding certain forward-looking statements in the following discussion and elsewhere
in this report and in any other statement made by us, or on our behalf, whether or not in future filings with the Securities and
Exchange Commission. Forward-looking statements are statements not based on historical information and which relate to future
operations, strategies, financial results or other developments. Forward-looking statements are necessarily based upon
estimates and assumptions that are inherently subject to significant business economic and competitive uncertainties and
contingencies, many of which are beyond our control and many of which, with respect to future business decisions, are subject to
change. These uncertainties and contingencies can affect actual results and could cause actual results to differ materially from
those expressed in any forward-looking statements made by us, or on our behalf. We disclaim any obligation to update forward-
looking statements.
The independent registered public accounting firm’s report on the Company’s financial statements as of March 31, 2016, and for
each of the years in the two-year period then ended, includes a “going concern” explanatory paragraph that describes substantial
doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
PLAN OF OPERATIONS
We are an energy company, focused on the acquisition, exploration, development and production of oil and natural gas. We have
acquired oil and natural gas properties located in the western United States, mainly in the Rocky Mountain region. Our goal is to
drill and produce oil and gas cost effectively by concentrating our efforts in proven oil rich areas where we have in-house
geologic and operating experience.
We are focusing on the acquisition of proven properties that we believe can be economically enhanced in this current commodity
price environment. In certain market conditions, we believe there could be additional upside realized through the development of
deeper productive horizons, or applying tertiary recovery applications to these acquired fields.
To date, we have focused our activities in Eastern Wyoming along the Salt Creek/Big Muddy trend. Starting with the Salt Creek
field in Natrona County, following the Salt Creek/Big Muddy trend down to the South Glenrock field in Converse County, we
believe there are a series of analogous fields that could provide ideal targets for us to execute this business strategy.
Our acquisition strategy includes taking older wells that are shut in or have lower production results and applying new and
existing technologies to work-over and/or recomplete those wells so as to increase production and ultimate recovery.
Technologies to be deployed include 3-D seismic imaging to target undeveloped areas of the reservoir that contain remaining
primary reserves and horizontal drilling to increase recoveries, as well as secondary and tertiary recovery methods to increase
produced reserves.
We will require substantial additional capital to support our existing and proposed future operations. We have no committed
source for any additional funds as of the date hereof. No representation is made that any funds will be available when needed. In
the event funds cannot be raised when needed, we may not be able to carry out our business plan, may never achieve sales or
royalty income and could fail in business as a result of these uncertainties.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
For the Year Ended March 31, 2016 Compared to the Year Ended March 31, 2015
Overview. During the year ended March 31, 2016, the Company recognized a net loss of $15,767,831 compared to a net loss of
$11,043,541 for the year ended March 31, 2015. The increase of $4,724,290 is primarily the result of an increase in oil sales
offset by an increase in operational activities, impairment of oil and gas properties as a result in the decline of oil and gas prices
and the acquisition of Western Interior. Discussions of individually significant line items follow:
Revenues: During the year ended March 31, 2016, the Company recognized revenues of $547,000. During the year ended
March 31, 2015, the Company did not recognize revenues from its oil and gas operational activities. During the year ended
March 31, 2016, the Company sold approximately 16,120 barrels of oil at an average price of $33.93 per barrel during the period.
Management expects to see increases in its production numbers as it takes over the management of the operations of the wells
held by LLC#3 and from the Company’s purchase of outstanding working interests in these properties during April 2016.
29
Operating Expenses: During the year ended March 31, 2016, the Company had an increase of $6,693,726 in total operating
expenses as a result of the following:
An increase in costs of $509,584 related to its oil and gas operational activities as a result of its acquisition of Western Interior.
General and administrative expenses increased by $464,096 primarily as a result of increases in staffing and costs associated
with reporting requirements. Depletion, depreciation, amortization and accretion increased by $3,392,414 as a result of its
acquisition of Western Interior oil and gas properties that at March 31, 2016 reflected only 46.5MBbls of proved producing
reserves (no proved undeveloped reserves) due to SEC pricing requirements with a decrease in exploration costs $1,440,037
due to the Company focusing its efforts on existing producing wells and an increase in asset impairment of $3,411,348 further as
a result of SEC pricing requirements.
LIQUIDITY
We have incurred a net loss of $15,767,831 for the year ended March 31, 2016 and have had a limited operating history.
On April 26, 2015, we entered into a Subscription Agreement for the purchase of shares of our restricted common stock pursuant
to Regulation S. Through the termination of the Subscription Agreement as of September 30, 2015, we received $1,345,000 in
funds and issued 664,050 shares of restricted common stock. The Company has used these funds to support ongoing
operations.
In October 2015, the Company commenced a private placement financing of $7,000,000 in Units, a Unit consisting of 1 share of
its Series A Shares and a Unit Warrant. The Unit Warrant has an exercise price of $3.00 per share and a term of 3 years. The
Unit Warrant is exercisable 9 months after issuance and is callable by the Company upon the Company’s common stock closing
at a market price of $5.00 or above for a period of 10 days. The Series A Shares do not accrue dividends and have a deemed
purchase price of $2.00 per share.
At March 31, 2016, the Company had received $657,988 of cash in exchange for issuance of 396,519 shares of its Series A
Shares and Unit Warrants exercisable for 396,519 shares of common stock. Additionally, in March 2016, the Company issued
12,500 shares of its Series A Shares and Unit Warrants exercisable for 12,500 shares of common stock in the discharge of an
accounts payable totaling $25,000.
On January 14, 2016, the Company issued secured convertible promissory notes (“Notes”) to two of its directors in exchange for
a total of $100,000 in cash or $50,000 per director. The Notes mature on September 30, 2016 with an interest rate of 5% per
annum. The Notes are convertible into shares of the Company’s restricted common stock at an exercise price to be determined
by the average consecutive daily trade closing price less 30%. The Notes are secured by the Company’s equity interest in T-Rex
#3.
The Company will need substantial additional capital to support its proposed future energy operations. We only began to
recognize revenues in the first quarter of this fiscal year and they are not sufficient to support operations. The Company has no
committed source for any funds but as of March 31, 2016, we have $428,204 in cash. No representation is made that any funds
will be available when needed. In the event funds cannot be raised when needed, we may not be able to carry out our business
plan and we may never achieve sales sufficient to support our operations.
Decisions regarding future participation in oil and gas development or geophysical studies or other activities will be made on a
case-by-case basis. We may, in any particular case, decide to participate or decline participation. If participating, we may pay our
proportionate share of costs to maintain our proportionate interest through cash flow or debt or equity financing. If participation is
declined, we may elect to farmout, non-consent, sell or otherwise negotiate a method of cost sharing in order to maintain some
continuing interest in the prospect.
The Company used cash flows in operations of $2,161,730 during the year ended March 31, 2016 that was adjusted by non-cash
items including: depreciation, depletion, amortization and accretion of $3,411,348, gain on settlement of claims of $1,531,048, an
asset impairment of $11,573,243, equity based compensation of $60,262 and gain on disposition of assets of $44,100.
30
The Company used cash flows in investing activities of $1,338,250 during the year ended March 31, 2016 that was primarily
comprised of: additions to oil and gas properties of $1,439,527, additions to non-oil and gas properties of $17,817 net of loans to
affiliates of $50,000, proceeds from the sale of mineral interest of $30,000 and additions to other assets of $39,094.
The Company was provided cash flows from financing activities of $3,291,642 during the year ended March 31, 2016 through
$2,674,670 from the sale of restricted common stock, Series A Shares and Unit Warrants and the cash contribution of a director
and shareholder of $1,000,000, net of $383,028 in repayment of notes payable.
Promissory Notes
During the year ended March 31, 2016, the Company paid $341,405 in principal towards the repayment of promissory notes
relative to the repurchase of 18,717 shares of Western Interior common stock owned by dissident shareholders as part of
agreements effective March 31, 2015 to repurchase a total of 33,085 shares of Western Interior common stock. At March 31,
2016, the Company owes a balance in the amount of $488,298 on one of the promissory notes plus accrued interest of $12,783,
with the remaining three promissory notes being paid in full.
On August 1, 2015, the Company, relative to the repurchase by the Company on March 31, 2015 of the remaining 14,368 shares
of Western Interior common stock, entered into an agreement with the note holder to settle the amount owed under the
promissory note. As such, the parties agreed the amount owed on such promissory note by the Company would be reduced from
$768,715 to $393,795 and the difference of $374,920 be considered a reduction in the purchase price by the Company of the
14,368 shares of Western Interior common stock. In addition, the $393,795 was paid in full effective August 1, 2015 by the
transfer to the note holder of certain oil and gas properties owned by Western Interior.
On January 14, 2016, the Company borrowed $50,000 each from two directors in exchange for secured promissory notes
including interest at the rate of 5% per annum with accrued and unpaid interest and principal due at September 30, 2016. The
promissory notes are collateralized by certain oil and gas properties located in the State of Wyoming. Holders may, at any time
prior to payment of the promissory notes elect to convert all or any portion of the promissory notes, including accrued interest, into
common shares of the Company at a price determined by the average ten consecutive day trading closing price less 30%. The
Company at March 31, 2016 owes $100,000 on the two promissory notes plus accrued interest of $1,052.
Line-of-Credit
The Company has a line-of-credit with a bank in the amount of $350,000 collateralized by certain oil and gas properties of the
Company. The line-of-credit matures on November 2016. Annual interest is at prime plus 2.50% with a floor of 7%. The Company
owes $174,789 on the line-of-credit at March 31, 2016.
Short Term
On a short-term basis, we have not generated revenues sufficient to cover operations. Based on prior history, we will continue to
have insufficient revenue to satisfy current and recurring liabilities as the Company continues exploration activities.
Capital Resources
The Company has only equity as its capital resource.
31
We have no material commitments for capital expenditures within the next year; however, our plans to develop our existing oil
properties are capital intensive and capital will be needed to pay for participation, investigation, exploration, acquisition and
working capital.
Need for Additional Financing
We do not have capital sufficient to meet our cash needs. The Company will have to seek loans or equity placements to cover
such cash needs. Recompletions and re-works on existing wells, along with exploration activities will spur the need for additional
financing is likely to increase substantially.
No commitments to provide additional funds have been made by the Company’s management or other shareholders.
Accordingly, there can be no assurance that any additional funds will be available to us to allow us to cover the Company’s
expenses as they may be incurred.
The Company will need substantial additional capital to support its proposed future energy operations. We have insufficient
revenues to cover our corporate costs. The Company has no committed source for any funds as of the date hereof. No
representation is made that any funds will be available when needed. In the event funds cannot be raised when needed, we may
not be able to carry out our business plan, may never achieve sufficient sales or royalty income and could fail in business as a
result of lack of capital.
Decisions regarding future participation in exploration wells or geophysical studies or other activities will be made on a case-by-
case basis. The Company may, in any particular case, decide to participate or decline participation. If participating, we may pay
the proportionate share of costs to maintain the Company’s proportionate interest through cash flow or debt or equity financing. If
participation is declined, the Company may elect to farmout, non-consent, sell or otherwise negotiate a method of cost sharing in
order to maintain some continuing interest in the prospect.
Critical Accounting Policies
Principles of Consolidation
The accompanying consolidated balance sheets at March 31, 2016 and 2015 and the consolidated statement of operations and
cash flows for the year ended March 31, 2016 include the accounts of Terex Energy Corporation, T-Rex Oil, Inc., Western Interior
Oil and Gas Corporation and T-Rex Oil LLC #3 and the consolidated statement of operations and cash flows for the year ended
March 31, 2015 include the accounts of Terex Energy Corporation and the accounts of T-Rex Oil, Inc. for the period December
23, 2014 through March 31, 2015. All intercompany balances have been eliminated during consolidation.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are stated at their cost less any allowance for doubtful accounts. The allowance for doubtful accounts is
based on the management’s assessment of the collectability of specific customer accounts and the aging of the accounts
receivable. If there is deterioration in a major customer’s creditworthiness or if actual defaults are higher than the historical
experience, the management’s estimates of the recoverability of amounts due to the Company could be adversely affected.
Based on the management’s assessment, there is no reserve recorded at March 31, 2016 and 2015.
Oil and Gas Producing Activities
The Company uses the successful efforts method of accounting for oil and gas activities. Under this method, the costs of
productive exploratory wells, all development wells, related asset retirement obligation assets and productive leases are
capitalized and amortized, principally by field, on a units-of-production basis over the life of the remaining proved reserves.
Exploration costs, including personnel costs, geological and geophysical expenses and delay rentals for oil and gas leases are
charged to expense as incurred. Exploratory drilling costs are initially capitalized, but charged to expense if and when the well is
determined not to have found reserves in commercial quantities. The sale of a partial interest in a proved property is accounted
for as a cost recovery, and no gain or loss is recognized as long as this treatment does not significantly affect the units-of-
production amortization rate. A gain or loss is recognized for all other sales of producing properties. There were capitalized costs
of $11,368,626 and $10,003,625 at March 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
32
Unproved oil and gas properties are assessed annually to determine whether they have been impaired by the drilling of dry holes
on or near the related acreage or other circumstances, which may indicate a decline in value. When impairment occurs, a loss is
recognized. When leases for unproved properties expire, the costs thereof, net of any related allowance for impairment, is
removed from the accounts and charged to expense. During the years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015, there was impairment to
unproved properties in the amount of $3,384,758 and $6,661, respectively and for the year ended March 31, 2016 there was a
write off of expired lease costs in the amount of $3,096,931. The sale of a partial interest in an unproved property is accounted for
as a recovery of cost when substantial uncertainty exists as to the ultimate recovery of the cost applicable to the interest retained.
A gain on the sale is recognized to the extent that the sales price exceeds the carrying amount of the unproved property. A gain
or loss is recognized for all other sales of unproved properties. There were capitalized costs of $4,745,917 and $8,087,991 at
March 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Costs associated with development wells that are unevaluated or are waiting for access to transportation or processing facilities
are reclassified into developmental wells-in-progress (“WIP”). These costs are not put into a depletable field basis until the wells
are fully evaluated or access is gained to transportation and processing facilities. Costs associated with WIP are included in the
cash flows from investing as part of investment in oil and gas properties. At March 31, 2016 and 2015, no capitalized
developmental costs were included in WIP.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization of proved oil and gas properties is calculated using the units-of-production method
based on proved reserves and estimated salvage values. For the years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015, the Company recorded
depreciation, depletion and amortization expense on oil and gas properties in the amount of $3,411,348 and $0, respectively.
The Company reviews its proved oil and natural gas properties for impairment whenever events and circumstances indicate that
a decline in the recoverability of its carrying value may have occurred. It estimates the undiscounted future net cash flows of its oil
and natural gas properties and compares such undiscounted future cash flows to the carrying amount of the oil and natural gas
properties to determine if the carrying amount is recoverable. If the carrying amount exceeds the estimated undiscounted future
cash flows, the Company will adjust the carrying amount of the oil and natural gas properties to fair value. For the years ended
March 31, 2016 and 2015, there was impairment to proved properties of $5,091,554 and $0, respectively.
Asset Retirement Obligations
The Company records estimated future asset retirement obligations (“ARO”) related to its oil and gas properties. The Company
records the estimated fair value of a liability for ARO in the period in which it is incurred with a corresponding increase in the
carrying amount of the related long-lived asset. The increased carrying value is depleted using the units-of-production method,
and the discounted liability is increased through accretion over the remaining life of the respective oil and gas properties.
The estimated liability is based on historical industry experience in abandoning wells, including estimated economic lives,
external estimates as to the cost to abandon the wells in the future and federal and state regulatory requirements. The
Company’s liability is discounted using management’s best estimate of its credit-adjusted, risk-free rate. Revisions to the liability
could occur due to changes in estimated abandonment costs, changes in well economic lives or if federal or state regulators
enact new requirements regarding the abandonment of wells.
33
For the Year Ended 
 
March 31,
 2016
2015
ARO - beginning of period $459,294   $-
Additions
Deletions
Accretion expense
 
Less current portion
ARO - end of period
721,860     459,294 
 
   (15,190 )   -
   31,179
    -
 
   1,197,143    459,294 
   176,587     163,389 
 $1,020,556  $295,905
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with authoritative guidance on accounting for the impairment or disposal of long-lived assets, as set forth in Topic
360 of the ASC, the Company assesses the recoverability of the carrying value of its non-oil and gas long-lived assets when
events occur that indicate an impairment in value may exist. An impairment loss is indicated if the sum of the expected
undiscounted future net cash flows is less than the carrying amount of the assets. If this occurs, an impairment loss is recognized
for the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the estimated fair value of the assets.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when it is realized or realizable and earned. Revenue is realized or realizable and earned
when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred or services have been rendered to the customer, the
price to the buyer is fixed or determinable and collectability is reasonably assured. For goods, this is the point at which title and
risk of loss is transferred and when payment has either been received or collection is reasonably assured. Revenues for services
are recorded when the services have been provided. Revenue that does not meet these criteria is deferred until the criteria are
met.
Business Combination
The Company accounts for acquisitions in accordance with guidance found in ASC 805, Business Combinations. The guidance
requires consideration given, including contingent consideration, assets acquired and liabilities assumed to be valued at their fair
values at the date of acquisition. The guidance further provides that acquisition costs will generally be expensed as incurred and
changes in deferred tax asset valuations and income tax uncertainties after the acquisition date generally will affect income tax
expense.
ASC 805 requires that any excess of purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired, including identifiable intangibles and
liabilities assumed, be recognized as goodwill and any excess of fair value of acquired net assets, including identifiable
intangible assets over the acquisition consideration, results in a gain from bargain purchase. Prior to recording a gain, the
acquiring entity must reassess whether acquired assets and assumed liabilities have been identified and recognized and perform
re-measurements to verify that the consideration paid, assets acquired and liabilities assumed have been properly valued.
Goodwill
In accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, goodwill cannot be amortized; however, it must be tested annually
for impairment. This impairment test is calculated at the reporting unit level. The goodwill impairment test has two steps. The first
identifies potential impairments by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its book value, including goodwill. If the fair
value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying amount, goodwill is not impaired and the second step is not necessary. If the
carrying value exceeds the fair value, the second step calculates the possible impairment loss by comparing the implied fair
value of goodwill with the carrying amount. If the implied goodwill is less than the carrying amount, a write-down is recorded.
Management tests goodwill each year for impairment, or when facts or circumstances indicate impairment has occurred.
34
Beneficial Conversion Feature and Deemed Dividend Related to Series A Shares
Pursuant to ASC 470-20, when the $558,171 of convertible Series A Shares of preferred stock were issued at a discount from the
if-converted $682,989 fair value as of the issuance date, the Company recognized this difference between the fair value per
share of its common stock and the conversion price, multiplied by the number of shares issuable upon conversion. This total
Beneficial Conversion Feature of $124,818 will be recorded as additional paid-in-capital for common shares. The offsetting
amount will be amortizable over the period from the issue date to the first conversion date or 9 months. Therefore, since the
409,019 Series A Shares are convertible between July and December 2016, a deemed dividend of $67,830 to the Series A
Shares has been recorded during the year ended March 31, 2016 in our statement of operations and cash flows. As the
Company is in an accumulated deficit position, the deemed dividend of $67,830 has been charged against additional paid-in-
capital for common shares as there are no retained earnings from which to declare a dividend.
ITEM 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
Our operations do not employ financial instruments or derivatives which are market sensitive. Short term funds are held in non-
interest bearing accounts and funds held for longer periods are placed in interest bearing accounts. Large amounts of funds, if
available, will be distributed among multiple financial institutions to reduce risk of loss. The Company’s cash holdings do not
generate interest income.
ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
The audited financial statements of T-Rex Energy, Inc. for the years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015 appear as pages 59
through 79 at the end of this annual report.
ITEM 9. CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
None.
ITEM 9A. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
The Company maintains a system of disclosure controls and procedures that are designed for the purposes of ensuring that
information required to be disclosed in the Company’s SEC reports is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the
time periods specified in the SEC rules and forms, and that such information is accumulated and communicated to the
Company’s management as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
Management, consisting of the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer (the same individual) after
evaluating the effectiveness of the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-14(c)
as of March 31, 2016 (the “Evaluation Date”) concluded that as of the Evaluation Date, the Company’s disclosure controls and
procedures were not effective to ensure that material information relating to the Company would be made known to them by
individuals within those entities, particularly during the period in which this annual report was being prepared and that
information required to be disclosed in the Company’s SEC reports is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the
time periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms, as discussed further below.
35
T-Rex’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting for the
Company in accordance with and as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Exchange Act. The Company’s internal
control over financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. The
Company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that:
(1)
(2)
(3)
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions
of the Company’s assets;
 
provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that the Company’s receipts and expenditures are being
made only in accordance with authorizations of T-Rex’s management and directors; and
 
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of the
Company’s assets that could have a material effect on T-Rex’s financial statements.
We have identified certain material weaknesses in internal control over financial reporting relating to a shortage of accounting
and reporting personnel due to limited financial resources and the size of our Company, as detailed below:
(1)
(2)
(3)
The Company currently does not have, but is in the process of developing formally documented accounting policies and
procedures, which includes establishing a well-defined process for financial reporting.
 
Due to the limited size of our accounting department, we currently lack the resources to handle complex accounting
transactions. We believe this deficiency could lead to errors in the presentation and disclosure of financial information in our
annual, quarterly and other filings.
 
As is the case with many companies of similar size, we currently lack a segregation of duties in the accounting department.
Until our operations expand and additional cash flow is generated from operations, a complete segregation of duties within
our accounting function will not be possible.
Considering the nature and extent of our current operations and any risks or errors in financial reporting under current operations
and the fact that we have been a small business with limited employees, such items caused a weakness in internal controls
involving the areas disclosed above.
We have concluded that our internal controls over financial reporting were ineffective as of March 31, 2016, due to the existence
of the material weaknesses noted above that we have yet to fully remediate.
This annual report does not include an attestation report of the Company’s registered public accounting firm regarding internal
control over financial reporting. Management’s report was not subject to attestation by the Company’s registered public
accounting firm pursuant to permanent rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission that permit the Company to provide
only management’s report in this annual report. There was no change in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred
during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2016, that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal
control over financial reporting.
ITEM 9B. OTHER INFORMATION
Not applicable.
36
PART III
ITEM 10. DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
The following table sets forth information as to persons who currently serve as T-Rex Energy, Inc. directors or executive officers,
including their ages as of March 31, 2016.
Term
Name
 
Donald Walford
Martin Gottlob
Allen Heim
Jon Nicolaysen
Kristi J Kampmann
Andrew VanderPloeg 74  Director
 68  Director
Herbert T Sears
Age Position
  
 70  Chairman, Chief Executive Officer & Acting CFO Annual
 65  Vice President of Geology and Director
 Annual
 Annual
 58  Vice President of Operations
 Annual
 69  Executive Vice President and Director
 Annual
 43  Chief Accounting Officer
 Annual
 Annual
The officers are elected by the board of directors at the first meeting after each annual meeting of the Company’s shareholders
and hold office until their successors are duly elected and qualified under T-Rex’s bylaws.
The directors named above will serve until the next annual meeting of T-Rex’s shareholders. Thereafter, directors will be elected
for one-year terms at the annual shareholders’ meeting. Officers will hold their positions at the pleasure of the board of directors
absent any employment agreement. There is no arrangement or understanding between the directors and officers and any other
person pursuant to which any director or officer was or is to be selected as a director or officer.
Biographical Information
DONALD WALFORD, Age 70, Chairman, CEO & Acting CFO
Mr. Walford has served as a director and an officer of several corporations among a variety of industries during the 46 years of his
business experience. They have included oil and gas companies, real estate development and sales companies, medical
research and clinical medical companies, as well as registered broker-dealers.
He is a founder and has served as Chief Executive Officer and director of Terex Energy Corporation, prior to its merger with T-
Rex Oil, Inc., starting in February 2014. In December 2014, he became the Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of T-Rex Oil,
Inc. From October 22, 2013 to January 28, 2014, he served as the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Three Forks, Inc.
From 2011 to March 2012, he served as a Vice President and Chief Executive Officer of Gulfstar Energy Corp. and from February
2012 through March 2012, a director of Gulfstar Energy Corp. In recent years, he served as Founder, Chairman, CEO, and in
various other capacities of Eveia Medical, Boulder County Paramedics.
He has been licensed as a broker-dealer in every state, as a principal in the NYSE and FINRA. He has been a principal licensed
in commodities and in municipal bonds, and was an Allied Member of the NYSE. Mr. Walford has been a consultant to the US
Department of Justice as well as an expert in three Federal Court Jurisdictions and in numerous arbitration matters. He has been
a principal and or underwriter of securities in industries such as agri-business, electronics, engineering, consumer
manufacturing, construction/home building and oil and gas. Mr. Walford has been principal or an underwriter of twelve oil and
gas public companies.
He received a B.A. in Liberal Arts from Harpur College, State University of New York (fka Binghamton University) in 1967, where
he was a full scholarship, N.Y.S. Regents Scholar.
37
Mr. Walford brings to the board of directors both his experience in the oil and gas industry and his knowledge and experience in
funding smaller reporting companies.
MARTIN R. GOTTLOB, Age 65, Director and Vice President of Geology of T-Rex
Mr. Gottlob is an experienced Rocky Mountain States geologist, oil finder, driller and operator of oil and gas wells. Mr. Gottlob
was appointed as the Vice President of Geology and a director of T-Rex in August 2014; he has served in the same positions
with Terex since February 2014.
He is the owner of Independence Oil II, LLC, where he has developed, drilled, completed and operated wells on behalf of clients.
From 2003 until he commenced working with Terex, he was responsible for exploration and operations for Davis Oil Co. oil
properties, where he was responsible for most phases of multiple field discoveries in the D-J Basin, in Colorado, Wyoming and
Nebraska.
Between 1979 and 2003, he worked in similar capacities for Petrogulf, Minnoco, Decalta, Resource Technology and Mountain
Minerals, all in Colorado.
He has a B.A. in Geology from the University of Colorado with an emphasis in petroleum exploration and sedimentary basin
analysis, and a Master of Science from the Colorado School of Mines, in oil and gas operations research, and management
science of oil and gas investment projects.
As a disclosure item, Mr. Gottlob, in 1999, was convicted of domestic violence felony in the state of Colorado.
Mr. Gottlob provides the board of directors with a perspective and experience in the operational and exploration aspects of the oil
and gas industry.
ALLEN HEIM, Age 58, Director, Vice President of Operations
Mr. Heim has served as the Vice President of Operations and a director of Terex since February 2014. He has served as a
director of T-Rex since August 1, 2015.
Mr. Heim has devoted most of his 30 year career to a variety of oil field disciplines including leasing, dealing in working interests,
drilling wells, fracking and managing hands-on all phases of post drilling, including completions and follow on operations through
plug and abandon.
He is experienced in location construction of oil well properties, pumping and long term well operations, as well as directional
drilling and fracking operations planning and execution.
Prior to working with T-Rex, he was retained by Davis Oil Co. Prior to that he has worked with Bic Petroleum, Smith Oil, Petro
West, Bolling Oil, Pease Oil and Gas, Pan Western Energy, Paladin Energy, Charterhall, Haines Oil Field Services, New Tech
Energy, O’Brien Energy, Peterson Energy, Sunburst Inc., Markus Production, Lyco Energy and Wanda Madden Oil.
He is the owner of Allen’s Pumping Service in Kimball, Nebraska.
Mr. Heim provides the board of directors with both in the field oil operations expertise and guidance.
38
JON NICOLAYSEN, Age 69, Director, Executive Vice President and Director
Mr. Nicolaysen was appointed an Executive Vice President in December, 2014. Prior to that, he served as the CEO and a
director of Rancher Energy Corporation (kna T-Rex Oil, Inc.) since September 2009.
Mr. Nicolaysen, through his company, JK Minerals Inc., was a non-operating working interest owner, but by 1997 he had bought
out the other working interest owners and as operator, began a successful 2nd Frontier development program at Cole Creek in
Wyoming.
In 2005, Slawson Exploration Inc. took over as operator and continued to develop the Frontier and Dakota formations. Eventually,
Blue Tip Inc. purchased all of Slawson’s and JK’s interests in the Frontier and Dakota. In 2006, Mr. Nicolaysen purchased the
majority working interest in the Shannon formation at Cole Creek through JK Minerals Inc. In 2004, he was part of a group that
redeveloped the Big Muddy Field in Converse County, Wyoming. In 2007, these fields were sold to Rancher Energy (kna T-Rex
Oil, Inc.) for $25 million.
In 2009, as a dissatisfied shareholder, he led a successful proxy fight for control of Rancher Energy (kna T-Rex Oil, Inc.) He led
the company successfully through a long Chapter 11 bankruptcy process paying off all creditors in full.
Mr. Nicolaysen provides the board of directors with not only his experience with a public reporting company but also his
experience in the oil and gas industry.
KRISTI J. KAMPMANN, Age 43, Chief Accounting Officer
Ms. Kampmann has approximately 20 years of experience in accounting and specifically in SEC reporting. She has served as
the Chief Accounting Officer, since March 1, 2016 and has worked with the Company as the comptroller from May 2015. Prior to
that Ms. Kampmann worked as the Controller of Hinto Energy, Inc. from April 2014 through May 2015. Ms. Kampmann worked as
a Financial Reporting Consultant – Paralegal with Michael A. Littman, Attorney at Law from March 2007 through April 2014.
Ms. Kampmann has worked with small reporting companies in a range of industries, including the oil and gas industry, not only in
the development, drafting and filing of SEC filings, but also in the development of accounting and auditing procedures.
Ms. Kampmann received an MBA from the University of Colorado, Denver in December 2001. She graduated from the Denver
Paralegal Institute in 1996 and received a B.A. from the University of Minnesota in Morris in 1995, majoring in Political Science
with a minor in Business Management.
ANDREW P. VANDERPLOEG, Age 74, Director
Mr. VanderPloeg, has over 45 years of experience in the securities industry where he has worked as a broker, a regulator and a
securities trader. He was licensed as a securities broker in 1967. From 1992 through his retirement in 2012, he worked as a
securities broker-dealer with Wilson Davis & Co., where he was the Denver branch manager and an over-the-counter securities
trader. Since then he has managed his personal investments.
Mr. VanderPloeg received his Masters of Business Administration from DePaul University in 1971 and his BSBA from Marquette
University in 1963. Mr. VanderPloeg also has been a licensed CPA, although he is not currently practicing.
Mr. VanderPloeg brings to the board of directors not only his accounting and finance experience, but his experience in the
securities industry.
39
HERBERT T. SEARS, age 68, Director
Mr. Sears is an attorney with about 40 years of domestic and international experience related to energy and technology projects.
He served as Vice President and Counsel to Stone & Webster Engineering Corporation, an operating affiliate of Stone &
Webster, Inc., an international multi-billion dollar engineering and construction firm; General Counsel to Badger Engineers, a
leader in the petrochemical industry; International Counsel to Washington Group International, a global Engineering and
Construction organization; Chairman to General Environmental Corporation (nka NT Technologies, Inc.), General Counsel to
Seaflow Systems, a former leader in deep sea oil well connections, and Consultant to Powerspan, a CO-2 injection technology
company. Mr. Sears currently is the court appointed Trustee of the Stone and Webster Liquidating Trust with responsibility for
liquidating the global assets of the former Stone & Webster operating companies.
In 2000, Mr. Sears formed Sears & Associates, a business and legal consulting firm based out of Exeter, New Hampshire from
which he still operates. Through Sears & Associates, he advises owners and engineering companies with respect to their
projects and legal activities. Mr. Sears is recognized in the industry for his expertise and creativity in negotiations, internal
corporate governance and claims resolution.
Mr. Sears served as the Chief Financial Officer and a director of Bedrock Energy (nka Gulfstar Energy Corporation) from 2008
through May 2010.
Mr. Sears is a member of the state bar in Massachusetts and the International Bar Association. He graduated from Boston
University School of Management with a B.S/B.A in International Business and earned his law degree from Washington
University School of Law.
Mr. Sears not only brings management experience to the board of directors, he also provides oil and gas operational
management experience.
Committees of the Board of Directors
The Company is managed under the direction of its board of directors.
Executive Committee
The Company does not have an executive committee, at this time.
Audit Committee
The Company does not have an audit committee at this time.
Conflicts of Interest – General.
The Company’s directors and officers are, or may become, in their individual capacities, officers, directors, controlling
shareholders and/or partners of other entities engaged in a variety of businesses. Thus, there exist potential conflicts of interest
including, among other things, time, efforts and corporate opportunity, resulting from participation with such other business
entities. While each officer and director of the Company’s business is engaged in business activities outside of the Company’s
business, the amount of time each of them devotes to our business will be up to approximately 40 hours per week.
Conflicts of Interest – Corporate Opportunities
Presently no requirement contained in the Company’s Articles of Incorporation, Bylaws or minutes requires officers and directors
of the Company’s business to disclose to T-Rex business opportunities which come to their attention. The Company’s officers
and directors do, however, have a fiduciary duty of loyalty to T-Rex to disclose to it any business opportunities which come to
their attention, in their capacity as an officer and/or director or otherwise. Excluded from this duty would be opportunities which
the person learns about through his involvement as an officer and director of another company. The Company has no intention of
merging with or acquiring an affiliate, associate person or business opportunity from any affiliate or any client of any such person.
40
ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
The following table sets forth the compensation paid to officers and directors during the fiscal years ended March 31, 2016, 2015
and 2014. The table sets forth this information for T-Rex Energy, Inc. including salary, bonus and certain other compensation to
the directors and named executive officers for the past three fiscal years.
SUMMARY EXECUTIVES COMPENSATION TABLE
Name & Position  Year   Salary($)
Bonus
($)
Stock
awards
  
($)
Option
awards
  
($)
2016   192,795    -
-
2015   186,000    26,000   -
  2014   -
-
1,100
2016   161,496    -
-
2015   108,562    -
   -
  2014   -
2016   194,436    -
2015   173,865    -
   -
  2014   -
-
   750
-
-
   750
2016   151,800    -
-
-
-
    -
-
115
    -
-
-
    -
-
2015   127,500    -
  2014   120,000    -
750,000    -
   -
    -
Donald Walford,
CEO & CFO (2)
 
 
 
Martin Gottlob, VP
of Geology (3)
 
 
 
Allen Heim, VP of
Operations
 
 
 
Jon Nicolaysen,
Executive Vice
President (4)
Non-equity
incentive plan
  
compensation
Non-qualified
deferred
compensation
  
earnings
($)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
($)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
All other
compensation
  
($) (1)
Total
  
($)
7,200
10,594
    -
7,200
1,350
    -
-
3,629
    -
199,995
222,594 
   1,100
168,696
110,027 
 
   750
194,436
177,494 
 
   750
7,200
159,000
106
    6,000
877,606 
   126,000
(3)
(2)
(1)All other compensation for the officers listed above consists of an auto allowance plus medical reimbursement.
In February 2014, Mr. Walford was issued 1,100,000 shares of Terex valued at $0.001 per share for services. As part of the T-
Rex/Terex Acquisition these shares were exchanged for T-Rex shares and options in December 2014.
 
In February 2014, Mr. Gottlob was issued 750,000 shares of Terex which was valued at $0.001 for services. In April 2014, Mr.
Gottlob was issued an option exercisable for shares of Terex with an exercise price of $0.10 per share, which was expensed
at $115. As part of the T-Rex/Terex Acquisition these shares and option were exchanged for T-Rex shares and options in
December 2014.
 
Mr. Nicolaysen served as the CEO of T-Rex until December 2014, at which time he was appointed Executive Vice President.
In December 2013, he was granted fully-vested options to purchase 7,412 shares of the Company’s common stock with an
exercise price of $3.50 per share. In August 2014 such option was canceled. In August 2014, he was issued 750,000 shares
of restricted common stock for his services. These shares were valued at $1.00 per share.
(4)
41
OUTSTANDING EQUITY AWARDS AT FISCAL YEAR END
The following table sets forth certain information concerning outstanding equity awards held by the Chief Executive and
Financial Officer and the Company’s most highly compensated executive officers for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2016 (the
“Named Executive Officers”):
Option Awards
Stock awards
Name
Number of
securities
underlying
unexercised
options (#)
exercisable
Number of
securities
underlying
unexercised
options (#)
unexercisable
Equity
incentive
plan
awards:
Number of
securities
underlying
unexercised
unearned
options 
(#)
Option
exercise
price 
($)
Option
expiration
date
Number
of
shares
or units
of stock
that
have
not
vested 
(#)
Market
value
of
shares
of
units
of
stock
that
have
not
vested
($)
Equity
incentive
plan
awards:
Number
of
unearned
shares,
units or
other
rights
that have
not
vested
(#)
Equity
incentive
plan
awards:
Market or
payout
value of
unearned
shares,
units or
others
rights
that have
not
vested 
($)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Donald
Walford
 
Martin
Gottlob
VP of
Geology
100,000
0
0
$  1.00            4/2017
-
-
-
-
2013 Stock Incentive Plan
Effective March 29, 2013, the Company’s 2013 Stock Option and Award Plan (the “2013 Stock Incentive Plan”) was approved by
its board of directors. Under the 2013 Stock Incentive Plan, the board of directors may grant options or rights to purchase
common stock to officers, employees and other persons who provide services to the Company or any related company. The
participants to whom awards are granted, the type of awards granted, the number of shares covered for each award and the
purchase price, conditions and other terms of each award are determined by the board of directors, except that the term of the
options shall not exceed ten years. A total of 12 million shares of our common stock are subject to the 2013 Stock Incentive Plan.
The shares issued for the 2013 Stock Incentive Plan may be either treasury or authorized and unissued shares. During the years
ended March 31, 2016 and 2015, no options were granted, expired or exercised under the 2013 Stock Incentive Plan. At March
31, 2016, no options were issued and outstanding under the 2013 Stock Incentive Plan.
42
2014 Stock Incentive Plan
Effective October 1, 2014, Terex’s 2014 Stock Option and Award Plan (the “2014 Stock Incentive Plan”) was approved by its
board of directors. As part of the acquisition of Terex by T-Rex, the 2014 Stock Option Plan was renamed the T-Rex 2014 Stock
Option and Award Plan.
Under the 2014 Stock Incentive Plan, the board of directors may grant options or rights to purchase common stock to officers,
employees and other persons who provide services to the Company or any related company. The participants to whom awards
are granted, the type of awards granted, the number of shares covered for each award and the purchase price, conditions and
other terms of each award are determined by the board of directors, except that the term of the options shall not exceed ten years.
A total of 2 million shares of our common stock are subject to the 2014 Stock Incentive Plan. The shares issued for the 2014
Stock Incentive Plan may be either treasury or authorized and unissued shares. During the year ended March 31, 2016, there
were 1,050,250 options granted under the 2014 Stock Incentive Plan and 1,070,000 were canceled. No options expired or were
exercised. At March 31, 2016, there were 915,250 options issued and outstanding under the 2014 Stock Incentive Plan.
EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENTS WITH OFFICERS AND DIRECTORS OF T-REX AND TEREX
Messrs. Donald Walford, Allen Heim and Jon Nicolaysen have entered into Employment Agreements with our subsidiary, Terex.
Mr. Martin Gottlob has entered into an Employment Agreement with T-Rex.
All of our officers and/or directors will continue to be active in other companies. All officers and directors have retained the right to
conduct their own independent business interests.
Donald Walford Employment Agreement with Terex
In August 2014, Mr. Walford entered into an Employment Agreement with Terex for his services as its Chief Executive Officer,
President and director. The Employment Agreement has a term of 3 years and provides for an annual compensation of $204,000
and a monthly car allowance of $600. Mr. Walford is eligible for annual bonuses as determined by the board of directors.
Allen Heim Employment Agreement with Terex
In November 2014, Mr. Heim entered into an Employment Agreement with Terex for his services as its Vice President of
Operations and director. The Employment Agreement has a term of 3 years and provides for an annual compensation of
$150,000. Mr. Heim is eligible for an annual bonus as determined by the board of directors.
Jon Nicolaysen Employment Agreement with Terex
In November 2014, Mr. Nicolaysen entered into an Employment Agreement with Terex for his services as its Vice President of
Geology and director. The Employment Agreement has a term of 3 years and provides for an annual compensation of $150,000.
Mr. Heim is eligible for an annual bonus as determined by the board of directors.
Martin Gottlob Employment Agreement with T-Rex
In January 2015, Mr. Gottlob entered into an Employment Agreement with T-Rex for his services as its Vice President of
Operations and director. The Employment Agreement has a term of 3 years and provides for an annual compensation of
$150,000. Mr. Heim is eligible for an annual bonus as determined by the board of directors.
General Terms of All Employment Agreements
Termination for Cause
All Employment Agreements provide for termination for cause. Cause is defined as:
●Conviction of a felony, crime of moral turpitude or commission of an act of embezzlement or fraud against the Company and/or
its subsidiaries;
    
●Deliberate dishonesty resulting in damages to the Company; and
    
●Dereliction of duty.
43
If terminated for cause, the employee is not entitled to any bonus for the period preceding the termination or any benefits
thereunder.
Termination At Will
All Employment Agreements provide for termination at will by the Company with 60 days written notice. As part of any such
termination, the Company is required to repurchase 50% of the shares held by the employee up to 1,000,000 shares at a price
equal to 90% of the average trading price over the 60 days preceding the notice. Such repurchase shall happen within 30 days of
the notice.
Change of Control
In the event of a change of control, the Employment Agreement is treated the same as if the Employment Agreement was
terminated without cause. If the Employment Agreement is terminated for a change of control, severance payments are payable
on the 15th day after the Company gives notice of the termination. Such severance pay will consist of:
●Full salary through termination specified in the termination notice.
    
●An amount equal to the amount of salary and benefits equal to a 6 month period.
    
●Full vestment of any outstanding stock and/or option grants.
As a result of the acquisition of Terex by T-Rex, the change in control clause in Messrs. Walford, Heim and Nicolaysen’s
employment agreements was activated. All agreed to waive such clause as it pertains to the change of control event of Terex by
T-Rex.
It is possible that situations may arise in the future where the personal interests of the officers and directors may conflict with our
interests. Such conflicts could include determining what portion of their working time will be spent on our business and what
portion on other business interests. To the best ability and in the best judgment of our officers and directors, any conflicts of
interest between us and the personal interests of our officers and directors will be resolved in a fair manner which will protect our
interests. Any transactions between us and entities affiliated with our officers and directors will be on terms which are fair and
equitable to us. Our board of directors intends to continually review all corporate opportunities to further attempt to safeguard
against conflicts of interest between their business interests and our interests.
We have no intention of merging with or acquiring an affiliate, associated person or business opportunity from any affiliate or any
client of any such person.
44
DIRECTOR COMPENSATION
All of the Company’s officers and/or directors will continue to be active in other companies. All officers and directors have
retained the right to conduct their own independent business interests.
The Company does not pay any directors fees for meeting attendance.
The following table sets forth certain information concerning compensation paid to the Company’s directors during the fiscal year
ended March 31, 2016:
DIRECTORS’ COMPENSATION
Name
Donald
Walford(1)
 
Martin
Gottlob (1)
 
Jon
Nicolaysen
(1)
 
Allen Heim
(1)
 
Jeffrey
Bennett(2)
 
Andrew
VanderPloeg
 
Herbert T
Sears
Fees earned or
 
paid in cash 
($)
Stock
  
awards
($)
Option
  
awards
($)
Non-equity incentive
  
plan compensation
($)
Non-qualified deferred
  
compensation earnings 
($)
All other
  
compensation
($)
Total 
  
($)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
199,995
199,995
168.696
168,696
159,000
159,000
194,436
194,436
-
-
-
-
-
-
Mr. Walford’s, Gottlob’s, Nicolaysen’s and Heim’s compensation as discussed in the table above and in this footnote were
(1)
paid for their services as officers of the Company as discussed in the Executive Compensation table.
(2)Mr. Bennett resigned as a director of the Company on April 1, 2016.
45
ITEM 12. SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED
STOCKHOLDER MATTERS.
The following table sets forth information with respect to the beneficial ownership of T-Rex’s outstanding common stock by:
●each person who is known by T-Rex to be the beneficial owner of five percent (5%) or more of T-Rex common stock;
    
 ●T-Rex chief financial officer, its other executive officers and each director as identified in the “Management — Executive
Compensation” section; and
    
 ●all of the Company’s directors and executive officers as a group.
Beneficial ownership is determined in accordance with the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission and generally
includes voting or investment power with respect to securities. Shares of common stock and options, warrants and convertible
securities that are currently exercisable or convertible within 60 days of the date of this document into shares of the Company’s
common stock are deemed to be outstanding and to be beneficially owned by the person holding the options, warrants or
convertible securities for the purpose of computing the percentage ownership of the person, but are not treated as outstanding for
the purpose of computing the percentage ownership of any other person.
The information below is based on the number of shares of T-Rex’s common stock that we believe was beneficially owned by
each person or entity as of March 31, 2016.
Name and Address of Beneficial Owner *
Donald Walford, CEO, Acting CFO & Chairman
 
Martin Gottlob, VP of Geology & Director (2)
 
Jon Nicolaysen, Executive VP & Director
 
Allen Heim, VP of Operations & Director
 
Jeffrey Bennett, Executive VP of Drilling Operations (3)
 
Andrew VanderPloeg, Director (4)
 
Herb Sears, Director
 
Schwaben Kapital GmbH
 
RMI GmbH (5)
Amount and
Nature of
Beneficial 
 
Owner
Common Stock
  1,080,000
   
  750,000
   
  1,052,400
   
  755,000
   
  -
   
  324,528
   
  66,667
   
  1,480,152
   
  991,628
6.80
     
    4.88
-
    
   100,000     4.84
    
   -
    
   -
    
   14,286     -0-
    
   125,000     2.10
    
    
    
   -
    
   -
0.43
     
    9.56
     
    6.41
Percent of
Common 
Warrants 
  
  
and/or 
Stock Issued 
and 
Options
Outstanding (1)
    6.98
%
 
%
 
%
 
%
 
%
 
%
 
%
 
%
 
%
Rainer Mayerhofer (5)
 
All Directors and Executive Officers asa Group (4 persons)  4,028,595
439,021
-
    
   239,286     26.03
2.84
%
 
%
*The Address for the above individuals and entities is c/o T-Rex Oil, Inc., 520 S. Zang Street, Suite 250, Broomfield, Colorado
80021.
46
Based upon 15,480,882 shares of issued and outstanding common stock at March 31, 2016. Warrants and options
exercisable for 239,286 shares of common stock are not included in this number of shares of issued and outstanding common
stock as they are not considered to be exercisable in the next 60 days.
 
Mr. Gottlob holds an option exercisable for 100,000 shares of common stock with an exercise price of $0.10 per share and a
term of 3 years. The option is fully vested.
 
Mr. Bennett holds a warrant exercisable for 14,286 shares of common stock with an exercise price of $3.50 per share and a
term of 3 years. The option is fully vested. Mr. Bennet resigned as a director of the Company effective April 1, 2016 and was
appointed the Executive Vice President of Drilling Operations on May 1, 2016.
 
Mr. VanderPloeg holds 125,000 shares of Series A Preferred Stock convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock
and a warrant exercisable for 125,000 shares of common stock with an exercise price of $3.00 and a term of 3 years.
 
Mr. Mayerhofer is the controlling officer of RMI GmbH and as such holds voting control of the 991,628 shares held by RMI
GmbH. He holds 439,021 shares of stock directly and beneficially. He has voting control over a total of 1,430,649 shares of
stock or 9.25% of the Company’s common stock.
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(5)
Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act governs the determination of beneficial ownership of securities. That rule provides that a
beneficial owner of a security includes any person who directly or indirectly has or shares voting power and/or investment power
with respect to such security. Rule 13d-3 also provides that a beneficial owner of a security includes any person who has the
right to acquire beneficial ownership of such security within 60 days, including through the exercise of any option, warrant or
conversion of a security. Any securities not outstanding which are subject to such options, warrants or conversion privileges are
deemed to be outstanding for the purpose of computing the percentage of outstanding securities of the class owned by such
person. Those securities are not deemed to be outstanding for the purpose of computing the percentage of the class owned by
any other person.
ITEM 13. CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS
Other than the stock transactions discussed below, the Company has not entered into any transaction nor is there any proposed
transaction in which any of the founders, directors, executive officers, shareholders or any members of the immediate family of
any of the foregoing had or are to have a direct or indirect material interest.
Employment Agreements with Officers and Directors
Donald Walford Employment Agreement with Terex
In August 2014, Mr. Walford entered into an Employment Agreement with Terex for his services as its Chief Executive Officer,
President and director. The Employment Agreement has a term of 3 years and provides for an annual compensation of $204,000
and a monthly car allowance of $600. Mr. Walford is eligible for annual bonuses as determined by the board of directors.
Allen Heim Employment Agreement with Terex
In November 2014, Mr. Heim entered into an Employment Agreement with Terex for his services as its Vice President of
Operations and director. The Employment Agreement has a term of 3 years and provides for an annual compensation of
$150,000. Mr. Heim is eligible for an annual bonus as determined by the board of directors.
47
Jon Nicolaysen Employment Agreement with Terex
In November 2014, Mr. Nicolaysen entered into an Employment Agreement with Terex for his services as its Vice President of
Geology and director. The Employment Agreement has a term of 3 years and provides for an annual compensation of $150,000.
Mr. Heim is eligible for an annual bonus as determined by the board of directors.
Martin Gottlob Employment Agreement with T-Rex
In January 2015, Mr. Gottlob entered into an Employment Agreement with T-Rex for his services as its Vice President of
Operations and director. The Employment Agreement has a term of 3 years and provides for an annual compensation of
$150,000. Mr. Gottlob is eligible for an annual bonus as determined by the board of directors.
Equity Issuances to Officers and Directors
Year Ended March 31, 2016
Series A Preferred Stock
In October 2015, Mr. VanderPloeg, a director, purchased 125,000 Series A Shares and $3 Warrants exercisable for 125,000
shares in exchange for $250,000.
Convertible Promissory Notes
On January 14, 2016, in exchange for $100,000 cash we issued convertible promissory notes in the amount of $50,000 each to
Mr. Nicolaysen and Mr. Bennett. The convertible promissory notes have a term of 9 months and accrue interests at a rate of 5%.
The notes are convertible into shares of our restricted common stock at a discount of 30% of the 5-day trading closing market.
Common Stock
In March 2016, two of our directors, Mr. VanderPloeg and Mr. Sears, purchased shares of restricted common stock from the
Company, 300,000 and 66,667 shares, respectively, at $0.75 per share.
Year Ended March 31, 2015
In August 2014, Mr. Nicolaysen, an officer and director of Terex, was issued 750,000 shares of the common stock of Terex for
services with a value of $750,000 that were expensed. Such shares were exchanged for shares of T-Rex as part of the
acquisition of Terex by T-Rex. In addition, Mr. Nicolaysen, a director and officer of T-Rex, returned to T-Rex an option exercisable
for 7,142 shares of common stock. T-Rex cancelled such option.
In August 2014, T-Rex issued warrants in the following amounts and terms to its then officers and directors as follows. All
amounts have been adjusted for the October 2014 reverse split.
Number of Shares  Exercise Price  Term  
Name
   3 years 
Jeffrey Bennett
   14,285
   3 years 
Mathijs van Houweninge   14,285
Al “Sid” Overton
   14,285
   3 years
$ 3.50
  $ 3.50
  $ 3.50
In April 2014, Mr. Gottlob was issued an option exercisable for 100,000 shares of Terex’s common stock with an exercise price of
$0.10 per share and a term of 3 years. The option is fully vested and had a value of $115 at the time of issuance that was
expensed. As part of the acquisition of Terex by T-Rex, this option has been exchanged for an option exercisable for 100,000
shares of T-Rex.
48
Cole Creek, Wyoming Farmout Agreement
On September 30, 2014, Terex entered into a Farmout Agreement with Red Hawk Oil Exploration, Inc. (“Red Hawk”). Mr. Jon
Nicolaysen was an officer and director of Terex and also the president of Red Hawk.
The Farmout Agreement provides for Terex to drill two Shannon formation wells in an operating unit formation within 24 months.
Upon drilling of the first two wells, Terex has the option of drilling additional wells at locations of its choice. Upon drilling and
completion of the first two wells, Terex is entitled to an assignment of 100% of the interest held by Red Hawk. In the event an
earning well is capable of production in paying quantities, Terex will notify Red Hawk, whereupon Red Hawk will have a right to
elect to back in to an undivided 10% of the interest assigned to Terex.
Purchase of Sioux and Kimball County, Nebraska Properties
On September 20, 2014, Terex entered into a Purchase and Sale Agreement with Allen Heim, Pamela Heim and Marlin C. Heim.
At the time, Allen Heim was an officer and director of Terex. Pamela Heim is the wife of Allen Heim (the “Heims”). The Purchase
and Sale Agreement entitled Terex to purchase certain oil and gas leases and a well bore in Sioux County, Nebraska, in
exchange for certain consideration. As part of the consideration, the Heims received cash of $50,000 and warrants to acquire
400,000 shares of Terex’s common stock at $1.00 per share. At the time of purchase, the warrants were valued at $325,798.
However, since the Heims are considered related parties, the oil and gas leases and well bore were recorded at the Heims’
historical cost of $278,000. As part of the T-Rex – Terex acquisition, the warrants were re-issued and are exercisable for shares
of T-Rex.
Director Independence
Our board of directors undertook its annual review of the independence of the directors and considered whether any director had
a material relationship with us or our management that could compromise his ability to exercise independent judgment in
carrying out his responsibilities. As a result of this review, the board of directors affirmatively determined that Mr. Bennett was
“independent” as such term is used under the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission. Messrs.
Walford, Nicolaysen and Gottlob, as officers of the Company, are not considered to be “independent.”
ITEM 14. PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES
GENERAL.
BF Borgers CPA PC (“Borgers”) is the Company’s principal auditing accountant firm. The Company’s board of directors has
determined that the provision of audit services is compatible with maintaining their independence.
The following table represents aggregate fees billed to the Company for the years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015.
2015
Year Ended March 31, 
 
 2016
 
 
 $146,560   $ 22,140  
Audit Fees
 
 
    
 
Audit-related Fees $0
 
    
 
Tax Fees
 $3,240
 
 
    
 
 
 $0
All Other Fees
    
 
 
Total Fees
 $149,800   $ 22,140
$ 0
     
  $ 0
     
  $ 0
All audit work was performed by the auditors’ full time employees.
Pre-approval Policies and Procedures
The board of directors on an annual basis reviews audit and non-audit services performed by the independent auditor. All audit
and non-audit services are preapproved by the board of directors, which considers, among other things, the possible effect of the
performance of such services on the auditors’ independence. The board of directors has considered the role of Borgers in
providing services to us for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015 and has concluded that such services are
compatible with their independence as our auditors. The board has considered the services rendered and fees billed to the date
of this report by Borgers, and are satisfied as to their services being rendered on a basis of independence.
49
PART IV
ITEM 15. EXHIBITS, FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES
The following is a complete list of exhibits filed as part of this Form 10K. Exhibit numbers correspond to the numbers in the
Exhibit table of Item 601 of Regulation S-K.
Number  Description
 
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
3.10
3.11
3.12
3.13
3.14
3.15
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation of Rancher Energy Corp
 (1)
 Certificate of Correction
 (2)
 Amended and Restated Bylaws of Rancher Energy Corp
 (9)
 Articles of Merger, by and between Rancher Energy Corp and T-Rex Oil, Inc.
 (8)
 Statement of Merger
 (8)
 Articles of Incorporation of T-Rex Oil, Inc.
 (8)
 Articles of Incorporation of Terex Energy Corporation
 (11)
 Amendment to the Articles of Incorporation of Terex Energy Corporation, dated February 2007
 (11)
 Articles of Incorporation of Western Interior Oil & Gas Corporation
 (11)
 Amendment to the Articles of Incorporation of Western Interior Oil & Gas Corporation, dated April 2007  (11)
 Amendment to the Articles of Incorporation of Western Interior Oil & Gas Corporation, dated May 2007
 (11)
 Articles of Amendment of T-Rex Oil – Certificate of Designation of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock  (12)
 Articles of Organization of T-Rex Oil LLC #3
 (13)
 (13)
 Articles of Incorporation of JK Minerals, Inc.
 (13)
 By-Laws of JK Minerals, Inc.
 (4)
 Form of Non-Qualified Stock Option Agreement
 2014 T-Rex Oil, Inc. Stock Option and Award Plan
 (11)
 (13)
 Form of $3 Warrant
 Form of Convertible Promissory Note
 (!3)
Participation Agreement between Rancher Energy Corp. and PetroShare Corp. dated September 30,
 
2013
Settlement Agreement and Mutual Release between Rancher Energy Corp. and PetroShare Corp.
 
dated as of May 5, 2014
Securities Purchase Agreement by and between Rancher Energy Corp. and Terex Energy Corporation
 
as of August 19, 2014
Share Exchange Agreement between T-Rex Oil, Inc. and Western Interior Oil & Gas Corp & Its
 
Shareholders dated February 25, 2015
Share Exchange Agreement between T-Rex Oil, Inc. and Terex Energy Corporation as of December 22,
 
2014
 Operating Agreement of T-Rex Oil LLC #3
(10)
(11)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(13)
Filed
 
Herewith
  
Filed
 
Herewith
  
Filed
 
Herewith
  
Filed
 
Herewith
  
Filed
 
Herewith
Filed
Herewith
Filed
 
Herewith(14)
Filed
 
Herewith(14)
Filed
 
Herewith(14)
Filed
 
Herewith(14)
Filed
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
23.1
31.1
Consent of Independent Petroleum Engineers and Geologists
Certification of Chief Executive Officer & Principal Executive
Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
31.2
Certification of Chief Accounting Officer & Principal Accounting
Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
32.1
Certification of Chief Executive Officer & Principal Executive
Officer pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
32.2
Certification of Chief Accounting Officer & Principal Accounting
Officer pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
99.1
Reserve Report, dated July 19, 2016
101.INS  XBRL Instance Document
101.SCH XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document
101.CAL  XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document
101.DEF  XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document
101.LAB  XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document
101.PRE XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document
Herewith(14)
Filed
 
Herewith(14)
50
(1)Incorporated by reference from the exhibits included in the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated April 3, 2007.
(2)Incorporated by reference from the exhibits included in the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the period ended
September 30, 2007.
(3)Incorporated by reference from the exhibits included in the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated December 28, 2006.
(4)Incorporated by reference from the exhibits included in the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated December 3, 2013.
(5)Incorporated by reference from the exhibits included in the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 9, 2013.
(6)Incorporated by reference from the exhibits included in the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated May 6, 2014.
(7)Incorporated by reference from the exhibits included in the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated August 21, 2014.
(8)Incorporated by reference from the exhibits included in the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 31, 2014.
(9)Incorporated by reference from the exhibits included in the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K/A dated October 29, 2014.
(10)Incorporated by reference from the exhibits included in the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated February 24, 2015.
(11)Incorporated by reference from the exhibits included in the Company’s Current Report on Form 10-K, dated July 16, 2015.
(12)Incorporated by reference from the exhibits included in the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 28, 2015.
(13)Incorporated by reference from the exhibits included in the Compamy’s Registration Statement on Form S-1 dated March 22,
2016.
(14)Pursuant to Rule 406T of Regulation S-T, this interactive data file is deemed not filed or part of a registration statement or
prospectus for purposes of Sections 11 or 12 of the Securities Act of 1933, is deemed not filed for purposes of Section 18 of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, and otherwise is not subject to liability under these sections.
51
T-REX OIL, INC.
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEARS ENDED MARCH 31, 2016 AND 2015
52
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of T-Rex Oil, Inc.:
We have audited the accompanying balance sheets of T-Rex Oil, Inc. (“the Company”) as of March 31, 2016 and 2015, and the
related statement of operations, stockholders’ equity (deficit) and cash flow for the years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015. These
financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these
financial statements based on our audit.
We conducted our audit in accordance with standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States).
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial
statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable
basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of T-Rex Oil,
Inc., as of March 31, 2016 and 2015 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the years then ended, in conformity
with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America.
The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting.
Our audit included consideration of internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit procedures that are
appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the Company’s internal control over
financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. As
discussed in Note 3 to the financial statements, the Company’s significant operating losses raise substantial doubt about its
ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the
outcome of this uncertainty.
B F Borgers CPA PC
Denver, CO
August 9, 2016
53
T-Rex Oil, Inc. and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Balance Sheets
ASSETS
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents
Accounts receivable, trade
Loan to affiliate
Prepaids
Total current assets
Property and equipment
Oil and gas properties, successful efforts method of accounting
Proved
Unproved
Other
Total property and equipment
Less accumulated depreciation, depletion, amortization and valuation allowance
Net property and equipment
Other assets
Deposits and other assets
Total other assets
Total assets
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current liabilities
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Asset retirement obligations, current
Notes payable
Total current liabilities
Long-term liabilities
Asset retirement obligations, net of current
Total liabilities
Commitments and Contingencies
STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Preferred shares, $0.001 par value, 50,000,000 shares authorized;409,019 and 0 shares
issued and outstanding at March 31 2016 and 2015, respectively
Common shares, $0.001 par value, 275,000,000 shares authorized;15,480,882 and
15,295,025 shares issued and outstanding at March 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively
Additional paid in capital
Accumulated deficit
Stockholders’ equity
Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
54
396,355
2015
       
       
    $ 636,542
      35,660
      50,000
      46,938
      769,140
March 31,
 
  2016
 
     
 
     
 
  $ 428,204
 
    132,391
 
    -
 
    50,370
 
    610,965
 
     
     
 
    11,368,626       10,003,625  
    4,745,917       8,087,991  
    404,514
 
    16,519,057       18,487,971  
    14,621,873       3,000,940  
    1,897,184       15,487,031  
 
     
 
    275,658
    275,658
 
  $ 2,783,807     $ 16,550,886  
 
     
       
 
     
       
  $ 758,832
 
    $ 660,901
      163,389
    176,587
 
    783,210
      1,934,953  
    1,718,629       2,759,243  
     
 
    1,020,556       295,905
 
    2,739,185       3,055,148  
 
    -
294,715
      294,715
-
409
-
15,481
15,295
26,785,705       24,537,415  
    (26,756,973)     (11,056,972)
    44,622
      13,495,738  
  $ 2,783,807     $ 16,550,886
T-Rex Oil, Inc. and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Operations
2015
       
    $-
      -
       
      30,089
      -
Revenues
Oil and gas sales
Total revenues
Operating expenses:
Lease operating expense
Production taxes
General and administrative expense
Asset impairment
Exploration expense
Depreciation, depletion, amortization and accretion
 Total operating expenses
Loss from operations
Other income (expense)
Interest expense
Gain on settlement of claims
Gain on disposal of assets
Interest income
 Total other income
Loss before income taxes
Income taxes
Net loss
Deemed dividend for beneficial conversion feature of preferred stock     (67,830
Net loss attributable to common shareholders
Net loss per common share
Basic and diluted
Weighted average number of common shares
Year Ended March 31,
 
  2016
 
     
 
  $547,000
 
    547,000
 
     
 
    499,120
 
    40,553
 
    2,208,359       1,744,263  
    11,573,243       7,814,365  
    4,705
      1,444,742  
    3,411,348       10,143
 
    17,737,328       11,043,602  
    17,190,328       11,043,602  
 
     
       
    (87,665
 
)     -
 
    1,531,048       -
 
      -
    44,100
    2,844
      61
 
    1,490,327       61
 
    (15,700,001)     (11,043,541)
    -
 
    (15,700,001)     (11,043,541)
  
    (15,767,831)     (11,043,541)
 
     
  $(1.00
)
     15,656,201       2,922,235
)   $(3.78
)     -
-
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
55
T-Rex Oil, Inc. and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Stockholders’ Equity
-
      -
342,465
      -
Preferred Shares
    Common Shares
 
  $0.001 Par Value     $0.001 Par Value
 
  Shares     Amount    Shares
 
BALANCES, March 31, 2014
    -
Shareholders’ cash contributions     -
Shareholder’s non-cash
contribution of services
Shareholder’s non-cash
contribution of property
Shareholder’s non-cash
contribution of services, related
party
Issuance of warrants for property
Issuance of warrants for
property,related party
-
-
-
-
--
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Additional
    Paid-in
    Amount     Capital
      342
      -
178,673
      2,195,700       -
Total
Accumulated    Stockholders’ 
 
    (Deficit)
    Equity
)     165,584
      (13,431
 
      2,195,700
200,000
-
200,000
50,000
-
50,000
750,000
-
-750,000
374,975
-
228,000
-
374,975
228,000
-
     -
-
-
-
-
    -
-
-
-
Equity based compensation
Fair value of T-Rex Oil Inc. net
assets at exchange date
Recapitalization of shares
Sale of shares for cash at $2.50
per share
Issuance of shares to acquire
Western Interior Oil and
Gas,Corporation
Net loss for the period
BALANCES, April 1, 2015
Sale of shares for cash at $0.75
per share
Sale of shares for cash at $2.15
per share
Sale of shares for cash at $2.50
per share
Sale of shares for cash from $1.51
to $1.91 per share
Sale of warrants for cash from
$0.09 to $0.49 per warrant
Shareholder cash contribution
Issuance of shares for debt
Cancellation of shares for
settlement of claims
Equity based compensation
Beneficial conversion feature of
preferred stock
Deemed dividend for preferred
stock’s beneficial conversion
feature
Net loss for the period
BALANCES, March 31, 2016
-
        -
-
-
-
-
    $ -
-
-
       -
-
       -
19,707
      -
       1,095,876        -
7,467,392       7,468       (7,468
20,000
20
49,980
)     -
-
19,707
 
      -1,095,876
-
-50,000
7,465,168        7,465        19,401,972
19,409,437
-
      (11,043,541)     (11,043,541 )
      15,295,025    $15,295    $24,537,415     $(11,056,972)   $13,495,738
-
-
680,536
680
508,453
-
509,133
-
664,050
664
1,344,336       -
1,345,000
-
11,000
11
27,489
-
27,500
)
1,000,000  
      45,000
(1,531,047 )
60,262
67,830
396,519       397        -
-
-
-
-
    12,500       12
-
-
      8,000
-
-
-
      8
657,591
-
657,988
135,049
-
135,049
1,000,000       -
      44,980
      -
-
-
-
-
(1,177,729 )     (1,177 )     (1,529,870 )     -
-
-
60,262
67,830
-
-
-
-
-
-
(67,830
)      -
(67,830
-
    409,019    $ 409       15,480,882    $15,481    $26,785,705     $(26,756,973)   $44,622
(15,700,001)     (15,700,001 )
-
-
-
-
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
56
T-Rex Oil, Inc. and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Net loss attributable to common stockholders
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash flows used in operating activities:      
Depreciation, depletion, amortization and accretion
Dry Hole Expense
Impairment of asset
Gain on disposal of assets
Gain on settlement of claims
Equity based compensation
Changes in:
Accounts receivable, trade
Prepaids
Year Ended March 31,
 
  2016
     
 
  $(15,700,001)   $(11,043,541)
  
 
    3,411,348       10,143
    -
      1,360,119  
    11,573,243       7,814,365  
    (44,100
 
)     -
 
    (1,531,048 )     -
 
    60,262
 
     
    (96,731
 
 
    (3,431
969,707
       
)     387
)     15,495
2015
11,903
)     -
)
    168,728
      (11,626
)
    (2,161,730 )     (884,951
     
 
    (1,439,527 )     (1,817,527 )
)     (42,510
    (17,817
)
      (50,000
)
    50,000
      966,027
 
    -
       
 
     
      103,771
    -
 
 
      -
    30,000
)
    39,094
      (11,586
)
    (1,338,250 )     (851,825
     
 
       
      2,195,700  
    -
 
    2,674,670       -
 
    1,000,000       -
    -
 
    (383,028
 
    3,291,642       2,207,603  
 
    (208,338
 
    636,542
  $428,204
 
 
     
 
  $-
 
  $45,000
  $393,795
 
 
  $67,830
  
  $ (67,830
 
  $74,883
  $-
)     470,827
      165,715
    $636,542
       
    $95,740
    $-
    $-
    $-
)   $ -
    $-
    $-
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Net cash (used in) operating activities
INVESTING ACTIVITIES
Additions to oil and gas properties
Additions to non oil and gas properties
Loans to affiliates, net of repayments
Acquisition of T-Rex Oil Inc., cash acquired
Acquisition of Western Interior Oil and Gas
Corporation, cash acquired
Proceeds from sale of mineral interest
Additions to other assets
Net cash (used in) investing activities
FINANCING ACTIVITIES
Shareholders’ cash contributions
Sale of shares and warrants
Shareholder cash contribution
Proceeds from notes payable, net of repayments
Repayment of notes payable
Net cash provided by financing activities
NET CHANGE IN CASH
CASH, Beginning
CASH, Ending
SUPPLEMENTAL SCHEDULE OF CASH FLOW INFORMATION:
Issuance of shares for property
Issuance of shares for debt
Transfer of property for debt
Beneficial conversion on feature of preferred stock
Deemed dividend for beneficial conversion feature of preferred stock
Interest paid
Income taxes paid
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
57
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
Note 1 – Organization and History
T-Rex Oil, Inc. (the “Company”) was incorporated in Colorado on September 2, 2014. Rancher Energy Corp was incorporated in
Nevada on February 2, 2004. Effective October 20, 2014, T-Rex Oil, Inc. and Rancher Energy Corp were merged under the laws
of the State of Colorado and T-Rex Oil, Inc. became the surviving entity. Effective October 29, 2014, the Company authorized
50,000,000 shares of preferred stock in addition to its common stock and completed a reverse split of its common stock, issued
and outstanding, on a one (1) new share for three hundred fifty (350) old shares basis.
The Company is currently engaged in the acquisition, exploration, and development of oil and gas prospects in the Rocky
Mountain region of Wyoming.
On December 22, 2014, the Company acquired 100% of the issued and outstanding common stock of Terex Energy Corporation
(“Terex”) pursuant to Exchange Agreements with the shareholders of Terex. Terex was incorporated in the State of Colorado in
February 2014 and is headquartered in Broomfield, Colorado. Pursuant to the Exchange Agreements, the Company issued
7,385,700 shares of its restricted common stock for 100% of the issued and outstanding common stock of Terex. The shares were
exchanged on a one for one basis. As a result, Terex has become a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. T-Rex Oil, Inc.
was the legal acquirer and Terex was the legal acquiree. However, under accounting rules, since the Company is a public
company, which had nominal activity, the acquisition was treated as a recapitalization of Terex. Therefore, Terex was the
accounting acquirer in the transaction since Terex’s shareholders and management gained control of T-Rex Oil, Inc. and T-Rex
Oil, Inc. was the accounting acquiree. On August 19, 2014, prior to entering into the Exchange Agreements, Terex had purchased
371,004 shares from the Company. After such purchase, Terex owned approximately 52% of the issued and outstanding
common stock of the Company. As part of the December 22, 2014 transaction, Terex surrendered its ownership of the 371,004
shares of T-Rex Oil, Inc. common stock and as a result such shares were canceled.
On February 24, 2015, the Company entered into a Share Exchange Agreement with Western Interior Oil & Gas Corporation, a
Wyoming private oil and natural gas company (“Western Interior”) and the shareholders of Western Interior. Under the Share
Exchange Agreement the Company exchanged 7,465,168 shares of its restricted common stock for 170,878 shares of the issued
and outstanding common stock of Western Interior thereby owning 83% of Western Interior. The acquisition was closed on March
27, 2014 and became effective March 31, 2015. On March 31, 2015, the Company entered into an amendment to the Share
Exchange Agreement whereby the Company assumed certain repurchase agreements between Schwaben Kapital GmbH,
Western Interior and its dissident shareholders and as a result acquired the remaining 17% of Western Interior. As part of these
agreements, the Company assumed certain promissory notes issued to the dissenting shareholders in the total amount of
$1,770,047 that were secured by Western Interior assets. As a result, Western Interior became a wholly-owned subsidiary of the
Company. See Note 2 – Summary of Significant Accounting Policies – Principles of Consolidation.
On January 15, 2016, T-Rex Oil LLC #3 entered into a Purchase and Sale Agreement with Blue Tip Energy Wyoming, Inc. and
Cole Creek Recompletions LLC and acquired approximately 82% of the working interest in certain leases located in the state of
Wyoming known as the Cole Creek properties in exchange for $1,200,000 in cash plus the assumption of liabilities in the amount
of $833,382 for a total purchase price of $2,033,382. On April 20, 2016, the T-Rex Oil LLC #3 entered into a Purchase and Sale
Agreement with Black Hills Exploration & Production, Inc. and acquired the remaining approximately 18% working interest in the
Cole Creek properties in exchange for $250,000 in cash plus the assumption of liabilities in the amount of $182,938 for a total
purchase price of $432,938. These leases are proved developed and undeveloped leaseholds and include producing crude oil
wells totaling approximately 13,328 gross acres. See Note 2 – Principles of Consolidation.
58
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
Note 2 – Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Principles of Consolidation
The accompanying consolidated balance sheets at March 31, 2016 and 2015 and the consolidated statement of operations and
cash flows for the year ended March 31, 2016 include the accounts of Terex Energy Corporation, T-Rex Oil, Inc., Western Interior
Oil and Gas Corporation and T-Rex Oil LLC #3 and the consolidated statement of operations and cash flows for the year ended
March 31, 2015 include the accounts of Terex Energy Corporation and the accounts of T-Rex Oil, Inc. for the period December
23, 2014 through March 31, 2015. All intercompany balances have been eliminated during consolidation.
Use of Estimates in the Preparation of Consolidated Financial Statements
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United
States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities,
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of
revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates
include the fair value of assets and liabilities, oil and natural gas reserves, income taxes and the valuation allowances related to
deferred tax assets, asset retirement obligations and contingencies.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all liquid investments purchased with an initial maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents.
Cash and cash equivalents include demand deposits and money market funds carried at cost which approximates fair value. The
Company maintains its cash in institutions insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”), although such
deposits are in excess of the insurance coverage. At March 31, 2016, the Company had $111,641 of cash deposits in excess of
FDIC insured limits.
Concentration of Credit Risk
The Company’s producing properties are primarily located in Wyoming and the oil and gas production is sold to various
purchasers based on market index prices. The risk of non-payment by these purchasers is considered minimal and the Company
does not generally obtain collateral for sales. The Company continually monitors the credit standing of the primary purchasers.
During the years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015, one purchaser accounted for 79% and 74.5% of total revenues, respectively.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are stated at their cost less any allowance for doubtful accounts. The allowance for doubtful accounts is
based on the management’s assessment of the collectability of specific customer accounts and the aging of the accounts
receivable. If there is deterioration in a major customer’s creditworthiness or if actual defaults are higher than the historical
experience, the management’s estimates of the recoverability of amounts due to the Company could be adversely affected.
Based on the management’s assessment, there is no reserve recorded at March 31, 2016 and 2015.
Oil and Gas Producing Activities
The Company uses the successful efforts method of accounting for oil and gas activities. Under this method, the costs of
productive exploratory wells, all development wells, related asset retirement obligation assets, and productive leases are
capitalized and amortized, principally by field, on a units-of-production basis over the life of the remaining proved reserves.
Exploration costs, including personnel costs, geological and geophysical expenses, and delay rentals for oil and gas leases are
charged to expense as incurred. Exploratory drilling costs are initially capitalized, but charged to expense if and when the well is
determined not to have found reserves in commercial quantities. The sale of a partial interest in a proved property is accounted
for as a cost recovery, and no gain or loss is recognized as long as this treatment does not significantly affect the units-of-
production amortization rate. A gain or loss is recognized for all other sales of producing properties. There were capitalized costs
of $11,368,626 and $10,003,625 at March 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
59
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
Unproved oil and gas properties are assessed annually to determine whether they have been impaired by the drilling of dry holes
on or near the related acreage or other circumstances, which may indicate a decline in value. When impairment occurs, a loss is
recognized. When leases for unproved properties expire, the costs thereof, net of any related allowance for impairment, is
removed from the accounts and charged to expense. During the years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015, there was impairment to
unproved properties in the amount of $3,384,758 and $0, respectively and for the year ended March 31, 2016 there was a write
off of expired lease costs in the amount of $3,096,931. The sale of a partial interest in an unproved property is accounted for as a
recovery of cost when substantial uncertainty exists as to the ultimate recovery of the cost applicable to the interest retained. A
gain on the sale is recognized to the extent that the sales price exceeds the carrying amount of the unproved property. A gain or
loss is recognized for all other sales of unproved properties. There were capitalized costs of $4,745,917 and $8,087,991 at March
31, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Costs associated with development wells that are unevaluated or are waiting on access to transportation or processing facilities
are reclassified into developmental wells-in-progress (“WIP”). These costs are not put into a depletable field basis until the wells
are fully evaluated or access is gained to transportation and processing facilities. Costs associated with WIP are included in the
cash flows from investing as part of investment in oil and gas properties. At March 31, 2016 and 2015, no capitalized
developmental costs were included in WIP.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization of proved oil and gas properties is calculated using the units-of-production method
based on proved reserves and estimated salvage values. For the years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015, the Company recorded
depreciation, depletion and amortization expense on oil and gas properties in the amount of $3,327,337 and $0, respectively.
The Company reviews its proved oil and natural gas properties for impairment whenever events and circumstances indicate that
a decline in the recoverability of its carrying value may have occurred. It estimates the undiscounted future net cash flows of its oil
and natural gas properties and compares such undiscounted future cash flows to the carrying amount of the oil and natural gas
properties to determine if the carrying amount is recoverable. If the carrying amount exceeds the estimated undiscounted future
cash flows, the Company will adjust the carrying amount of the oil and natural gas properties to fair value. For the years ended
March 31, 2016 and 2015, there was impairment to proved properties of $5,091,554 and $0, respectively.
Other Property and Equipment
Other property and equipment, such as computer hardware and software, are recorded at cost. Costs of renewals and
improvements that substantially extend the useful lives of the assets are capitalized. Maintenance and repair costs are expensed
when incurred. When other property and equipment is sold or retired, the capitalized costs and related accumulated depreciation
are removed from their respective accounts. Depreciation expense of other property and equipment for the years ended March
31, 2016 and 2015 was $42,591 and $10,143, respectively.
Asset Retirement Obligations
The Company records estimated future asset retirement obligations (“ARO”) related to its oil and gas properties. The Company
records the estimated fair value of a liability for ARO in the period in which it is incurred with a corresponding increase in the
carrying amount of the related long-lived asset. The increased carrying value is depleted using the units-of-production method,
and the discounted liability is increased through accretion over the remaining life of the respective oil and gas properties.
60
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
The estimated liability is based on historical industry experience in abandoning wells, including estimated economic lives,
external estimates as to the cost to abandon the wells in the future, and federal and state regulatory requirements. The
Company’s liability is discounted using management’s best estimate of its credit-adjusted, risk-free rate. Revisions to the liability
could occur due to changes in estimated abandonment costs, changes in well economic lives, or if federal or state regulators
enact new requirements regarding the abandonment of wells.
For the Year Ended 
 
March 31,
 2016
2015
ARO - beginning of period $459,294   $-
Additions
Deletions
Accretion expense
 
Less current portion
ARO - end of period
721,860     459,294 
 
   (15,190 )   -
   31,179
    -
 
   1,197,143    459,294 
   176,587     163,389 
 $1,020,556  $295,905
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with authoritative guidance on accounting for the impairment or disposal of long-lived assets, as set forth in Topic
360 of the ASC, the Company assesses the recoverability of the carrying value of its non-oil and gas long-lived assets when
events occur that indicate an impairment in value may exist. An impairment loss is indicated if the sum of the expected
undiscounted future net cash flows is less than the carrying amount of the assets. If this occurs, an impairment loss is recognized
for the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the estimated fair value of the assets.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when it is realized or realizable and earned. Revenue is realized or realizable and earned
when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred or services have been rendered to the customer, the
price to the buyer is fixed or determinable and collectability is reasonably assured. For goods, this is the point at which title and
risk of loss is transferred and when payment has either been received or collection is reasonably assured. Revenues for services
are recorded when the services have been provided. Revenue that does not meet these criteria is deferred until the criteria are
met.
Other Comprehensive Loss
The Company has no material components of other comprehensive loss and accordingly, net loss is equal to comprehensive
loss for the period.
Income Taxes
The Company uses the liability method of accounting for income taxes under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are
recognized for the future tax consequences of temporary differences between the accounting bases and the tax bases of the
Company’s assets and liabilities. The deferred tax assets and liabilities are computed using enacted tax rates in effect for the
year in which the temporary differences are expected to reverse.
The Company’s deferred income taxes include certain future tax benefits. The Company records a valuation allowance against
any portion of those deferred income tax assets when it believes, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than
not that some portion or all of the deferred income tax asset will not be realized.
61
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
The Company has adopted ASC guidance regarding accounting for uncertainty in income taxes. This guidance clarifies the
accounting for income taxes by prescribing the minimum recognition threshold an income tax position is required to meet before
being recognized in the consolidated financial statements and applies to all income tax positions. Each income tax position is
assessed using a two-step process. A determination is first made as to whether it is more likely than not that the income tax
position will be sustained, based upon technical merits, upon examination by the taxing authorities. If the income tax position is
expected to meet the more likely than not criteria, the benefit recorded in the consolidated financial statements equals the largest
amount that is greater than 50% likely to be realized upon its ultimate settlement. At March 31, 2016, there were no uncertain tax
positions that required accrual.
Business Combination
The Company accounts for acquisitions in accordance with guidance found in ASC 805, Business Combinations. The guidance
requires consideration given, including contingent consideration, assets acquired and liabilities assumed to be valued at their fair
values at the date of acquisition. The guidance further provides that acquisition costs will generally be expenses as incurred and
changes in deferred tax asset valuations and income tax uncertainties after the acquisition date generally will affect income tax
expense.
ASC 805 requires that any excess of purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired, including identifiable intangibles and
liabilities assumed be recognized as goodwill and any excess of fair value of acquired net assets, including identifiable
intangible assets over the acquisition consideration results in a gain from bargain purchase. Prior to recording a gain, the
acquiring entity must reassess whether ass acquired assets and assumed liabilities have been identified and recognized and
perform re-measurements to verify that the consideration paid, assets acquired and liabilities assumed have been properly
valued.
Goodwill
In accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, goodwill cannot be amortized, however, it must be tested annually
for impairment. This impairment test is calculated at the reporting unit level. The goodwill impairment test has two steps. The first
identifies potential impairments by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its book value, including goodwill. If the fair
value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying amount, goodwill is not impaired and the second step is not necessary. If the
carrying value exceeds the fair value, the second step calculates the possible impairment loss by comparing the implied fair
value of goodwill with the carrying amount. If the implied goodwill is less than the carrying amount, a write-down is recorded.
Management tests goodwill each year for impairment, or when facts or circumstances indicate impairment has occurred. See
Note 4 – Fair Value Measurement.
Net Loss per Share
Basic net loss per common share of stock is calculated by dividing net loss available to common stockholders by the weighted-
average number of common shares outstanding during each period.
Diluted net loss per common share is calculated by dividing net loss by the weighted-average number of common shares
outstanding, including the effect of other dilutive securities. The Company’s potentially dilutive securities consist of in-the-money
outstanding options and warrants to purchase the Company’s common stock. Diluted net loss per common share does not give
effect to dilutive securities as their effect would be anti-dilutive.
62
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
The treasury stock method is used to measure the dilutive impact of stock options and warrants. The following table details the
weighted-average dilutive and anti-dilutive securities related to stock options and warrants for the periods presented:
For the Year Ended
 
March 31,
 2016
  -
2015
   -
Dilutive
 
Anti Dilutive  2,494,571   1,389,546
Equity Based Payments
The Company recognizes compensation cost for equity based awards based on estimated fair value of the award and records
capitalized cost or compensation expense over the requisite service period. See Note 9 – Equity Based Payments.
Major Customers
During the year ended March 31, 2016, one purchaser accounted for approximately 79% of total revenues. The Company had no
revenues from operations during the year ended March 31, 2015 and as a result there are no customers.
Beneficial Conversion Feature and Deemed Dividend Related to Series A Shares
Pursuant to ASC 470-20, when the $558,171 of convertible Series A Shares of preferred stock were issued at a discount from the
if-converted $682,989 fair value as of the issuance date, the Company recognized this difference between the fair value per
share of its common stock and the conversion price, multiplied by the number of shares issuable upon conversion. This total
Beneficial Conversion Feature of $124,818 will be recorded as additional paid-in-capital for common shares. The offsetting
amount will be amortizable over the period from the issue date to the first conversion date or 9 months. Therefore, since the
409,019 Series A Shares of preferred stock are convertible between July and December of 2016, a deemed dividend of $67,830
to the Series A Shares of preferred stock has been recorded during the year ended March 31, 2016 in its statement of operations
and cash flows. As the Company is in an accumulated deficit position, the deemed dividend of $67,830 has been charged
against additional paid-in-capital for common shares as there being no retained earnings from which to declare a dividend.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As part of its ongoing business, the Company has not participated in transactions that generate relationships with unconsolidated
entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities (SPEs), which
would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or
limited purposes. From its incorporation on February 11, 2014 through March 31, 2016, the Company has not been involved in
any unconsolidated SPE transactions.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2014, the FASB issued ASU No. 2014-10, Development Stage Entities (Topic915) – Elimination of Certain Financial
Reporting Requirements, Including an Amendment to Variable Interest Entities Guidance in Topic 810, Consolidation. This
standard update is to improve financial reporting by reducing the cost and complexity associated with the incremental reporting
requirements for development stage entities, and as a result removes all incremental financial reporting requirements. This
standard update also eliminates an exception provided to development stage entities in Topic 810, Consolidation, for
determining whether an entity is a variable interest entity on the basis of the amount of the investment equity that is at risk. ASU
2014-10 is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2016, and interim reporting periods beginning
after December 15, 2017. Entities are allowed to apply the guidance early for any annual reporting period or interim period for
which the entity’s financial statements have not yet been issued or made available for issuance. The Company adopted these
standards and they did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
63
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
In August 2014, the FASB issued Update No. 2014-15 - Presentation of Financial Statements – Going Concern that requires
management to evaluate whether there are conditions or events that raise substantial doubt about an entity’s ability to continue
as a going concern within one year after the date that the entity’s financial statements are issued, or within one year after the date
that the entity’s financial statements are available to be issued, and to provide disclosures when certain criteria are met. This
guidance is effective for the annual period ending after December 15, 2016, and for annual periods and interim periods thereafter.
Early application is permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the provisions of this guidance and assessing its impact, but
does not currently believe it will have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements or disclosures.
In September 2015, the FASB issued ASU No. 2015-16, Business Combinations (Topic 805): Simplifying the Accounting for
Measurement-Period Adjustments. ASU 2015-16 requires that an acquirer recognize adjustments to provisional amounts that are
identified during the measurement period in the reporting period in which the adjustment amounts are determined. Under ASU
2015-16, the effect on earnings resulting from changes to the provisional amounts, calculated as if the accounting had been
completed as of the acquisition date, must be recorded in the reporting period in which the adjustment amounts are determined
rather than retrospectively. The amendments in this ASU are effective for annual and interim periods beginning after December
15, 2015. ASU 2015-16 should be adopted prospectively to adjustments to provisional amounts occurring after the effective date
of the update and earlier application is permitted for financial statements that have not been issued. The Company adopted these
standards and they did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
In November 2015, the FASB issued ASU No. 2015-17, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Balance Sheet Classification of Deferred
Taxes ASU 2015-17”). ASU 2015-17 is part of the FASB’s initiative to reduce the complexity in accounting standards. ASU 2015-
17 requires entities to present deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities as non-current in a classified balance sheet. The
amendments in this ASU simplify current guidance in ASC 740-10-45-4 that requires separate presentation of deferred tax assets
and liabilities as current and non-current in a classified balance sheet based on the classification of the related asset or liability.
ASU 2015-17 is effective for public companies for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2017 and interim periods
beginning after December 15, 2018. Earlier application is permitted as of the beginning of an interim or annual reporting period.
The Company adopted this ASU as of March 31, 2016. The adoption of this ASU did not have a material impact on our
consolidated balance sheets as of March 31, 2016 and 2015.
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842). ASU 2016-02 requires lessees to recognize all
leases, including operating leases, on the balance sheet as a lease asset or lease liability, unless the lease is a short-term lease.
ASU 2016-02 also requires additional disclosures regarding leasing arrangements. ASU 2016-02 is effective for interim periods
and fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, and early application is permitted. The Company is in the process of
determining the method of adoption and the impact this guidance will have on its financial condition, results of operations and
cash flows.
There were other accounting standards and interpretations issued during the year ended March 31, 2016, none of which are
expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial position, operations or cash flows.
64
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
Subsequent Events
The Company evaluates events and transactions after the balance sheet date but before the financial statements are issued.
Note 3 – Going Concern and Managements’ Plan
The Company’s consolidated financial statements for the years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015 have been prepared on a going
concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the settlement of liabilities and commitments in the normal
course of business. The Company reported a net loss of $15,767,831 and $11,043,541 for the years ended March 31, 2016 and
2015, respectively, and an accumulated deficit of $26,756,973 as of March 31, 2016. At March 31, 2016, the Company had a
working capital deficit of $(1,107,664).
The future success of the Company is dependent on its ability to attract additional capital and ultimately, upon its ability to
develop future profitable operations. There can be no assurance that the Company will be successful in obtaining such financing,
or that it will attain positive cash flow from operations. Management believes that actions presently being taken to revise the
Company’s operating and financial requirements provide the opportunity for the Company to continue as a going concern.
Note 4 – Fair Value Measurements
The Company applies the authoritative guidance applicable to all financial assets and liabilities required to be measured and
reported on a fair value basis, as well as to non-financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a non-recurring basis,
including impairments of proved oil and gas properties and other long-lived assets and AROs initially measured at fair value. The
fair value of an asset or liability is the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in
an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. The Company maximizes the use of observable
inputs and minimizes the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. Observable inputs are inputs that market
participants would use in valuing the asset or liability based on market data obtained from sources independent of the Company.
Unobservable input are inputs that reflect the Company’s assumptions of what market participants would use in valuing the asset
or liability based on the information available in the circumstances.
Financial and non-financial assets and liabilities are classified within the valuation hierarchy based upon the lowest level of input
that is significant to the fair value measurement. The Company’s policy is to recognize transfers in and out of the fair value
hierarchy as of the end of the reporting period in which the event or change in circumstances caused the transfer. The Company
has consistently applied the valuation techniques discussed below in all periods presented. The hierarchy is organized into three
levels based on the reliability of the inputs as follows:
Level 1: Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities; or
Level 2: Quoted prices in active markets for similar assets and liabilities and inputs, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or
liabilities in markets that are not active and model-derived valuations whose inputs or significant value drivers are observable; or
Level 3: Unobservable pricing inputs in which there is little or no market data, which requires the reporting entity to develop its
own assumptions.
65
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
The following table presents the Company’s non-financial assets and liabilities that were measured at fair value on a non-
recurring basis at March 31, 2016 by level within the fair value hierarchy:
Level 1  Level 2   Level 3  Total
Description
Assets
  
Oil and gas properties $
$930,238  $
-
$930,238
-
Effective January 1, 2016, the Company acquired approximately 82% of the working interest in certain leases located in the state
of Wyoming known as the Cole Creek properties and recorded the oil and gas properties at a fair value of $2,033,382. Thus, due
to the significance of this event, the oil and gas properties were tested under ASC 360 as to its recoverability. Therefore, the oil
and gas properties were recorded at fair value if impairment is required under the accounting guidance. The Company uses
Level 2 inputs and the income valuation techniques of undiscounted oil and gas future net cash flows to measure the fair value of
the oil and gas properties and thus the model forecast including discount rates and commodity prices were selected by the
independent engineers of Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc. As such, there was an impairment to the oil and gas properties
during the year ended March 31, 2016, the amount of $1,103,144 and reported in the consolidated statement of operations.
The following table presents the Company’s non-financial assets and liabilities that were measured at fair value on a non-
recurring basis at March 31, 2015 by level within the fair value hierarchy:
Description
 Level 1  Level 2   Level 3  Total
Assets
  
Goodwill
 $
Other property and equipment $
$-
  $
  $22,632  $
-
-
$-
 
  $22,632
-
-
Effective March 31, 2015, the Company acquired Western Interior and as a result realized goodwill in the amount of $7,786,997.
Thus, due to the significance of this event, goodwill was tested under ASC 360 as to its recoverability. Therefore, goodwill is
recorded at fair value if impairment is required under the accounting guidance. The Company uses Level 2 inputs and the income
valuation techniques of undiscounted oil and gas future net cash flows to measure the fair value of goodwill and thus the model
forecast including discount rates and commodity prices were selected by the independent engineers of Netherland, Sewell &
Associates, Inc. As such, the Company’s goodwill was fully impaired during the year ended March 31, 2015 in the amount of
$7,786,997 and reported in the consolidated statement of operations.
Fair value in the initial recognition of other equipment is determined based on the quoted fair value of the vehicle using inputs
from valuation techniques used by industry participants. Accordingly, the fair value is based on observable pricing inputs and is
considered a Level 2 value measurement. Therefore, the Company’s other equipment was written down to its fair value of
$22,632 and an impairment during the year ended March 31, 2015 in the amount of $27,368 was reported in the consolidated
statement of operations.
Note 5 – Significant Acquisition
Effective January 1, 2016, the Company acquired approximately 82% of the working interest in certain leases located in the state
of Wyoming known as the Cole Creek properties.
66
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
The following table presents the allocation of the consideration given to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, based on
their fair values at January 1, 2016:
Consideration Given
 $1,200,000 
Cash
    
 
 
 $1,200,000 
Total purchase price
 
 
    
Allocation of Consideration Given
Oil and gas properties Proved
 
Total assets
 
Current liabilities
Long-term liabilities
 
Total liabilities
 
Net assets acquired
$2,033,382 
    
 
   2,033,382 
    
 
   111,522  
   721,860  
    
 
   833,382  
    
 
 $1,200,000
Effective March 31, 2015, the Company acquired 100% of the issued and outstanding stock of Western Interior which is a
Wyoming private oil and natural gas company. The acquisition was a business combination accounted for using the acquisition
method in accordance with ASC 805.
The following table presents the allocation of the consideration given to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, based on
their fair values at March 31, 2015:
Consideration Given
7,465,168     
T-Rex shares issued to Western Interior shareholders
  $19,409,437 
 $2.60
Fair value of T-Rex shares at date of acquisition
     
 
 
    
    1,770,047  
Promissory notes issued to Western Interior shareholders    
     
 
    
 
  $21,179,484 
Total purchase price
    
 
     
    
 
 
  
Allocation of Consideration Given
   
 
 $154,695    
Current assets
Oil and gas properties
    
     
 
 
   8,458,250     
 Proved
 
   5,585,583     
 Unproved
 
   242,837      
Other property and equipment
Goodwill
   7,780,336     
 
 
   183,129      
Other assets
     
    
 
 
  $22,404,830 
    
Total assets
 
    
     
 
 
   929,441      
Current liabilities
 
   295,905      
Long-term liabilities
     
    
 
 
Total liabilities
    
    1,225,346  
     
    
 
 
Net assets acquired
    
  $21,179,484
67
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
Goodwill associated with the above transaction has been impaired. See Note 4 – Fair Value Measurements.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined results of operations are presented below as though the acquisition of Western
Interior occurred on April 1, 2014.
Revenue   Net Loss
Year ended March 31, 2015 - as reported $-
  $11,043,541 
Year ended March 31, 2015 - pro forma  $895,182  $14,285,867
Note 6 – Debt
Promissory Notes
The Company during the year ended March 31, 2016 paid $341,405 in principal towards the repayment of promissory notes
relative to the repurchase of 18,717 shares of Western Interior common stock owned by dissident shareholders as part of
agreements effective March 31, 2015 to repurchase a total of 33,085 shares of Western Interior common stock. The Company at
March 31, 2016 owes a balance in the amount of $488,298 on one of the promissory notes plus accrued interest of $12,783 with
the remaining three promissory notes being paid in full.
On August 1, 2015, the Company, relative to the repurchase by the Company on March 31, 2015 of the remaining 14,368 shares
of Western Interior common stock entered into an agreement with the note holder to settle the amount owed under the promissory
note. As such, the parties agreed the amount owed on such promissory note by the Company would be reduced from $768,715 to
$393,795 and the difference of $374,920 be considered a reduction in the purchase price by the Company of the 14,368 shares
of Western Interior common stock. In addition, the $393,795 was paid in full effective August 1, 2015 by the transfer to the note
holder of certain oil and gas properties owned by Western Interior which resulted in the Company reporting a gain on disposal of
assets in the amount of $44,100.
On January 14, 2016, the Company borrowed $50,000 each from two directors in exchange for secured promissory notes
including interest at the rate of 5% per annum with accrued and unpaid interest and principal due at September 30, 2016. The
promissory notes are collateralized by certain oil and gas properties located in the State of Wyoming. Holders may, at any time
prior to payment of the promissory notes elect to convert all or any portion of the promissory notes, including accrued interest, into
common shares of the Company at a price determined by the average ten consecutive day trading closing price less 30%. The
Company at March 31, 2016 owes $100,000 on the two promissory notes plus accrued interest of $1,052.
Line-of-Credit
The Company has a line-of-credit with a bank in the amount of $350,000 collateralized by certain oil and gas properties of the
Company. The line-of-credit matures in November 2016. Annual interest is at prime plus 2.50% with a floor of 7%). The Company
owes $174,789 on the line-of-credit at March 31, 2016.
Installment Notes
The Company during the years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015, borrowed $34,374 and $17,288 from unrelated parties to
finance their insurance policies. The unsecured notes are repaid during the year ended March at $3,437 per month including
interest at the rate of 5.81% per annum. The Company owed $20,123 and $20,630 at March 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
68
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
Note 7 – Stockholders’ Equity
The Company’s capital stock at March 31, 2016 consists of 325,000,000 authorized shares of which 50,000,000 shares are
$0.001 par value preferred stock and 275,000,000 shares are $0.001 par value common stock.
Preferred Shares
At March 31, 2016 and 2015, there are a total of 409,019 and 0 shares of preferred stock issued and outstanding, respectively.
On October 28, 2015, the Company filed an Amendment to its Articles of Incorporation to designate a class of preferred stock as
the Series A Convertible Preferred Stock.
The Amendment sets aside 5,000,000 shares of the authorized 50,000,000 shares of the Company’s $0.001 par value preferred
stock as the Series A Convertible Preferred Stock (“the Series A Shares.”) The Series A Shares are convertible at the option of
the Holder into common shares of the Company’s stock 9 months after the date of issuance. Further, the Series A Shares have a
conversion price based upon 80% of the 10 day average of the Company’s closing market price at the time of conversion.
In October 2015, the Company commenced a private placement financing of $7,000,000 in Units, a Unit consisting of one share
of its Series A Shares and an Unit Warrant. The Unit Warrant has an exercise price of $3.00 per share and a term of 3 years. The
Unit Warrant is exercisable 9 months after issuance and is callable by the Company upon the Company’s common stock closing
at a market price of $5.00 or above for a period of 10 days.
Pursuant to ASC 470-20, when the $558,171 of convertible Series A Shares of preferred stock were issued at a discount from the
if-converted $682,989 fair value as of the issuance date, the Company recognized this difference between the fair value per
share of its common stock and the conversion price, multiplied by the number of shares issuable upon conversion. This total
Beneficial Conversion Feature of $124,818 will be recorded as additional paid-in-capital for common shares. The offsetting
amount will be amortizable over the period from the issue date to the first conversion date or 9 months. Therefore, since the
409,019 Series A Shares of preferred stock are convertible between July and December of 2016, a deemed dividend of $67,830
to the Series A Shares of preferred stock has been recorded during the year ended March 31, 2016 in its statement of operations
and cash flows. As the Company is in an accumulated deficit position, the deemed dividend of $67,830 has been charged
against additional paid-in-capital for common shares as there being no retained earnings from which to declare a dividend.
During the year ended March 31, 2016, the Company received $818,038, including cash of $793,037, in exchange for the
issuance of 409,019 shares of its Series A Preferred Stock and Unit Warrants exercisable for 419,019 shares of common stock.
We apply the guidance enumerated in ASC 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” when determining the classification and
measurement of preferred shares. Preferred shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments
and are measured at fair value. We classify conditionally redeemable preferred shares (if any), which includes preferred shares
that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of
uncertain events not solely within our control, as equity. At all other times, we classified our preferred shares in stockholders’
equity.
69
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
We have applied the guidance of ASC 470 “Debt” in accounting for the unit warrants and as such have valued the Unit Warrants
using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The option-pricing model requires a number of assumptions, of which the most
significant are the stock price at the valuation date that was at a range of $1.10 to $1.50 per share as well as the following
assumptions:
Volatility
Expected Option/Warrant Term 3 years
Risk-free interest rate
Expected dividend yield
.25%
 0.00%
82% - 134%
The expected term of the Unit Warrants granted were estimated to be the contractual term. The expected volatility was based on
an average of the volatility disclosed based upon comparable companies who had similar expected option and warrant terms.
The risk-free rate was based on the one-year U.S. Treasury bond rate.
As a result, the Unit Warrants exercisable for 409,019 shares of our restricted common stock were valued at $135,049 and as
such $67,830 was credited to additional paid in capital during the year ended March 31, 2016.
Common Shares
At March 31, 2016 and 2015, there are a total of 15,480,882 and 15,295,025 shares of common stock issued and outstanding,
respectively.
During the year ended March 31, 2016, the Company as part of a private placement sold 680,536 shares of its restricted common
stock for $509,133 in cash and 11,000 shares for $27,500 in cash. In April 2015, the Company entered into a Subscription
Agreement to sell up to 2,800,000 shares of its restricted common stock pursuant to Regulation S of the Securities Act in
exchange for funds totaling $6,020,000. In July 2015, the Company and Schwaben Kapital GmbH amended their Subscription
Agreement pursuant to Regulation S of the Securities Act to extend the expiration of the Subscription Agreement from June 30,
2015 to September 30, 2015.The Agreement was terminated as of September 30, 2015 and during the year ended March 31,
2016, the Company sold 664,050 shares of its restricted common stock as part of the Subscription Agreement for $1,345,000 in
cash or $2.15 per share. In addition, the Company issued 8,000 shares of its restricted common stock as payment of an accounts
payable in the amount of $20,000 and the Company recognized no gain or loss between the face value of the accounts payable
and the fair value of the common stock.
During the year ended March 31, 2015, the Company issued 7,385,700 shares of its restricted common stock to the shareholders
of Terex as part of an Exchange Agreement. See Note 1 – Organization and History. In addition, the Company issued 81,692
shares as part of the recapitalization of the Company. Also, the Company issued 7,465,168 shares of its restricted common stock
valued at $19,409,437 to the shareholders of Western Interior Oil and Gas Corporation as part of an acquisition. See Note 4 –
Significant Acquisition. Further, the Company sold 20,000 shares of its restricted common stock as part of a private placement for
$50,000 in cash or $2.50 per share.
Additional Paid-in Capital
During the year ended March 31, 2016, as the Company is in an accumulated deficit position, the deemed dividend in the amount
of $67,830 was charged against additional paid-in-capital as there being no retained earnings from which to declare a dividend.
During the year ended March 31, 2016, the Company realized additional paid in capital relative to the fair value of equity based
payments in the amount of $60,262 See Note 9 – Equity Based Payments.
70
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
During the year ended March 31, 2015, shareholders of Terex as part of a private placement contributed cash in the amount of
$2,195,700 in exchange for 2,195,700 shares of Terex restricted common stock valued at $1.00 per share. In addition,
shareholders of Terex contributed services valued at $950,000 in exchange for 950,000 shares of Terex restricted common stock
that were expensed including 750,000 shares to a related party. See Note 10 - Related Party Transactions. Further, Terex
received property valued at $50,000 in exchange for 50,000 shares of Terex restricted common stock that was capitalized under
other property and equipment.
During the year ended March 31, 2015, the Company realized additional paid in capital relative to the fair value of equity based
payments in the amount of $394,682 of which $19,707 was expensed and $374,975 was capitalized of which $150,978 was from
a transaction with a related party. See Note 9 – Equity Based Payments.
Retirement of Common Shares
During the year ended March 31, 2016, the Company entered into settlement agreements with four of its shareholders to settle
certain claims valued at $1,531,047 in exchange for the shareholders returning to the Company 1,177,729 shares of their
common stock.
Note 8 – Income Taxes
The effective income tax rate for the years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015 differs from the U.S. Federal statutory rate due to the
following:
Federal statutory income tax rate
State income taxes, net of federal benefit   472,000
Permanent items
Change in valuation allowance
2016
 
 $5,492,000   $3,865,000  
 
   (3,231,000)   (2,960,000)
   (2,733,000)   (1,237,000)
 
 $-
$-
2015
332,000
The components of the deferred tax assets and liabilities at March 31, 2016 and 2015 are as follows:
Long-term deferred tax assets:
Federal net operating loss carryforwards $3,580,000   $870,000
Equity based compensation
    368,000
2015
2016
391,000
4,000
4,000
 
   (3,975,000)   (1,242,000)
 
 $-
$-
Long-term deferred tax liabilities:
Property, plant and equipment
Valuation allowance
Net long-term deferred tax assets
71
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
For Income Tax Return Purposes Only
On August 19, 2014, Terex Energy Corporation acquired 52% of the outstanding common stock of T-Rex Oil Inc. and thus T-Rex
had a change of control event under IRC section 382, which will limit T-Rex’s ability to utilize its deferred tax assets, including net
operating loss carryforwards, to offset future taxable income. T-Rex has net operating loss carryforwards of approximately
$49,000,000 which will begin to expire in 2024.
On December 22, 2014, T-Rex acquired 100% of the outstanding common stock of Terex and Terex did not have a change of
control event under IRC section 382. Terex has net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $425,000 which will begin to
expire in 2034.
On March 31, 2015, T-Rex acquired 100% of the outstanding common stock of Western Interior and Western Interior had a
change of control event under IRC section 382 which will limit T-Rex’s ability to utilize its deferred tax assets, including net
operating loss carryforwards of approximately $12,000,000 (limited to approximately $560,000 per year) which will begin to
expire in 2027, to offset future taxable income.
The tax years that remain open to examination by the IRS are years 2012 through 2014. Due to the Company’s net operating loss
carryforwards, the IRS may also adjust the amount of loss realizable under examination back to the year 2008.
Note 9 – Equity Based Payments
The Company accounts for equity based payment accruals under authoritative guidance as set forth in the Topics of the ASC.
The guidance requires all equity based payments to employees and non-employees, including grants of employee and non-
employee stock options and warrants, to be recognized in the consolidated financial statements based at their fair values.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model is used to estimate the option and warrant fair values. The option-pricing model requires
a number of assumptions, of which the most significant are the stock price at the valuation date that ranged from $0.01 to $3.50
per share as well as the following assumptions:
Volatility
 82.00% - 134.00%
Expected Option/Warrant Term 9 months - 3 years
Risk-free interest rate
Expected dividend yield
.12% - .25%
 0.00%
The expected term of the options and warrants granted were estimated to be the contractual term. The expected volatility was
based on an average of the volatility disclosed based upon comparable companies who had similar expected option and warrant
terms. The risk-free rate was based on the one-year U.S. Treasury bond rate.
2014 Stock Incentive Plan
Effective October 1, 2014, the Company’s 2014 Stock Option and Award Plan (the “2014 Stock Incentive Plan”) was approved by
its Board of Directors. Under the 2014 Stock Incentive Plan, the Board of Directors may grant options or purchase rights to
purchase common stock to officers, employees, and other persons who provide services to the Company or any related
company. The participants to whom awards are granted, the type of awards granted, the number of shares covered for each
award, and the purchase price, conditions and other terms of each award are determined by the Board of Directors, except that
the term of the options shall not exceed 10 years. A total of 2 million shares of the Company’s common stock are subject to the
2014 Stock Incentive Plan. The shares issued for the 2014 Stock Incentive Plan may be either treasury or authorized and
unissued shares.
72
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
The following table summarizes the non-qualified stock option and warrant activity for the years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015:
Outstanding at beginning of year   
Options
Warrants
 
Granted
Options
Warrants
 
Exercised
Options
Warrants
 
Cancelled
2016
 Number of    
 Options/
 Warrants
935,000
  942,858
   
   
  1,262,750   $ 0.100
  409,019
  $ 3.000
 
   
   
   
   
 
  $ -
  -
  -
  $ -
Weighted Average  Options/
  Exercise Price
   
  $ 0.018
  $ 0.080
2015
  Number of
$ 0.010
  $ -
Weighted Average
Warrants   Exercise Price
    
   28,571
   -
    
    
   935,000   $ 0.010
   942,858   $ 0.800
    
    
   -
   -
$ -
  $ -
Options
Warrants
 
Outstanding at March 31,
Options
Warrants
 
Exercisable at March 31,
Options
Warrants
$ -
(1,070,000) $ 0.010
  -
   
   
  1,127,750   $ 0.039
  1,351,877   $ 1.462
   
   
  1,127,750   $ 0.039
  1,351,877   $ 1.462
$ -
(28,571 ) $ 0.010
   -
    
    
   935,000   $ 0.018
   942,858   $ 0.800
    
    
   907,917   $ 0.010
   942,858   $ 0.800
Weighted average remaining contractual life Life
Aggregate
Intrinsic Value
Life
Aggregate
Intrinsic Value
Options
Warrants
1.13  $ 1,115,084
  1.21  $ 511,500
2.68  $ 2,258,200
   2.82  $ 1,668,000
The aggregate intrinsic value of outstanding securities is the amount by which the fair value of underlying (common) shares
exceed the amount paid for and the exercise price of the options and warrants issued and outstanding.
Note 10 – Commitments and Contingencies
Operating Lease
The Company leases an office space in Colorado at the rate of $4,572 per month and the lease expires in August 2017. In
addition, the Company leases an office space in Wyoming at the rate of $5,838 per month and the lease expires in June 2019.
Total rent expense under these leases was $128,340 and $37,614 for the years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015.
73
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
The following is a schedule of minimum future rental annual payments under the operating lease for the stated fiscal year ends:
Employment Agreements
3/31/2017   123,453 
3/31/2018   83,111  
3/31/2019   62,940  
3/31/2020   15,735  
 
 $285,240
In August 2014, Terex entered into an Employment Agreement for services with its Chief Executive Officer, President and
director. The Employment Agreement has a term of 3 years and provides for an annual compensation of $204,000 and a monthly
car allowance of $600. It also provides for an annual bonus as determined by the board of directors.
In November 2014, Terex entered into an Employment Agreement for services with its Vice President of Operations and director.
The Employment Agreement has a term of 3 years and provides for an annual compensation of $150,000. It also provides for an
annual bonus as determined by the board of directors.
In November 2014, Terex entered into an Employment Agreement for services with its Vice President of Geology and director.
The Employment Agreement has a term of 3 years and provides for an annual compensation of $150,000. It also provides for an
annual bonus as determined by the board of directors.
In January 2015, T-Rex entered into an Employment Agreement for services with its Vice President of Operations and director.
The Employment Agreement has a term of 3 years and provides for an annual compensation of $150,000. It also provides for an
annual bonus as determined by the board of directors.
Consulting Agreement
The Company entered into a three-year agreement effective September 1, 2014 with a consultant to perform services at the base
rate of $150,000 per year under certain terms and conditions including with an auto allowance of $600 per month. In addition, the
consultant has been granted cashless options to acquire up to 500,000 shares of T-Rex’s common stock at an option price of
$0.10 per share for a period of three years from April 1, 2014. The options vested ratably over the year ended March 31, 2015.
See Note 9 – Equity Based Payments.
Note 11 – Related Party Transactions
Equity for Services
On April 1, 2014, an officer and director of the Company was granted options to acquire 100,000 shares of T-Rex’s restricted
common stock in exchange for services valued at $115 or $0.0015 per share.
On August 25, 2014 a shareholder of Terex that is a director of the Company contributed services valued at $750,000 that were
expensed in exchange for 750,000 shares of Terex restricted common stock valued at $1.00 per share.
74
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
During September 2014, an officer of the Company and a related party sold unproved oil and gas property to the Company in
exchange for $50,000 in cash and warrants to acquire 400,000 shares of the Terex restricted common stock that was recorded by
the Company at the historical cost basis to the officer and related party or $150,798.
Consulting Services
During the year ended March 31, 2016 and 2015, the Company paid its officers and directors $0 and $193,149, respectively in
fees that were expensed.
T-Rex Oil LLC #1
The Company is the manager of T-Rex Oil LLC #1 that was formed during December 2014 for the purpose of drilling and
producing oil and gas wells. During the year ended March 31, 2015, the Company loaned the LLC $50,000 and at March 31,
2016 and 2015, the Company is owed $0 and $50,000, respectively.
The Company in December 2014 entered into put agreements with the members of T-Rex #1 whereby the Company granted a
right to put the purchase of their interest of T-Rex #1 in the amount of $425,000 back to the Company at an exercise price of
$2.00 per share or a total of 212,500 shares of the Company’s common stock.
T-Rex Oil LLC #3
The Company is the manager of T-Rex Oil LLC #3 that was formed in January 2016 for the purpose of acquiring and developing
oil and gas leases known as the Cole Creek properties in Wyoming. T-Rex Oil LLC #3 is included as part of the consolidated
financial statements as of and for the year ended March 31, 2016. See Note 1 – Organization and History.
Note 12 – Subsequent Events
Sale of Common Shares
During the period April 1, 2016 through June 20, 2014, the Company sold 254,382 shares of its common stock in exchange for
$381,570 in cash or at $1.50 per share and 99,328 shares in exchange for $74,497 or at $0.75 per share as part of a private
placement.
Stock Options
During the period April 1, 2016 through June 20, 2016, the Company received $5,000 in cash in exchange to acquire 50,000
shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $0.10 per share.
Note 13 - Supplemental Oil And Gas Disclosure (Unaudited)
Estimated Net Quantities Of Oil And Gas Reserves (Unaudited)
There are numerous uncertainties inherent in estimating quantities of proved crude oil and natural gas reserves. Crude oil and
natural gas reserve engineering is a subjective process of estimating underground accumulations of crude oil and natural gas
that cannot be precisely measured. The accuracy of any reserve estimate is a function of the quality of available data and of
engineering and geological interpretation and judgment. Results of drilling, testing and production subsequent to the date of the
estimate may justify revision of such estimate. Accordingly, reserves estimates are often different from the quantities of crude oil
and natural gas that are ultimately recovered.
75
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
Proved oil and gas reserves are those quantities of oil and gas, which, by analysis of geoscience and engineering data, can be
estimated with reasonable certainty to be economically producible – from a given date forward, from known reservoirs, and under
existing economic conditions, operating methods, and government regulations – prior to the time at which contracts providing the
right to operate expire, unless evidence indicates that renewal is reasonably certain, regardless of whether deterministic or
probabilistic methods are used for the estimation. The project to extract the hydrocarbons must have commenced or the operator
must be reasonably certain that it will commence the project within a reasonable time.
The area of the reservoir considered as proved includes all of the following: (a) the area identified by drilling and limited by fluid
contacts, if any, and (b) adjacent undrilled portions of the reservoir that can, with reasonable certainty, be judged to be continuous
with it and to contain economically producible oil or gas on the basis of available geoscience and engineering data. In the
absence of data on fluid contacts, proved quantities in a reservoir are limited by the lowest known hydrocarbons as seen in a well
penetration unless geoscience, engineering, or performance data and reliable technology establish a lower contact with
reasonable certainty.
Reserves that can be produced economically through application of improved recovery techniques (including but not limited to,
fluid injection) are included in the proved classification when both of the following occur: (a) successful testing by a pilot project in
an area of the reservoir with properties no more favorable than in the reservoir as a whole, the operation of an installed program
in the reservoir of an analogous reservoir, or other evidence of reliable technology establishes the reasonable certainty of the
engineering analysis on which the project or program was based, and (b) the project has been approved for development by all
necessary parties and entities, including governmental entities.
Existing economic conditions include prices and costs at which economic productivity from a reservoir is to be determined. The
price shall be the average price during the 12-month period prior to the ending date of the period covered by the report,
determined as an unweighted arithmetic average of the first-day-of-the-month price for each month within such period, unless
prices are defined by contractual arrangements, excluding escalations based upon future conditions.
Proved developed oil and gas reserves are proved reserves that can be expected to be recovered: (i) through existing wells with
existing equipment and operating methods or in which the cost of the required equipment is relatively minor compared to the
costs of a new well; and (ii) through installed extraction equipment and infrastructure operational at the time of the reserve
estimate if the extraction is by means not involving a well.
Proved undeveloped oil and gas reserves are proved reserves that are expected to be recovered from new wells on undrilled
acreage, or from existing wells where a relatively major expenditure is required for recompletion. Reserves on undrilled acreage
shall be limited to those directly offsetting development spacing areas that are reasonably certain of production when drilled,
unless evidence using reliable technology exists that establishes reasonable certainty of economic productivity at greater
distances. Undrilled locations can be classified as having undeveloped reserves only if a development plan has been adopted
indicating that they are scheduled to be drilled within five years, unless the specific circumstances, justify a longer time. Under no
circumstances shall estimates for undeveloped reserves be attributable to any acreage for which an application of fluid injection
or other improved recovery technique is contemplated, unless such techniques have been proved effective by actual projects in
the same reservoir or an analogous reservoir, or by other evidence using reliable technology establishing reasonable certainty.
“Prepared” reserves are those quantities of reserves which were prepared by an independent petroleum consultant. “Audited”
reserves are those quantities of revenues which were estimated by the Company’s employees and audited by an independent
petroleum consultant. An audit is an examination of a company’s proved oil and gas reserves and net cash flow by an
independent petroleum consultant that is conducted for the purpose of expressing an opinion as to whether such estimates, in
aggregate, are reasonable and have been determined using methods and procedures widely accepted within the industry and in
accordance with SEC rules.
Estimates of the Company’s oil and natural gas reserves and present values at March 31, 2016 and 2015 were prepared by
Netherland, Sewell & Associates Inc., independent reserve engineers.
76
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
Oil And Gas Reserves
The following table sets forth our net proved oil and gas reserves, including the changes therein at March 31, 2016 and 2015.
Net Proved Developed And Undeveloped Oil Reserves – (UNAUDITED):
Natural
  Gas
  (MMcf) [1]
Estimated proved reserves at April 1, 2014
Purchase of proved reserves [2]
Production
Disposition of properties
 
Estimated proved reserves at March 31, 2015   488
   76
Purchase of proved reserves [3]
Revisions of previous estimates
   (425
   (16
Production
   -
Disposition of properties
 
    
Estimated proved reserves at March 31, 2016   123
Oil
 (MBbls)
 
 (unaudited)  (unaudited) 
  
 
 
   -
 
   488
 
   -
   -
)  
)
-
-
-
-
 
-
-
-
-
-
 
-
Net Proved Oil And Gas Reserves Consisted Of The Following At March 31, 2016 and 2015:
Proved developed reserves:
March 31, 2015
March 31, 2016
104
   123
-
    -
Proved undeveloped reserves:
    -
March 31, 2015
    -
March 31, 2016
 
     
Base pricing, before adjustments for contractual differentials:   $/bbl WTI Posted     
March 31, 2015
384
   -
$0.00
$79.21
March 31, 2016
[1] Mboe is based on a ratio of 6 Mcf to 1 barrel.
$42.77
$0.00
[2] The Company purchased Western Interior Oil and Gas Corporation at March 31, 2015.
[3] The Company purchased the Cole Creek properties in Wyoming effective January 1, 2016.
77
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
Results Of Operations For Oil And Gas Producing Activities For The Years Ended March 31, 2016 and 2015:
2015
 
  (unaudited)  
 
 
  $-
Revenue
 
     
Expenses:
    30,089
 
Production costs
Depreciation, depletion, amortization and valuation allowance   14,942,000     6,681
 
    1,444,742  
Exploration
   4,705
    
 
     
 
Results of operations of oil and gas producing activities
 $(14,939,378) $(1,481,512)
Year Ended March 31,
 2016
 (unaudited)
 $547,000
    
   539,673
Cost Incurred For Oil And Gas Property Acquisition, Exploration And Development Activities:
Year Ended March 31,
2015
2016
 
 (unaudited)  (unaudited)  
 
 
Property acquisition:    
 $1,285,313  $10,003,625 
Proved
   154,214     8,042,728  
Unproved
    1,444,742  
   4,705
Exploration
 
    45,263
   -
Development
 
    
     
 
Total costs incurred  $1,444,232  $19,536,358
78
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
Aggregate Capitalized Costs
Capitalized costs relating to oil and gas activities for the years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015 are as follows:
March 31,
 
 2016
 
 
 (unaudited)   (unaudited)  
Proved
 $11,368,626  $10,003,625 
Unproved
   4,745,917     8,087,991  
Total capitalized costs
   16,114,543    18,091,616 
 
    
 
Accumulated depreciation, depletion, and valuation allowance   14,495,132    2,912,155  
Net capitalized costs
 $1,619,411   $15,179,461
2015
Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net Cash Flows
Information with respect to the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to proved reserves is
summarized below. The price used to estimate the reserves is held constant over the life of the reserve. Future production and
development costs are derived based on current costs assuming continuation of existing economic conditions.
The discounted future net cash flows related to proved oil and gas reserves at March 31, 2016 and 2015 (in millions):
March 31,
 
 
 2016   2015  
 
 $4.29  $31.61 
Future cash inflows
    
 
Less future costs:
   3.24    15.94 
Production
   0.88    6.67  
Development and abandonment
   -
 
Income taxes [1]
   0.17    9.00  
Future net cash flows
10% discount factor
   -
    (6.58 )
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows $0.17  $2.42
-
[1] No income tax provision is included in the standardized measure calculation shown above as the Company does not project
to be taxable or pay cash income taxes based on its available tax assets and tax assets generated in the development of its
reserves because the tax basis of its oil and gas properties and NOL carryforwards exceed the amount of discounted future net
earnings.
79
T-REX OIL, INC. AND SUBISIDIARIES
Notes To The Consolidated Financial Statements
March 31, 2016 And 2015
Changes in Discounted Future Net Cash Flows
The following summarizes the principal sources of change in the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows
during the years ended March 31, 2016 and 2015 (in millions):
Year Ended March 31, 
 
 
 2016
 
 
 $ 2.81
Beginning of the period
   0.69
 
Purchase of reserves
 
(3.32
Changes in costs and prices
  
 
(0.01
Sales of oil and natural gas produced during the period, net of production costs  
 
  
 
 
End of period
 $ 0.17
2015
   $ -
     2.81
)   
)   
    
   $ 2.81
-
-
80
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this
report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
T-REX OIL, INC.
 
 
 
Dated: August 11, 2016
By:/s/ Donald Walford
Donald Walford, Chief Executive Officer & Acting
Chief Financial Officer
 (Principal Executive Officer)
By:/s/ Kristi J. Kampmann
  Kristi J. Kampmann, Chief Accounting Officer
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons
on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the date indicated.
Dated: August 11, 2016
T-REX OIL, INC.
 
/s/ Donald Walford
Donald Walford, Director
/s/ Jon Nicolaysen
Jon Nicolaysen, Director
 
/s/ Martin Gottlob
Martin Gottlob, Director
 
/s/ Allen Heim
Allen Heim, Director
81