
17 August 2016
ABN 65 086 630 373
ASX ANNOUNCEMENT
Contingent Resources Estimates for the Galoc Oil Field
Highlights:
Independent  assessment  by  ODIN  Reservoir  Consultants  Pty  Ltd  estimates  the
Galoc Field contains 2C Contingent Resources of 7.4 MMstb net to Nido on a Net
Working Interest (NWI) basis.
1C  and  3C  Contingent  Resource  estimates  are  3.3  MMstb  and  13.7  MMstb,
respectively, on a net to Nido on a NWI basis.
 Nido is Operator of the Galoc Joint Venture and has a 55.88%1 working interest in


the Galoc Field.
Nido  Petroleum  Limited  (ASX:NDO)  (“Nido”  or  the  “Company”)  is  pleased  to  provide  the 
results  of  an  independent  Contingent  Resources  assessment  of  the  Galoc  Field  as  at  1 
August 2016, undertaken by ODIN Reservoir Consultants Pty Ltd (ODIN).
This independent assessment updates previous work completed on behalf of the Company 
by  Gaffney  Cline  &  Associates  as  reported  in  the  Company’s  Contingent  Resources 
Statement in Nido’s Annual Report for 20152.
Details of Mid-Galoc Contingent Resources Assessment:
ODIN  has  completed  its  Independent  Resources  assessment  on  the  Galoc  Field  in 
accordance  with  the  SPE/WPC/AAPG/SPEE  Petroleum  Resource  System  (SPE  PRMS) 
Definitions  and Guidelines and the ASX Listing Rules including Listing Rules 5.25 to 5.44 
where applicable.  The tables and information below summarise the Resources for the Galoc 
Field as at 1 August 2016 in accordance with these Requirements.
Technical Review:
The Galoc Field is comprised of the producing Central Field Area (CFA) and the un-drilled 
northern extension Galoc Mid Area (GMA), located in Block C1 of Service Contract 14 (SC 
14C1) in the NW Palawan basin, offshore Philippines.
The CFA is currently under production from Galoc-3/ST, -4, -5 and -6. The SC 14C1 JV are 
currently considering the drilling of the Galoc-7 appraisal well to appraise the GMA.
1 via Nido’s wholly owned subsidiaries Galoc Production Company WLL (Operator) which holds a 33% working 
interest and Nido Production (Galoc) Pty Ltd which holds a 22.88% working interest.
2 Please refer to page 8 of the Company’s Annual Report for 2015 filed on the ASX on 15 March 2016.
1
In  the  case  of  Galoc-7  success,  the  GMA  is  being  considered  as  a  potential  Phase  III 
development  project  using  conventional  horizontal  drilling  and  sub-sea  completion 
technology.
Nido has recently completed an extensive technical review of the existing CFA production 
data  and  GMA  geological  and  reservoir  engineering  data.  This  has  resulted  in  new, 
integrated  static  and  dynamic  reservoir  models  which  have  underpinned  the  Resource 
assessment undertaken by ODIN.
Contingent Resources for the Galoc Field include Resources from the CFA which represent 
continued  production  from  the  existing  wells  beyond  the  current  economic  limit,  and 
Resources  from  the  GMA.  The  preliminary  development  plans  for  the  GMA  are  based  on 
drilling  two  horizontal,  subsea  development  wells  tied  back  to  the  Galoc  Field  Floating 
Production  Storage  and  Offloading  (FPSO)  facilities  with  first  production  in  2019.    The 
development plan  is contingent upon the success of Galoc-7 and as a result  is  still being 
optimised.  It has not yet been submitted to the Philippine authorities for approval.
ODIN has reviewed the CFA production forecasts generated by the Company and formed 
the  opinion  that  the  forecasts  are  representative  of  existing  and  future  production.    The 
Galoc  Field  integrated  static  and  dynamic  reservoir  simulation  models  have  been  used  to 
define the probabilistic range of in-place oil volumes for the GMA. The results of the Galoc
2
Field  dynamic  reservoir  simulation  models  were  used  to  produce  type-curves  which  were 
applied to probabilistically derived oil in place volumes in the GMA to generate production 
forecasts for the range of oil in place outcomes.
Nido  concluded  its  work  by  integrating  the  CFA  and  GMA  production  profiles  and  this 
combined  field  profile  forms  the  basis  of  the  Resource  estimates.    ODIN  has  considered 
production  forecasts  based  on  Nido’s  preliminary  development  plan  to  be  classified  as 
Contingent Resources under the sub-category ‘Development Pending’.
Contingent  Resources  estimated  by  ODIN  and  attributable  to  Nido’s  Net  Working  Interest 
(NWI) in Block C1 of the Service Contract as at 1 August, 2016 are tabulated below:
Contingent 
Resources 
(MMstb)
Galoc
100% Venture
Nido Share (NWI)
1C
5.9
2C
3C
13.3
24.5
1C
3.3
2C
7.4
3C
13.7
Table 1 Galoc Contingent Resources
Notes: 
 
 
1.  No recoverable gas volumes have been reported as there are no plans to recover the gas cap volumes. 
2.  Company Net Contingent Resources in this table are the Company’s approximate Net Entitlement share of the Gross 
Field Resources. They do not represent the Company’s actual Net Entitlement under the terms of the SC that governs 
the asset, which might be lower.
3.  The volumes reported here are “unrisked” in the sense that no adjustment has been made for the risk that the project 
may not go ahead in the form envisaged or may not go ahead at all (i.e. no “Chance of Development” factor has been 
applied).
4.  Contingent Resources should not be aggregated with Reserves because of the different levels of risk involved and the
different basis on which the volumes are determined.
5.  Totals may not sum exactly due to rounding. 
 
 
ODIN has also estimated a “chance of development” for the Galoc Mid Area development 
project, based on consideration of the key contingencies relating to this project. These 
include:
  Success of the Galoc-7 appraisal well in the Galoc Mid Area; 
  The preparation and submission of a Field Development Plan for the Galoc Mid Area; 
  The necessary approvals required from Government and JV partners; 
  The requirement for an extension to the Service Contract; 
  The company’s ability to successfully conduct the work programme; 
  Based on ODIN’s evaluation of these factors, it is considered that there is a high
chance that the development of the Galoc Mid Area will proceed as expected.
It must be appreciated that the Contingent Resources reported herein are unrisked in terms 
of economic uncertainty and commerciality.  There is no certainty that it will be commercially 
viable to produce any portion of the Contingent Resources.
3
Contingent Resources in Galoc were estimated using a deterministic approach and in the 2C 
and 3C cases represent production volumes that extend beyond the current expiry date of 
the Service Contract. 
   
 
Qualified Reserves and Resources Evaluator Statement 
 
 
In  accordance  with  ASX  Listing  Rule  5.42,  the  Company  confirms  that  the  hydrocarbon 
resources information contained in this document in relation to the Galoc Field is based on 
and fairly represents information prepared by Odin Reservoir Consultants Pty Ltd under the 
supervision  of  Mr  David  Lim.  Mr  Lim  holds  a  B.Sc.  (Hons)  and  a  M.Sc.  (Petroleum 
Engineering), is a member of the Society of Petroleum Engineers (SPE) and has 30 years of 
international reservoir  engineering  experience  in  Europe,  North and  South  America,  North 
and West Africa, Middle East, Asia and Australasia. Mr Lim is an employee and Director of 
Odin  Reservoir  Consultants  Pty  Ltd  and  is  not  an  employee  of  the  Company.    Mr  Lim 
consented  in writing to the inclusion of the hydrocarbon resources information in the form 
and  context  in  which  it  appears  in  this  release.    The  hydrocarbon  resources  information 
contained in this document does not comply with Canadian or US standards of disclosure for 
oil and gas.   
 
 
For further information please contact: 
 
 
Dr Mike Fischer 
Managing Director 
+61 8 9474 0000 
reception@nido.com.au
4