
HUAKAN INTERNATIONAL MINING INC.
NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETING
TO BE HELD ON APRIL 17, 2014
AND
MANAGEMENT INFORMATION CIRCULAR
Concerning a special meeting to approve the proposed amalgamation of
HUAKAN INTERNATIONAL MINING INC.
– and –
0996059 B.C. LTD.
a corporation owned by Hong Kong Huakan Investment Co., Limited, Sun Luck Asia Investment Limited and
Power Best Resources Inc.
MARCH 17, 2014
This document requires your immediate attention.  If you are in doubt as to how to deal with it, 
you should consult your investment dealer, broker, bank manager or other professional advisor.
HUAKAN INTERNATIONAL MINING INC.
March 17, 2014
To the shareholders of Huakan International Mining Inc.:
On behalf of the board of directors of Huakan International Mining Inc. (the “Corporation”), I invite you to a special 
meeting  (the  “Meeting”)  of  holders  of  the  Corporation’s  common  shares  (the  “Common  Shares”)  to  be  held  on 
April 17,  2014  at  10:00 a.m.  (Vancouver 
Inc. 
(“Computershare”) located at 510 Burrard Street, 2nd Floor, Vancouver, B.C., V6C 3B9.
the  offices  of  Computershare
time)  at
Investor  Services
The purpose of the Meeting will be to ask our shareholders to approve a proposed going private transaction by way of 
an amalgamation (the “Amalgamation”) of the Corporation with 0996059 B.C. Ltd. (“Newco”), a corporation owned 
by Hong Kong Huakan Investment Co., Limited (“Hong Kong Huakan”), Sun Luck Asia Investment Limited (“Sun 
Luck”)  and  Power  Best  Resources  Inc.  (“Power  Best”,  and  together  with  Hong  Kong  Huakan  and  Sun  Luck,  the 
“Acquirors”)  and  to  adopt  the  Amalgamation  Agreement  (attached  as  Appendix B  to  the  Circular)  between  the 
Corporation and Newco.  The Amalgamation and the adoption of the Amalgamation Agreement must be approved at 
the  Meeting  by  at  least  66  and  two  thirds  percent  of  the  votes  cast  by  all  holders  of  Common  Shares  present  or 
represented by proxy at the Meeting.
Upon  the  Amalgamation,  holders  of  Common  Shares  other  than  Sun  Luck,  Power  Best,  Ms.  Shu-Fen  Lee  (the 
“Ongoing  Shareholder”)  and  certain  wholly-owned  subsidiaries  of  Hong  Kong  Huakan  (being  Huakan  Resources 
Inc., Hua Kan International Mining Co., Ltd., Shanchuan Mining Limited and Dashan Mining Limited), will receive, for 
each  Common  Share,  one  Class  A  preferred  share  (“Amalco  Class  A  Preferred  Share”)  of  the  new  corporation 
(“Amalco”)  resulting  from  the  Amalgamation.    On  the  date  of  the  Amalgamation,  each  Amalco  Class  A  Preferred 
Share will be redeemed for CDN $0.50 in cash.  Subsequent to the Amalgamation, Amalco will be a private company 
that  is  wholly-owned,  directly  or  indirectly,  by  the  Acquirors  and  the  Ongoing  Shareholder.    The  attached 
management information circular describes the proposed Amalgamation in detail.  You may wish to consult your tax 
or financial advisor to assist you in considering the Amalgamation.
In order to receive the cash payable upon the completion of the Amalgamation and the redemption of the Amalco 
Class  A  Preferred  Shares,  shareholders  must  complete  and  sign  the  enclosed  letter  of  transmittal  (the  “Letter  of 
Transmittal”) and return it, together with their share certificate(s) and any other required documents and instruments, 
to Computershare, in accordance with the procedure set out in the Letter of Transmittal.  If the Amalgamation is not 
completed, share certificate(s) sent to Computershare will be returned to shareholders. Please refer to “Information 
Regarding  the  Amalgamation  -  Deposit  of  Share  Certificates  and  Redemption  of  Common  Shares”  in  the 
accompanying management information circular for more details.
The  board  of  directors  of  the  Corporation  has  determined  that  the  Amalgamation  is  in  the  best  interests  of  the 
Corporation and is fair, from a financial point of view, to minority shareholders and unanimously recommends that all 
shareholders vote in favour of the special resolution approving the Amalgamation.  Please see “Background to the 
Amalgamation” in the accompanying management information circular for an explanation of how the board 
of  directors  determined  to  make  such  a  recommendation  to  shareholders  to  vote  in  favour  of  the  special 
resolution approving the Amalgamation.
If you are unable to attend the Meeting, we would appreciate your signing and returning the accompanying form of 
proxy for each of your Common Shares so that your vote is recorded.
If shareholders vote at the Meeting to approve the Amalgamation, it is anticipated that the Amalgamation will become 
effective on or about April 28, 2014.
Yours truly,
(signed) “Wenhong Jin” 
Wenhong (Wilson) Jin 
President
HUAKAN INTERNATIONAL MINING INC.
NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS
NOTICE  IS  HEREBY  GIVEN  that  a  special  meeting  (the  “Meeting”)  of  holders  (the  “Shareholders”)  of  common 
shares  (the  “Common  Shares”)  of  Huakan  International  Mining  Inc.  (the  “Corporation”)  will  be  held  on  April 17, 
2014  at  10:00 a.m.  (Vancouver  time)  at  the  offices  of  Computershare  Investor  Services  Inc.  (“Computershare”) 
located at 510 Burrard Street, 2nd Floor, Vancouver, B.C., V6C 3B9, for the following purposes:
(1)
this  notice  of  meeting,  approving,  among  other
to consider and, if deemed advisable, approve a special resolution (the “Amalgamation Resolution”) in the 
form attached as Appendix A to the management information circular (the “Circular”) dated March 17, 2014 
accompanying 
the  amalgamation  (the 
“Amalgamation”) of the Corporation with 0996059 B.C. Ltd. (“Newco”), a corporation owned by Hong Kong 
Huakan Investment Co., Limited, Sun Luck Asia Investment Limited and Power Best Resources Inc. to form 
an  amalgamated  company  (“Amalco”),  upon  the  terms  and  conditions  set  forth  in  the  amalgamation 
agreement (the “Amalgamation Agreement”) between the Corporation and Newco dated March 14, 2014 
attached as Appendix B to the Circular, and the adoption of the Amalgamation Agreement; and
things,
(2)
to transact such other business, including any amendments or variations to the foregoing, as may properly 
come before the Meeting or any adjournment or postponement thereof.
The Amalgamation Resolution must be approved at the Meeting by at least 66 and two thirds percent of the votes 
cast by all holders of Common Shares present or represented by proxy at the Meeting.
Accompanying this notice of meeting are: (i) the Circular; (ii) instruments of proxy and notes thereto; and (iii) the letter 
of transmittal sent to registered Shareholders (the “Letter of Transmittal”).
Copies of the text of the Amalgamation Resolution and the Amalgamation Agreement are attached as Appendix A 
and Appendix B, respectively, to the Circular.  The Circular provides additional information relating to the matters to 
be dealt with at the Meeting and is incorporated into and forms part of this notice of special meeting.
A Shareholder who is unable to attend the Meeting in person and who wishes to ensure that such holder’s Common 
Shares will be voted at the Meeting is requested to complete, sign and date the accompanying form of proxy for each 
of your Common Shares (enclosed) and deliver it by hand or by mail in accordance with the instructions set out in the 
form of proxy and the Circular.  It is expected that the solicitation will be primarily by mail; however, directors, officers 
and employees of the Corporation may also solicit proxies by telephone.  In order to be effective, a proxy must be 
mailed so as to reach or be deposited with Computershare not later than 10:00 a.m. (Vancouver time) on April 15, 
2014 or, if the Meeting is adjourned or postponed, before 10:00 a.m. (Vancouver time) on the second last business 
day before any adjournment or postponement thereof.
In order to receive the cash payable upon the completion of the Amalgamation and the redemption of the Class A 
preferred shares of Amalco, shareholders must complete and sign the enclosed Letter of Transmittal and return it, 
together  with  their  share  certificate(s)  and  any  other  required  documents  and  instruments,  to  Computershare,  in 
accordance  with  the  procedure  set  out  in  the  Letter  of  Transmittal.    If  the  Amalgamation  is  not  completed,  share 
certificate(s)  sent  to  Computershare  will  be  returned  to  shareholders.  Please  refer  to  “Information  Regarding  the 
Amalgamation - Deposit of Share Certificates and Redemption of Common Shares” in the Circular for more details.
Pursuant to the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia) (the “BCBCA”), a registered Shareholder may 
dissent  in  respect  of  the  Amalgamation  Resolution.    If  the  Amalgamation  is  completed,  dissenting 
Shareholders who comply with the procedures set forth in the BCBCA will be entitled to be paid the fair value 
of  their  Common  Shares.    This  dissent  right  is  summarized  in  Appendix D  to  the  Circular,  which  also 
includes the text from Part 8 Division 2 of the BCBCA.  Failure to comply strictly with the requirements set 
forth in Part 8 Division 2 of the BCBCA may result in the loss or unavailability of any right to dissent.
DATED at Vancouver, British Columbia, this 17th day of March, 2014.
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
(signed) “Wenhong Jin” 
Wenhong (Wilson) Jin 
President
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTERESTS OF DIRECTORS AND SENIOR 
OFFICERS ............................................................... 15 
PREVIOUS PURCHASES AND SALES .................. 16 
PREVIOUS DISTRIBUTIONS .................................. 16 
PRICE RANGE AND TRADING VOLUME OF 
COMMON SHARES ................................................. 17 
DIVIDEND RECORD AND POLICY ......................... 17 
CERTAIN CANADIAN FEDERAL INCOME TAX 
CONSIDERATIONS ................................................. 17 
Minority Shareholders Resident in Canada .......... 18 
Minority Shareholders Not Resident in Canada ... 19 
Other Tax Considerations .................................... 20 
PRIOR VALUATIONS .............................................. 20 
INTEREST OF PERSONS IN THE MATTERS TO BE 
ACTED UPON AT THE MEETING ........................... 20 
INTEREST OF INFORMED PERSONS IN MATERIAL 
TRANSACTIONS ..................................................... 21 
MATERIAL CHANGES IN THE AFFAIRS OF THE 
CORPORATION ...................................................... 21 
DIRECTORS’ AND OFFICERS’ INSURANCE AND 
INDEMNIFICATION ................................................. 21 
OTHER BUSINESS ................................................. 21 
OTHER MATERIAL FACTS ..................................... 21 
AUDITOR, TRANSFER AGENT AND REGISTRAR 21 
SOLICITATION ........................................................ 21 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION .................................. 21 
CERTIFICATE OF THE CORPORATION ................ 23 
CONSENT ............................................................... 24
Appendix A – Special Resolution ........................... A-1 
Appendix B – Amalgamation Agreement ............... B-1 
Appendix C – Summary of Fairness Opinion. ........ C-1 
Appendix D – Dissent Provisions of the BCBCA .... D-1
GLOSSARY OF TERMS ............................................ 1 
MANAGEMENT INFORMATION CIRCULAR ............ 1 
INFORMATION CONTAINED IN THIS CIRCULAR ... 1 
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING 
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS ...................... 1 
NOTICE TO SHAREHOLDERS IN THE UNITED 
STATES ..................................................................... 2 
INFORMATION REGARDING ORGANIZATION AND 
CONDUCT OF MEETING .......................................... 2 
Business of the Meeting ......................................... 2 
Solicitation of Proxies............................................. 3 
Appointment and Revocation of Proxies ................ 3 
Non-Registered Holders ........................................ 4 
Exercise of Discretion ............................................ 5
VOTING SHARES AND PRINCIPAL HOLDERS 
THEREOF .................................................................. 5 
SPECIAL BUSINESS TO BE ACTED UPON AT THE 
MEETING ................................................................... 5 
INFORMATION REGARDING THE AMALGAMATION5 
Background to the Corporation .............................. 5 
Background to the Amalgamation .......................... 6 
Recommendation of the Board of Directors ........... 7 
Prior Offers ............................................................ 7 
Lock-up Agreements .............................................. 8 
Ongoing Shareholder ............................................. 8 
Regulatory Matters ................................................ 8 
Shareholder Approval Required ............................. 8 
Right to Dissent ..................................................... 8 
Exemption from Formal Valuation Requirement .... 9 
Fairness Opinion .................................................... 9 
Options .................................................................. 9 
Terms of the Amalgamation ................................. 10 
The Amalgamation Agreement ............................ 10 
TSX-V Approval ................................................... 14 
Failure to Complete Proposed Transaction .......... 14 
Expenses of the Proposed Amalgamation ........... 14 
Deposit of Share Certificates and Redemption of 
Common Shares .................................................. 14 
Lost Certificates ................................................... 15 
Effect of the Amalgamation on Markets and 
Listing .................................................................. 15 
INFORMATION CONCERNING NEWCO ................ 15
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
“Affiliate” means an affiliated body corporate within the meaning of section 2(1) of the BCBCA.
“allowable  capital  loss”  has  the  meaning  ascribed  to  it  in  “Certain  Canadian  Federal  Income  Tax
Considerations”.
“Acquiror Group” means, collectively, certain Shareholders including Sun Luck, Power Best and the wholly-
owned subsidiaries of Hong Kong Huakan (being Huakan Resources Inc., Hua Kan International Mining Co., Ltd., 
Shanchuan Mining Limited and Dashan Mining Limited).
“Acquirors” has the meaning ascribed to it in “Information Regarding Organization and Conduct of Meeting
– Business of the Meeting”.
“Amalco” means the new corporation resulting from the Amalgamation.
“Amalco Common Share” means a common share in the capital of Amalco.
“Amalco Class A Preferred Share” means a Class A preferred share in the capital of Amalco.
“Amalco Class B Preferred Share” means a Class B preferred share in the capital of Amalco.
“Amalgamation” means the amalgamation of the Corporation and Newco substantially upon the terms and
conditions set out in the Amalgamation Agreement.
“Amalgamation  Agreement”  means  the  amalgamation  agreement  entered  into  by  and  between  the 
Corporation  and  Newco  as  of  March  14,  2014,  a  copy  of  which  was  filed  under  the  Corporation’s  profile  on  the 
SEDAR website on March 17, 2014 and is available at www.sedar.com.
“Amalgamation  Resolution”  means  the  special  resolution  in  the  form  attached  as  Appendix A  to  the
Circular.
“BCBCA” means the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia).
“BCSC” means the British Columbia Securities Commission.
“Board of Directors” means the board of directors of the Corporation.
“CDS” means the Canadian Depository for Securities Limited.
“Circular” means this management information circular of the Corporation dated March 17, 2014.
“Common Share” means a common share in the capital of the Corporation.
“Computershare” means Computershare Investor Services Inc.
“Convertible  Loan”  has  the  meaning  set  out  in  “Information  Regarding  Organization  and  Conduct  of
Meeting – Business of the Meeting”.
“Corporation”  means  Huakan  International  Mining  Inc.,  a  corporation  existing  under  the  laws  of  British
Columbia.
“CRA” means the Canada Revenue Agency.
“Depositary”  has  the  meaning  ascribed  to  it  in  “Information  Regarding  the  Amalgamation  –  The
Amalgamation Agreement – Covenants of the Corporation”.
“Dissenting Shareholder” means any registered Shareholder that dissents to the Amalgamation Resolution
in accordance with Part 8 Division 2 of the BCBCA and has not withdrawn their dissent, as further described herein.
2
“Effective Date” means the date on which the Amalgamation will become effective, which the Corporation 
anticipates will be on or before April 28, 2014, or such later date as the Board of Directors and Newco may mutually 
determine.
“Effective Time” means the time at which the Amalgamation becomes effective on the Effective Date, as
mutually agreed by Newco and the Corporation.
“Fairness Opinion” means the fairness opinion dated March 13, 2014 prepared by Semeniuk, a summary
of which is attached as Appendix C to this Circular.
“Hong Kong Huakan” means Hong Kong Huakan Investment Co., Limited.
“Intermediary”  has  the  meaning  ascribed  to  it  in  “Information  Regarding  Organization  and  Conduct  of
Meeting – Non-Registered Holders”.
“Letter of Transmittal” means the letter of transmittal included in the Meeting Materials.
“Management” means the management of the Corporation.
“Meeting”  means  the  special  meeting  of  holders  of  Common  Shares  to  be  held  on  April 17,  2014  at
10:00 a.m. (Vancouver time).
“Meeting Materials” means the Notice, Circular, Letter of Transmittal and forms of proxy.
“MI 61-101” means MI 61-101 – Protection of Minority Securityholders in Special Transactions.
“Minority  Shareholders”  means  Shareholders  other  than  the  members  of  the  Acquiror  Group  and  the
Ongoing Shareholder.
“Newco” means 0996059 B.C. Ltd., a corporation existing under the laws of British Columbia.
“Newco Common Share” means a common share in the capital of Newco.
“NI 54-101” means National Instrument 54-101 – Communication with Beneficial Owners of Securities of a
Reporting Issuer.
“Non-Resident  Shareholder”  has  the  meaning  ascribed  to  it  in  “Certain  Canadian  Federal  Income  Tax
Considerations”.
“Non-Registered  Holder”  has  the  meaning  ascribed  to  it  in  “Information  Regarding  Organization  and
Conduct of Meeting – Non-Registered Holders”.
“Non-Voting Share” means a non-voting share in the capital of the Corporation.
“Notice” means the notice of special meeting accompanying the Circular.
“Ongoing  Shareholder”  means  Ms.  Shu-Fen  Lee,  a  Shareholder  who,  following  the  Effective  Time,  will
own Amalco Common Shares.
“Proposal” has the meaning ascribed to it in “Information Regarding the Amalgamation – Background to the
Amalgamation”.
“Proposed  Transaction”  has  the  meaning  ascribed  to  it  in  “Information  Regarding  the  Amalgamation  –
Background to the Amalgamation”.
“Power Best” means Power Best Resources Inc.
“Redemption Amount” means, in respect of each Amalco Class A Preferred Share which will be issued in
exchange for each Common Share held by the Minority Shareholders, $0.50.
“Redemption Time” means effective immediately after the Effective Time.
3
“Resident  Holder”  has
Considerations”.
the  meaning  ascribed
to
it
in  “Certain  Canadian  Federal
Income  Tax
“Semeniuk” means Stephen W. Semeniuk, CFA.
“Shareholders” means the holders of Common Shares.
“Special Committee” means the special committee of independent directors, being Mr. David Bo and Mr.
Garnet Dawson, as appointed by the Board of Directors.
“Sun Luck” means Sun Luck Asia Investment Limited.
“Tax Act” means the Income Tax Act (Canada) and the regulations thereunder.
“Tax Proposals” has the meaning ascribed to it in “Certain Canadian Federal Income Tax Considerations”.
“taxable  capital  gain”  has  the  meaning  ascribed  to  it  in  “Certain  Canadian  Federal  Income  Tax
Considerations”.
“Trust  Amount”  has  the  meaning  ascribed  to  it  in  “Information  Regarding  the  Amalgamation  –  The
Amalgamation Agreement – Covenants of the Corporation”.
“TSX-V” means the TSX Venture Exchange.
MANAGEMENT INFORMATION CIRCULAR
This Circular is furnished in connection with the solicitation of proxies by Management to be voted 
at the Meeting of the Shareholders of the Corporation to be held on April 17, 2014, at 10:00 a.m. (Vancouver 
time)  at  the  offices  of  Computershare  Investor  Services  Inc.  located  at  510  Burrard  Street,  2nd  Floor, 
Vancouver, B.C., V6C 3B9, for the purposes set out in the accompanying Notice.
INFORMATION CONTAINED IN THIS CIRCULAR
Unless  otherwise  indicated,  the  information  contained  in  this  Circular  is  given  as  of  March 17,  2014.    No 
person  has  been  authorized  to  give  any  information  or  to  make  any  representations  in  connection  with  the 
Amalgamation  other  than  those  contained  in  this  Circular  and,  if  given  or  made,  any  such  information  or 
representation must not be relied upon and should not be considered to have been authorized by the Corporation.
This Circular does not constitute the solicitation of an offer to acquire any securities or the solicitation of a 
proxy by any person in any jurisdiction in which such solicitation is not authorized or in which the person making such 
solicitation is not qualified to do so or to any person to whom it is unlawful to make such solicitation.
Shareholders should not construe the contents of this Circular as legal, tax or financial advice and 
should consult with their own professional advisors as to the relevant legal, tax, financial or other matters in 
connection with the Meeting and the transactions described herein.
All capitalized terms used herein but not otherwise defined herein have the meanings set forth under the
“Glossary of Terms”.
Unless otherwise indicated, all dollar references in this Circular are to Canadian dollars.
All  summaries  of,  and  references  to  the  Amalgamation  Agreement  in  this  Circular  are  qualified  in  their 
entirety  by  reference  to  the  complete  text  of  the  Amalgamation  Agreement,  a  copy  of  which  is  attached  as 
Appendix B to this Circular.  You are urged to carefully read the full text of the Amalgamation Agreement.
This  Circular  describes  the  items  to  be  voted  on  at  the  Meeting  and  the  voting  process.    Please  see 
“Information Regarding Organization and Conduct of Meeting” for an explanation of how you can vote on the matters 
to be considered at the Meeting, whether or not you intend to attend the Meeting.
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Certain  statements  included  in  this  Circular  constitute  “forward-looking  statements”  including,  without 
limitation, statements concerning the value of the Common Shares and estimated transaction costs.  All statements, 
other than statements of historical fact, included in this Circular that address future activities, events, developments or 
financial performance,  are forward-looking statements.  These forward-looking  statements can  be  identified  by the 
use of forward-looking words such as “may”, “should”, “will”, “could”, “expect”, “intend”, “plan”, “estimate”, “anticipate”, 
“believe”, “future” or “continue” or the negatives thereof or similar variations.  These forward-looking statements are 
based certain assumptions and analyses made by the Corporation and its management in light of their experiences 
and  their  perception  of  historical  trends,  current  conditions  and  expected  future  developments,  as  well  as  other 
factors they believe are appropriate in the circumstances.  This Circular may also contain forward-looking statements 
specifically relating to the Amalgamation and Newco, including timing, terms and required steps and the likelihood of 
the  closing  of  the  Amalgamation,  the  success  of  any  other  of  the  Corporation’s  strategic  initiatives,  growth  and 
profitability prospects, and the Corporation’s position in the market and future opportunities therein.  Shareholders are 
cautioned not to put undue reliance on such forward-looking statements, which reflect the analysis of Management 
only as of the date of this Circular and are not a guarantee of performance.  Such forward-looking statements are 
subject to a number of uncertainties, assumptions  and  other factors, many of  which  are outside the  control  of the 
Corporation  that  could  cause  actual  results  to  differ  materially  from  those  expressed  or  implied  by  such 
forward-looking statements.  All forward-looking statements are expressly qualified in their entirety by the cautionary 
statements set forth above.
2
The Corporation undertakes no obligation, and expressly disclaims any intention or obligation, to update or 
revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as 
required by applicable law.
NOTICE TO SHAREHOLDERS IN THE UNITED STATES
The solicitation of proxies and the transactions contemplated in this Circular involve securities of an issuer 
located  in  Canada  and  are  being  effected  in  accordance  with  Canadian  corporate  and  securities  laws.  The  proxy 
solicitation rules under the U.S. Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, are not applicable to the Corporation 
or this solicitation and this solicitation has been prepared in accordance with disclosure requirements under Canadian 
securities  laws.  Shareholders  should  be  aware  that  disclosure  requirements  under  Canadian  securities  laws  may 
differ from disclosure requirements under U.S. securities laws.
The enforcement by investors of civil liabilities under U.S. federal securities laws may be affected adversely 
by the fact that the Corporation is incorporated under the laws of the Province of British Columbia, the majority of its 
directors and executive officers are not residents of the United States and a substantial portion of its assets and the 
assets  of  such  persons  are  located  outside  the  United  States.  Shareholders  may  not  be  able  to  sue  a  foreign 
company or its officers or directors in a foreign court for violations of U.S. federal securities laws. It may be difficult to 
compel a Canadian company and its officers and directors to subject themselves to a judgment by a U.S. court.
THE  TRANSACTIONS  DESCRIBED
IN  THIS  CIRCULAR  HAVE  NOT  BEEN  APPROVED  OR 
DISAPPROVED BY ANY SECURITIES REGULATORY AUTHORITY NOR HAS ANY SECURITIES REGULATORY 
AUTHORITY PASSED ON THE FAIRNESS OR MERITS OF SUCH TRANSACTIONS OR UPON THE ACCURACY 
OR  ADEQUACY OF THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN THIS CIRCULAR.  ANY REPRESENTATION TO THE 
CONTRARY IS A CRIMINAL OFFENCE.
Shareholders who are U.S. persons should be aware that the transactions contemplated herein may have 
tax consequences both in Canada and in the United States. Accordingly, Shareholders should consult their own 
tax advisors with respect to their particular circumstances, including the application and effect of the income 
and other tax laws of any country, province, territory, state or local tax authority.
INFORMATION REGARDING ORGANIZATION AND CONDUCT OF MEETING
Business of the Meeting
At  the  Meeting,  Shareholders  will  be  asked  to  consider  and,  if  deemed  advisable,  approve  the 
Amalgamation Resolution, in the form attached as Appendix A to this Circular, approving the proposed Amalgamation 
of the Corporation and Newco, a corporation owned by Hong Kong Huakan, Sun Luck and Power Best (together, the 
“Acquirors”) to form Amalco, upon the terms and conditions set forth in the Amalgamation Agreement dated March 
14,  2014  between  the  Corporation  and  Newco  attached  as  Appendix B  to  this  Circular,  and,  if  deemed  advisable, 
adopt  the  Amalgamation  Agreement.    The  Corporation  is  not  aware  of  any  other  matters  to  be  considered  at  the 
Meeting.  However, you may also vote on any other business that may properly come before the Meeting.
Pursuant  to  the  Amalgamation  Agreement,  provided  that  the  Amalgamation  Resolution  is  passed,  on  the
Effective Date, at the Effective Time and without any further act or formality:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
the Corporation and Newco will be amalgamated and continue as Amalco under the name “Huakan 
International Mining Inc.”
each  of  the  issued  and  outstanding  Common  Shares  held  by  Minority  Shareholders  (other  than 
Dissenting Shareholders) shall be exchanged for one Amalco Class A Preferred Share, and such 
Amalco Class A Preferred Shares shall be deemed to be redeemed immediately after the Effective 
Time for the Redemption Amount in accordance with the articles of Amalco without further action 
by such Minority Shareholders;
each of the issued and outstanding Common Shares held by members of the Acquiror Group shall 
be exchanged for one Amalco Common Share;
each of the issued and outstanding Common Shares owned by the Ongoing Shareholder shall be 
exchanged for one Amalco Common Share;
3
(e)
each  of  the  issued  and  outstanding  Newco  Common  Shares  held  by  the  Acquirors  shall  be 
exchanged for one Amalco Class B Preferred Share, and such Amalco Class B Preferred Shares 
shall be immediately redeemed for their redemption price of $0.001 per Amalco Class B Preferred 
Share after the Effective Time in accordance with the articles of Amalco; and
(f)
all the unissued share capital of the Corporation and Newco shall be cancelled.
In  addition,  Newco  has  represented  to  the  Corporation  that  the  aggregate  Redemption  Amount  of 
$1,632,646.50  payable  pursuant  to  the  Amalgamation  and  transactions  contemplated  under  the  Amalgamation 
Agreement is and shall remain available to Newco and Amalco so that Amalco shall be in a position to redeem the 
Amalco  Class  A  Preferred  Shares  in  exchange  for  all  the  Common  Shares  owned  by  the  Minority  Shareholders 
pursuant to the Amalgamation.  Such amount is to be made available to Newco by way of a convertible loan which 
immediately after the Effective Time will be converted into Amalco Common Shares and the Acquirors shall be issued 
such number of Amalco Common Shares that is equal to the outstanding principal amount of such convertible loan 
divided by $0.50 per share (the “Convertible Loan”).
Upon the completion of the above, Amalco will be a corporation wholly-owned, directly or indirectly, by the
Acquirors and the Ongoing Shareholder.
At  the  Effective  Time,  Dissenting  Shareholders  will  be  entitled  to  be  paid  in  cash  the  fair  value  of  their 
Common Shares provided that they follow the dissent procedures set out in the BCBCA.  Please see “Information 
Regarding the Amalgamation - Right to Dissent” and Appendix D to this Circular.
For more details on the Amalgamation Agreement, please see “Information Regarding the Amalgamation –
The Amalgamation Agreement”.
Solicitation of Proxies
The solicitation of proxies on behalf of management of the Corporation will be solely by mail.  All costs of
this solicitation will be borne by the Corporation.
Appointment and Revocation of Proxies
The individuals named in the accompanying forms of proxy for each of your Common Shares, as applicable, 
are Ms. Fiona Leung, the Chief Financial Officer of the Corporation and Mr. David Bo, a director of the Corporation. A 
Shareholder eligible to vote at the Meeting has the right to appoint a person or company, who need not be a 
Shareholder, to attend and act for the Shareholder and vote on the Shareholder’s behalf at the Meeting other 
than either of the persons designated in the accompanying forms of proxy, and may do so either by inserting 
the  name  of  that  other  person  in  the  blank  space  provided  in  the  accompanying  forms  of  proxy  or  by 
completing another suitable form of proxy.
Shareholders are requested to complete, sign and return the accompanying form of proxy for each of their 
Common Shares for use at the Meeting if they are not able to attend the Meeting personally.  To be effective, forms 
of proxy must be received by the Corporation’s registrar and transfer agent, Computershare, no later than 48 hours 
(excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) before the time of the Meeting (being by 10:00 a.m., Vancouver time, 
on  Tuesday,  April 15,  2014)  or  any  adjournment  thereof  at  which  the  proxy  is  to  be  used.    Proxies  delivered  by 
regular mail should be addressed to Computershare Investor Services Inc., 8th Floor, 100 University Avenue, Toronto, 
Ontario,  M5J 2Y1,  Attention: Proxy  Department.    Proxies  delivered  by  facsimile  must  be  sent  to  Computershare 
Investor  Services  Inc.,  Attention:  Proxy  Department,  at  416-263-9524  or  toll  free  1-866-249-7775.    To  vote  by 
Internet, visit the website address shown on the forms of proxy provided.  Follow the online voting instructions given 
to you and vote over the Internet referring to your holder account number and proxy access number provided on the 
forms of proxy that  were delivered to  you.  To vote by telephone, call the toll-free number shown  on  the forms of 
proxy.  Using a touch-tone telephone to select your voting preferences, follow the instructions of the “vote voice” and 
refer to your holder account number and proxy access number provided on the forms of proxy that were delivered to 
you.  Note that voting by telephone is not available if you wish to appoint a person as a proxy other than someone 
named on the forms of proxy.
A Shareholder who has given a proxy may revoke it by an instrument in writing duly executed and delivered 
either to the registered office of the Corporation at any time up to and including the last business day that precedes 
the day of the Meeting or, if the Meeting is adjourned, that precedes any reconvening thereof, or to the chairman of 
the Meeting on the day of the Meeting or of any reconvening thereof, or in any other manner provided by law.  A 
revocation of a proxy will not affect a matter on which a vote is taken before the revocation.  Non-Registered Holders
4
(as defined below) who wish to revoke their proxy must arrange for their respective Intermediary (as defined below) to 
revoke the proxy on their behalf within the time specified by such Intermediary.
Non-Registered Holders
Only registered Shareholders or  duly  appointed proxyholders  are  permitted to vote at the Meeting.   Most 
Shareholders of the Corporation are “non-registered” Shareholders because the Common Shares they own are not 
registered in their names but are instead registered in the name of the brokerage firm, bank or trust company through 
which they purchased the Common Shares.  More particularly, a person is not a registered Shareholder in respect of 
Common Shares which are held on behalf of that person (the “Non-Registered Holder”) but which are registered 
either: (a) in the name of an intermediary (an “Intermediary”) that the Non-Registered Holder deals with in respect of 
the  Common  Shares  (Intermediaries  include,  among  others,  banks,  trust  companies,  securities  dealers  or  brokers 
and directors or administrators of self-administered RRSPs, RRIFs, RESPs and similar plans); or (b) in the name of a 
clearing agency (such as CDS) of which the Intermediary is a participant.  In accordance with the requirements of 
NI 54-101,  the  Corporation  has  distributed  copies  of  the  Meeting  Materials  to  the  clearing  agencies  and 
Intermediaries for onward distribution to Non-Registered Holders.  The Corporation does not intend to pay for delivery 
of the Meeting Materials to objecting beneficial holders (as defined in NI 54-101), and as a result objecting beneficial 
holders will not receive the Meeting Materials unless their intermediary assumes the cost of delivery.
Intermediaries  are  required  to  forward  the  Meeting  Materials  to  Non-Registered  Holders  unless  a 
Non-Registered Holder has waived the right to receive them.  Very often, Intermediaries will use service companies 
(such as Broadridge Financial Solutions, Inc.) to forward the Meeting Materials to Non-Registered Holders.
Generally, Non-Registered Holders who have not waived the right to receive Meeting Materials will receive 
either  a  voting  instruction  form  or,  less  frequently,  a  form  of  proxy.    Non-Registered  Holders  should  follow  the 
procedures set out below, depending on which type of form they receive.
(a)
(b)
Voting  Instruction  Form.    In  most  cases,  a  Non-Registered  Holder  will  receive,  as  part  of  the 
Meeting  Materials,  a  voting  instruction  form  which  is  not  signed  by  the  Intermediary,  and  which, 
when  properly  completed  and  signed  by  the  Non-Registered  Holder  and  returned  to  the 
Intermediary  or  its  service  company,  will  constitute  voting  instructions  (often  called  a  “proxy 
authorization  form”)  which  the  Intermediary  must  follow.    If  the  Non-Registered  Holder  does  not 
wish to attend and vote at the Meeting in person (or have another person attend and vote on the 
Non-Registered  Holder’s  behalf),  the  voting  instruction  form  must  be  completed,  signed  and 
returned  in  accordance  with  the  directions  on  the  form.    Voting  instruction  forms  in  some  cases 
permit  the  completion  of  the  voting  instruction  form  by  telephone  or  through  the  Internet.    If  a 
Non-Registered Holder wishes to attend and vote at the Meeting in person (or have another person 
attend and vote on the Non-Registered Holder’s behalf), the Non-Registered Holder must strike out 
the names of the persons named in the form and insert the Non-Registered Holder’s (or such other 
person’s) name in the blank space provided and complete, sign and return the voting instruction 
form in accordance with the directions provided.  A form of proxy giving the right to attend and vote 
will then be forwarded to the Non-Registered Holder.
Form  of  Proxy.    Less  frequently,  a  Non-Registered  Holder  will  receive,  as  part  of  the  Meeting 
Materials,  a  form  of  proxy  which  has  already  been  signed  by  the  Intermediary  (typically  by  a 
facsimile, stamped signature), which is restricted as to the number of Common Shares beneficially 
owned by the Non-Registered Holder but which is otherwise not completed.  If the Non-Registered 
Holder does not wish to attend and vote at the Meeting in person (or have another person attend 
and  vote  on  the  Non-Registered  Holder’s  behalf),  the  Non-Registered  Holder  must  complete  the 
form  of  proxy  and  deposit  it  with  Computershare  Investor  Services  Inc.  as  provided  above.    If  a 
Non-Registered Holder wishes to attend and vote at the Meeting in person (or have another person 
attend and vote on the Non-Registered Holder’s behalf), the Non-Registered Holder must strike out 
the  names  of  the  persons  named  in  the  proxy  and  insert  the  Non-Registered  Holder’s  (or  such 
other person’s) name in the blank space provided.  Because the Intermediary has already signed 
the  form  of  proxy,  this  form  of  proxy  is  not  required  to  be  signed  by  the  Non-Registered  Holder 
when submitting the proxy.
In either case, the purpose of this procedure is to permit Non-Registered Holders to direct the voting of the 
Common Shares which they beneficially own.  Should a Non-Registered Holder who receives one of the above forms 
wish to vote at the Meeting or have someone else vote on his or her behalf, the Non-Registered Holder should strike 
out the names of the management proxy nominees named in the form and insert the Non-Registered Holder’s name 
or nominee’s name in the blank space provided.  In either case, Non-Registered Holders should carefully follow
5
the  instructions  of  their  Intermediary,  including  those  regarding  when  and  where  the  proxy  or  proxy 
authorization form is to be delivered.
Exercise of Discretion
On a poll the nominees named in the accompanying forms of proxy for each of your Common Shares will 
vote  or  withhold  from  voting  the  Common  Shares  represented  thereby  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  of  the 
Shareholder on any ballot that may be called for.  If a Shareholder specifies a choice with respect to any matter to be 
acted  upon,  the  Common  Shares  will  be  voted  accordingly.    The  proxy  will  confer  discretionary  authority  on  the 
nominees named therein with respect to:
(a)
(b)
each matter or group of matters identified therein for which a choice is not specified; and
any other matter, including amendments to any of the foregoing, as may properly come before the 
Meeting or any adjournment thereof.
In respect of a matter for which a choice is not specified in the proxy, or unless otherwise provided 
for  in  the  proxy,  the  nominees  named  in  the  accompanying  forms  of  proxy will  vote  the  Common  Shares 
represented by the proxy for the approval of such matter.
As of the date of this Circular, the Management knows of no amendment, variation or other matter that may 
come before the Meeting, but if any amendment, variation or other matter properly comes before the Meeting each 
nominee intends to vote thereon in accordance with the nominee’s best judgment.
VOTING SHARES AND PRINCIPAL HOLDERS THEREOF
As of the close of business on March 17, 2014, there were 42,451,939 Common Shares outstanding.  Each
Common Share carries the right to one vote per share at the Meeting.
Given the nature of the Amalgamation Resolution, all holders of Common Shares as at the close of business 
on March 13, 2014, the record date established for notice of the Meeting, are entitled to receive notice of and vote at 
the Meeting.
To the knowledge of the directors and executive officers of the Corporation, the only persons or corporations 
that beneficially owned, directly or indirectly, or exercised control or direction over, Common Shares carrying 10% or 
more of the voting rights attached to all outstanding shares of the Corporation as at March 17, 2014 is as follows:
Number and Class of Shares Held 
31,955,223(1)
Percentage of Outstanding Shares 
75.27%
Shareholder Name and Address 
Hong Kong Huakan Investment Co., 
Limited 
Note: 
(1)
The  Common  Shares  are  indirectly  held  through  Hua  Kan  International  Mining  Co.,  Ltd.,  Huakan  Resources  Inc.,  Dashan 
Mining Limited and Shanchuan Mining Limited, each of which is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Hong Kong Huakan Investment 
Co., Limited.
SPECIAL BUSINESS TO BE ACTED UPON AT THE MEETING
The Meeting has been called to ask Shareholders to consider and, if thought advisable, approve,  with or 
without amendment, the Amalgamation Resolution.  Copies of the text of the Amalgamation Resolution and the form 
of Amalgamation Agreement are attached as Appendix A and Appendix B, respectively, to this Circular.
INFORMATION REGARDING THE AMALGAMATION
Background to the Corporation
The Corporation is incorporated under the BCBCA, and its principal business activity is the exploration and 
development  of  mineral  properties.  The  Common  Shares  are  listed  on  the  TSX-V  under  the  symbol  “HK”  and  the
6
Corporation  is  a  reporting  issuer  in  the  provinces  of  Alberta  and  British  Columbia.  The  Corporation’s  head  and 
registered office are located at Suite 850, 580 Hornby Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
Background to the Amalgamation
(a)
Background to the Amalgamation
On  January  10,  2014,  the  Board  of  Directors  received  an  indicative,  non-binding  proposal  from  the 
Acquirors, but the Board of Directors were not in a position to consider such a proposal, or, indeed, any proposal on 
the basis that the Corporation was in the process of clarifying its technical disclosure following the receipt of a default 
notice from the BCSC.  On January 21, 2014, the Corporation announced that it had clarified its technical disclosure.
On  January  22,  2014,  the  Board  of  Directors  received  a  formal  non-binding  going  private  proposal  (the 
“Proposal”) from the Acquirors offering to acquire, by way of amalgamation (the “Proposed Transaction”), all of the 
issued and outstanding Common Shares not currently owned or controlled by the Acquirors, at the price of $0.40 per 
Common Share.  The Proposal noted that the Acquirors directly and indirectly owned or had voting control over, in 
aggregate,  approximately  91.80%  of  the  issued  and  outstanding  Common  Shares.    Subsequently,  on  January  28, 
2014, the Acquirors revised the Proposal and the Proposed Transaction set out therein to increase the price payable 
per Common Share to $0.50 per Common Share.
In response to the receipt of the Proposal, the Board of Directors convened a meeting on January 27, 2014 
and at the meeting, the Board of Directors appointed a Special Committee made up of the independent directors of 
the  Corporation,  being  Mr.  David  Bo  and  Mr.  Garnet  Dawson,  and  authorized  the  Special  Committee  to  review, 
consider and evaluate the Proposed Transaction or a similar transaction and to make a recommendation to the Board 
of Directors regarding the Proposed Transaction or a similar transaction.  Among other things, the Special Committee 
was authorized to engage third party professional advisors as it deemed necessary to assist with its deliberations.
Following  its  appointment,  the  Special  Committee  held  its  first  meeting  on  January  28,  2014.    At  the 
meeting,  the  Special  Committee  discussed  the  Proposed  Transaction  and  determined,  based  on  legal  advice 
provided by McCarthy Tétrault LLP, as legal counsel to the Special Committee, that the engagement of a qualified 
and  independent  person  to  review  and  assess,  and  provide  a  fairness  opinion,  in  respect  of  the  Proposed 
Transaction would be in the best interest of the Corporation and its shareholders. The Special Committee resolved to 
obtain one or more proposals from relevant qualified persons to provide the fairness opinion.  On February 1, 2014, 
the  Special  Committee,  after  review  of  among  other  things,  Semeniuk’s  background  and  credentials,  resolved  to 
engage Mr. Semeniuk to provide the fairness opinion.
Over the following weeks, the Special Committee met several times in person or by telephone, by itself and 
with its legal counsel and Semeniuk and directed management of the Corporation to provide any information required 
by McCarthy Tétrault LLP or Semeniuk in carrying out their assignments. During this time, apart from meeting as a 
committee,  members  of  the  Special  Committee  also  spent  time  reviewing  and  considering  relevant  data  and 
documents,  discussing  matters  arising  out  of  their  review  among  themselves  and  with  the  advisors  to  the  Special 
Committee  and  negotiating  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  proposed  Amalgamation  and  the  form  of  the 
Amalgamation  Agreement  with  the  Acquirors.    The  Special  Committee  also  sought  advice  from  McCarthy  Tétrault 
LLP  during this time to assist the Special  Committee in  carrying out its responsibilities and to  provide the Special 
Committee with advice concerning its duties and the conduct of its affairs.
On  March  13,  2014,  Semeniuk  delivered  the  Fairness  Opinion  to  the  Special  Committee,  a  summary  of 
which  is  attached  as  Appendix C  to  this  Circular.    The  Fairness  Opinion  concluded  that,  as  of  the  date  of  such 
opinion, based on the information, observations and analyses conducted by Semeniuk as set out therein as well as 
other relevant factors, the consideration to be received by the Minority Shareholders pursuant to the Amalgamation is 
fair, from a financial point of view, to the Minority Shareholders.
On  March  13,  2014,  the  Special  Committee,  after  considering  the  Fairness  Opinion  and  other  factors 
relevant  to  the  proposed  Amalgamation  as  described  in  “Reasons  for  the  Recommendation  of  the  Special 
Committee”  below,  determined  that  the  Amalgamation  was  in  the  best  interests  of  the  Corporation  and  that  the 
Redemption Amount is fair, from a financial point of view, to the Minority Shareholders, and resolved to recommend 
that the Board of Directors accept the proposed Amalgamation with Newco pursuant to the terms and conditions of 
the form of the Amalgamation Agreement as agreed between the Special Committee and the Acquirors.
On March 13, 2014, the Board of Directors, excluding the directors who were excluded from voting due to 
conflicts of interest), after considering the recommendation of the Special Committee and further deliberating on the
7
factors described in “Reasons for the Recommendation of the Special Committee” below, unanimously approved the 
Amalgamation and the entering into of the Amalgamation Agreement with Newco.
On March 14, 2014, the Amalgamation Agreement  was executed by the Corporation and Newco and the
Corporation issued a press release announcing such execution.
(b)
Reasons for the Recommendation of the Special Committee
The  Special  Committee,  in  (i) determining  that  the  Amalgamation  was  in  the  best  interests  of  the 
Corporation;  (ii) determining  that  the  Redemption  Amount  is  fair,  from  a  financial  point  of  view,  to  the  Minority 
Shareholders,  and  (iii) resolving  to  recommend  to  the  Board  of  Directors  that  the  proposed  Amalgamation  be 
approved, considered and relied upon a number of factors including the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
the relative absence of liquidity in the public market for the Common Shares;
the funding requirements to further advance the properties of the Corporation;
the  appropriateness  of  the  Corporation  remaining  a  public  company  in  light  of  the  significant 
shareholding of the Acquirors and the fact that the Corporation has not, for the past 2.5 years made 
use of, and in the foreseeable future is not likely to make use of, the public market for its shares to 
raise funds at reasonable prices without significantly diluting the existing Shareholders;
the advantages that would accrue to the Corporation as a result of the proposed Amalgamation, 
including the elimination of costs associated with maintaining a public company;
the conclusions reached by Semeniuk in the Fairness Opinion;
the  opportunity  afforded  by  the  proposed  Amalgamation  for  the  Minority  Shareholders  to  receive 
cash  consideration 
the  pre-
announcement market price of Common Shares without regard to the relative absence of liquidity 
in  the  public  market  for  such  shares  and  without  payment  of  brokerage  commissions  or  other 
selling costs;
investment,  representing  a  significant  premium
to
for
their
Minority Shareholders who oppose the proposed Amalgamation may, upon compliance with certain 
conditions in the BCBCA, dissent from the Amalgamation Resolution and be entitled to be paid the 
“fair  value”  of  their  Common  Shares  under  the  provisions  of  that  section  (See  “Information 
Regarding the Amalgamation – Right to Dissent”);
advice  by  the  Acquirors  that  shareholders  holding  in  aggregate  more  than  half  of  the  Common 
Shares  held  by  the  Minority  Shareholders  have  entered  into  lock-up  and/or  support  agreements 
with the Acquirors to support the proposed Amalgamation; and
information concerning the financial condition, results of operations, business, plans and prospects 
of the Corporation and current industry, economic, market and regulatory conditions.
Recommendation of the Board of Directors
The members of the Board of Directors, other than Pengzhi Guo, Shicheng Song and Wenhong (Wilson) 
Jin,  who  did  not  vote  on  matters  concerning  the  Amalgamation  due  to  conflicts  of  interest,  have  unanimously 
approved  the  terms  of  the  Amalgamation  and  unanimously  recommend  that  Shareholders  vote  in  favour  of  the 
Amalgamation  Resolution  at  the  Meeting.    The  Board  of  Directors  based  its  approval  upon  the  unanimous 
recommendation of the Special Committee (including the reasons articulated by the Special Committee).
Prior Offers
Other  than  with  respect  to  the  offer  received  from  the  Acquirors,  as  described  under  the  heading 
“Background to the Amalgamation”, during the 24 months before the Amalgamation was agreed to pursuant to the 
Amalgamation Agreement, the Corporation did not receive any bona fide prior offer that relates to the subject matter 
of or is otherwise relevant to the Amalgamation.
8
Lock-up Agreements
Between February 13 and February 18, 2014, three Shareholders, who own, control or represent the owners 
of,  in  aggregate,  1,806,752  Common  Shares  representing  approximately  4.3%  of  all  the  issued  and  outstanding 
Common  Shares,  entered  into  lock-up  agreements  with  the  Acquirors,  pursuant  to  which  they  agreed  to  vote  (or 
procure the vote) of all of the Common Shares owned or controlled by them in favour of the Amalgamation.
Ongoing Shareholder
On  February  13,  2014,  the  Ongoing  Shareholder  who  owns  or  controls  214,286  Common  Shares 
approximately 0.5% of all the issued and outstanding Common Shares, entered into a lock-up agreement with the 
Acquirors, pursuant to which it was agreed that the Ongoing Shareholder would vote all of her Common Shares in 
favour of the Amalgamation and would, at the Effective Time, receive Amalco Common Shares in exchange for her 
Common Shares along with the Acquiror Group.
Regulatory Matters
The  Corporation  is  a  reporting  issuer  in  the  provinces  of  British  Columbia  and  Alberta  and  is  therefore 
subject  to  MI 61-101  and  Policy  5.9  of  the  TSX-V.    MI 61-101  is  intended  to  regulate  insider  bids,  issuer  bids, 
business combinations, going private transactions and related party transactions to ensure that all stakeholders are 
treated in a manner that is fair, and perceived to be fair, by requiring in certain transactions, enhanced disclosure, 
valuation, review and approval processes.
Shareholder Approval Required
In  order  to  complete  the  Amalgamation,  at  the  Meeting,  Shareholders  will  be  asked  to  consider  and,  if 
thought  advisable,  approve,  with  or  without  amendment,  the  Amalgamation  Resolution.    The  full  text  of  the 
Amalgamation Resolution is attached to this Circular as Appendix A and a copy of the Amalgamation Agreement is 
attached to this Circular as Appendix B.
The Amalgamation is a “business combination” within the meaning of certain applicable Canadian securities 
legislation  including  MI 61-101  due  to  the  fact  the  Amalgamation  may  result  in  the  interest  of  holders  of  equity 
securities of the Corporation being terminated without such holders’ consent.  Subject to certain exemptions found 
under MI 61-101, no business combination shall be carried out in respect of an issuer unless minority approval for the 
business combination has been obtained.  Minority approval is determined by excluding votes attached to securities 
that are beneficially owned or over which control or direction is exercised by the Corporation, a party interested in the 
Amalgamation, any party related to an interested party and a joint actor with any interested party or related party.  In 
relation to this approval, the “minority” holders will be, unless an exemption is available or discretionary relief by the 
BCSC as required, all holders of Common Shares other than the Acquiror Group and the Ongoing Shareholder.
Section  4.6(1)(a)  of  MI 61-101  provides  an  exemption  to  the  requirement  to  seek  minority  approval  for  a 
business combination in circumstances where the interested parties own in excess of 90% of the shares of the issuer 
company to  which the business combination relates and  where shareholders are given an appraisal right.  As the 
Acquiror Group now hold in excess of 90% of the issued Common Shares, and an appraisal remedy is available to 
Dissenting  Shareholders  under  Part  8  Division  2  of  the  BCBCA,  the  Corporation  may  and  is  relying  upon  the 
exemption from the minority approval requirement set out in Section 4.6(1)(a) of MI 61-101.
Therefore,  for  the  Amalgamation  to  be  approved  at  the  Meeting  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the 
BCBCA and the requirements of the TSX-V, the Amalgamation Resolution must be passed by at least 66 and two 
thirds percent of the votes cast by all holders of Common Shares present or represented by proxy at the Meeting.
If the Amalgamation Resolution is approved, the Effective Date of the Amalgamation is expected to be on or 
about April 28, 2014, or such later date as the Board of Directors and Newco may mutually determine.  See “Shares 
Eligible to be Voted at the Meeting”.
Right to Dissent
Under the provisions of Part 8 Division 2 of the BCBCA, a registered Shareholder is entitled to deliver to the 
Corporation  a  written  notice  of  dissent  to  the  Amalgamation  Resolution  in  respect  of  the  approval  of  the 
Amalgamation.  A registered Shareholder intending to dissent must send to the Corporation a written notice of dissent 
at least two days before the date fixed for the Meeting and otherwise comply precisely with the requirements of Part 8
9
Division 2 of the BCBCA.  Beneficial owners who are not the holder of record of the Common Shares may not directly 
exercise dissent rights in respect of the Amalgamation Resolution.  The Non-Registered Holders must, in such cases, 
have the registered Shareholder, such as a broker, agent, intermediary or other nominee, submit the written notice of 
dissent in respect of the Amalgamation Resolution.  A registered Shareholder is not entitled to exercise dissent rights 
if such Shareholder votes any Common Shares in favour of the Amalgamation Resolution.
In  addition  to  any  other  right  a  Shareholder  may  have,  when  the  Amalgamation  becomes  effective,  a 
registered Shareholder who complies with the dissent procedure under sections 237 to 247 of the BCBCA is entitled 
to  be  paid  the  “fair  value”  of  the  Common  Shares  held  by  that  Shareholder  in  respect  of  which  that  Shareholder 
dissents,  determined  immediately  before  the  Amalgamation  Resolution  is  adopted.    Amalco  will  offer  an  amount 
equal to the Redemption Amount to any dissenting Shareholder who is a holder of Common Shares pursuant to the 
dissent procedure under sections 237 to 247 of the BCBCA.
In  the  event  that  a  Shareholder  fails  to  properly  make,  or  effectively  withdraws,  its  dissent  rights  under 
sections 237 to 247 of the BCBCA or forfeits its right to dissent under sections 237 to 247 of the BCBCA or such 
holder’s  rights  as  a  Shareholder  of  the  Corporation  are  otherwise  reinstated,  each  Common  Share  held  by  that 
Shareholder shall thereupon be deemed to have been exchanged for one Amalco Class A Preferred Share at the 
Effective  Time,  which  Amalco  Class A  Preferred  Share  shall  be  redeemed  for  the  Redemption  Amount  at  the 
Redemption Time.
A summary of the dissent procedure provided in section 242 the BCBCA and the full text of Part 8 Division 2 
of the BCBCA are set out in Appendix C to this Circular.  Shareholders who may wish to dissent should seek legal 
advice, as failure to comply with the strict requirements set out in sections 237 to 247 of the BCBCA may result in the 
loss or unavailability of any right to dissent.
The execution or exercise of a proxy or voting instruction form does not constitute a written notice of dissent
for the purposes of exercising dissent rights under section 242 of the BCBCA.
Exemption from Formal Valuation Requirement
Since the Amalgamation constitutes a "business combination" under Ml 61-101 and Policy 5.9 of the TSX-V, 
the Corporation is required to obtain a formal valuation in respect of the Amalgamation, unless an exemption to this 
requirement is available under Ml 61-101.  Given that the securities of the Corporation are listed on the TSX-V, the 
Corporation may and is relying upon the exemption described in Section 4.4(a) of Ml 61-101, which provides that an 
issuer is exempt from the formal valuation requirement if none of its securities are listed or quoted on the Toronto 
Stock Exchange, the New York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange, the NASDAQ Stock Market, or a 
stock exchange outside of Canada and the United States other than the AIM Market of the London Stock Exchange 
or the PLUS markets operated by PLUS Markets Group plc.
While the Corporation will rely on the exemption contained in section 4.4(a) of MI 61-101 (Issuer Not Listed 
on Specified Markets) by virtue of the fact that the Common Shares are listed exclusively on the TSX-V, the Special 
Committee has commissioned the Fairness Opinion from Semeniuk.
Fairness Opinion
The  Fairness  Opinion  was  delivered  by  Semeniuk  to  the  Special  Committee  on  March  13,  2014  and 
concluded that, as of the date of such opinion, based on the information, observations and analyses conducted by 
Semeniuk  as  set  out  therein  as  well  as  other  relevant  factors,  the  consideration  to  be  received  by  the  Minority 
Shareholders pursuant to the Amalgamation is fair, from a financial point of view, to the Minority Shareholders. For 
more details, please see “Background to the Amalgamation” and see a summary of the Fairness Opinion which is 
attached as Appendix C to this Circular.
Options
As  of  March  17,  2014,  2,230,000  options  to  purchase  an  aggregate  of  2,230,000  Common  Shares  were 
issued  and  outstanding  under  the  Corporation’s  stock  option  plan  dated  March  25,  2013.    As  of  the  date  of  the 
Circular,  all  holders  of  such  outstanding  options  have  executed  surrender  and  cancellation  agreements  with  the 
Corporation to conditionally surrender their options prior to the Effective Time.
10
Terms of the Amalgamation
If the Amalgamation Resolution is approved, the Amalgamation will be effected in accordance with the terms 
and  conditions  of  the  Amalgamation  Agreement,  which  terms  and  conditions  are  set  out  in  more  detail  under  the 
heading “The Amalgamation Agreement”.
Certain Canadian federal income tax implications of the Amalgamation are discussed in greater detail in this
Circular under the heading “Certain Canadian Federal Income Tax Considerations”.
As a result of the Amalgamation, the property of both the Corporation and Newco will become the property 
of Amalco and Amalco will continue to be liable for the obligations of both the Corporation and Newco.  Amalco will 
continue to carry on the operations of the Corporation and  will assume the assets and liabilities.  Accordingly, the 
Amalgamation is not expected to have any significant effect on the business and affairs of the Corporation.
If  the  Amalgamation  Resolution  is  approved,  the  Amalgamation  will  be  effected  in  accordance  with  the 
Amalgamation  Agreement.  Subject to obtaining the requisite approval of the shareholders of the Corporation and 
Newco and the filing of a statement of the directors of each of the Corporation and Newco in the form prescribed by 
sections 271(1) and (6) of the BCBCA, an amalgamation application in the required form and such other documents 
as may be required with the Registrar of Companies appointed under section 400 of the BCBCA, the Amalgamation 
will become effective on the Effective Date, at which time the Corporation and Newco will amalgamate and continue 
as one corporation.
The Amalgamation Agreement
The following description of the Amalgamation Agreement is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full 
text of the form of Amalgamation Agreement which is attached as Appendix B to this Circular.  For a full description of 
the  provisions  of  the  Amalco  Common  Shares,  the  Amalco  Class A  Preferred  Shares  and  the  Amalco  Class  B 
Preferred Shares, see Schedule A to the Amalgamation Agreement.
Amalgamation at the Effective Time
On the Effective Date at the Effective Time the following shall be deemed to occur without any further act or
formality:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
the Corporation and Newco will be amalgamated and continue as Amalco under the name “Huakan 
International Mining Inc.”
each  of  the  issued  and  outstanding  Common  Shares  held  by  Minority  Shareholders  (other  than 
Dissenting Shareholders) shall be exchanged for one Amalco Class A Preferred Share, and such 
Amalco Class A Preferred Shares shall be deemed to be redeemed immediately after the Effective 
Time for the Redemption Amount in accordance with the articles of Amalco without further action 
by such Minority Shareholders;
each of the issued and outstanding Common Shares held by members of the Acquiror Group shall 
be exchanged for one Amalco Common Share;
each of the issued and outstanding Common Shares owned by the Ongoing Shareholder shall be 
exchanged for one Amalco Common Share;
each  of  the  issued  and  outstanding  Newco  Common  Shares  held  by  the  Acquirors  shall  be 
exchanged for one Amalco Class B Preferred Share, and such Amalco Class B Preferred Shares 
shall be immediately redeemed for their redemption price of $0.001 per Amalco Class B Preferred 
Share after the Effective Time; and
(f)
all the unissued share capital of the Corporation and Newco shall be cancelled.
In  addition,  Newco  has  represented  to  the  Corporation  that  the  aggregate  Redemption  Amount  of 
$1,632,646.50  payable  pursuant  to  the  Amalgamation  and  transactions  contemplated  under  the  Amalgamation 
Agreement is and shall remain available to Newco and Amalco so that Amalco shall be in a position to redeem the 
Amalco  Class  A  Preferred  Shares  in  exchange  for  all  the  Common  Shares  owned  by  the  Minority  Shareholders 
pursuant to the Amalgamation.  Such amount is to be made available to Newco by way of the Convertible Loan which 
immediately after the Effective Time will be converted into Amalco Common Shares and the Acquirors shall be issued
11
such number of Amalco Common Shares that is equal to the outstanding principal amount of the Convertible Loan 
divided by $0.50 per share.
Upon the completion of the above, Amalco will be a corporation wholly-owned, directly or indirectly, by the
Acquirors and the Ongoing Shareholder.
At  the  Effective  Time,  Dissenting  Shareholders  will  be  entitled  to  be  paid  in  cash  the  fair  value  of  their 
Common  Shares  provided  that  they  follow  the  dissent  procedures  set  out  in  the  BCBCA.  Please  see  “Information 
Regarding the Amalgamation - Right to Dissent” and Appendix D to this Circular.
Effects of Amalgamation
Pursuant to the Amalgamation Agreement, on the Effective Date at the Effective Time:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
the Amalgamation will become effective and the Corporation and Newco will be amalgamated and 
continued  as  one  corporation  (Amalco)  under  the  terms  and  conditions  prescribed  in  the 
Amalgamation Agreement;
the property of each of the Corporation and Newco shall continue to be property of Amalco;
Amalco shall continue to be liable for the obligations of each of Newco and the Corporation;
any  existing  cause  of  action,  claim  or  liability  to  prosecution  with  respect  to  Newco  and  the 
Corporation shall be unaffected;
any civil, criminal or administrative action or proceeding pending by or against either Newco or the 
Corporation may be continued to be prosecuted by or against Amalco;
a  conviction  against,  or  filing,  order  or  judgment  in  favour  of  or  against,  either  Newco  or  the 
Corporation may be enforced by or against Amalco; and
the  articles  of  Amalco  will  be  the  form  of  articles  set  out  in  Schedule  A  of  the  Amalgamation 
Agreement.
The terms of the Amalco Class A Preferred Shares provide that each of such shares will be automatically
redeemed for the Redemption Amount at the Redemption Time.
Mutual Conditions Precedent to Amalgamation
The Amalgamation Agreement provides that the obligations of the Corporation and Newco to consummate 
the  Amalgamation  are  subject  to  certain  mutual  conditions  which  may  only  be  waived  if  agreed  by  both  parties, 
including the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
the privatization of the Corporation by way of the Amalgamation shall have been accepted for filing 
by the TSX-V;
the Amalgamation Agreement will have been approved by not less than two-thirds of the votes cast 
by the holders of the Common Shares who vote in respect of the Amalgamation Resolution at the 
Meeting;
the amalgamation application in the form attached as a schedule to the Amalgamation Agreement 
shall be accepted by the Registrar of Companies appointed under the BCBCA in accordance with 
the BCBCA;
no  act,  action,  suit,  proceeding,  objection  or  opposition  will  have  been  threatened,  taken  or 
commenced  by  any  domestic  or  foreign  governmental  body  and  no  law,  regulation,  policy, 
judgment, decision, order, ruling or directive shall have been proposed, enacted, promulgated or 
applied, which (i) has the effect or may have the effect to cease trade, enjoin, prohibit or impose 
material limitations or conditions on the completion of the Amalgamation or that  would materially 
delay  the  completion  of  the  Amalgamation,  or  (ii)  would  make  the  consummation  of  the 
Amalgamation illegal;
12
(e)
(f)
the Effective Date shall have occurred on or before July 17, 2014 unless otherwise agreed by the 
Corporation and Newco; and
the  Amalgamation  Agreement  has  not  been  terminated  in  accordance  with  its  terms.  (See 
“Termination of Agreement” below).
For  detailed  descriptions  of  the  mutual  conditions  precedent  summarized  above,  see  the  Amalgamation
Agreement attached as Appendix B to this Circular.
Conditions Precedent to Amalgamation in favour of Newco
The Amalgamation Agreement provides that the obligations of Newco to consummate the Amalgamation are
subject to certain conditions which may only be waived if agreed by Newco, including the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
all the representations and warranties of the Corporation in the Amalgamation Agreement shall be 
true and correct in all material respects as of the Effective Date;
the Corporation shall have complied in all material respects with its covenants in the Amalgamation 
Agreement which are to be complied with or performed prior to the Effective Date;
holders of not more than 2% of the Common Shares shall have exercised their right to dissent;
all outstanding options to purchase Common Shares of the Corporation shall have been cancelled, 
expired or exercised prior to the Effective Time; and
no  event,  condition,  fact,  change  that  has  had  or  could  reasonably  be  expected  to  have,  a 
materially  adverse  effect  on  the  business,  assets,  capitalization,  properties,  liabilities,  results  of 
operations or the condition (financial or otherwise) of the Corporation shall have occurred since the 
date of the Amalgamation Agreement.
For  detailed  descriptions  of  the  conditions  precedent  in  favour  of  Newco  summarized  above,  see  the
Amalgamation Agreement attached as Appendix B to this Circular.
Conditions Precedent to Amalgamation in favour of the Corporation
The  Amalgamation  Agreement  provides  that  the  obligations  of  the  Corporation  to  consummate  the 
Amalgamation are subject to certain conditions which may only be waived if agreed by the Corporation, including the 
following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
all the representations and warranties of Newco in the Amalgamation Agreement shall be true and 
correct in all material respects as of the Effective Date;
Newco  shall  have  complied  in  all  material  respects  with  its  covenants  in  the  Amalgamation 
Agreement which are to be complied with or performed prior to the Effective Date; and
no  event,  condition,  fact,  change  that  has  had  or  could  reasonably  be  expected  to  have,  a 
materially  adverse  effect  on  the  business,  assets,  capitalization,  properties,  liabilities,  results  of 
operations or the condition (financial or otherwise) of Newco shall have occurred since the date of 
the Amalgamation Agreement.
For  detailed  descriptions  of  the  conditions  precedent  in  favour  of  the  Corporation,  see  the  Amalgamation
Agreement attached as Appendix B to this Circular.
Termination of the Amalgamation Agreement
The Amalgamation Agreement may be terminated as follows:
(a)
(b)
at any time prior to the Effective Date, by the mutual written consent of the Corporation and Newco; 
or
by Newco by written notice to the Corporation if the Effective Date has not occurred by July 17, 
2014 due to one or more of the mutual conditions precedent or the conditions precedent in favour
13
of Newco not being satisfied and the failure to satisfy such condition is not the result, directly or 
indirectly, of Newco’s breach of the Amalgamation Agreement; or
(c)
by the Corporation by  written notice to Newco if the Effective Date has not occurred by July 17, 
2014 due to one or more of the mutual conditions precedent or the conditions precedent in favour 
of  the  Corporation  not  being  satisfied  and  the  failure  to  satisfy  such  condition  is  not  the  result, 
directly or indirectly, of Corporation’s breach of the Amalgamation Agreement.
Covenants of the Corporation
The  Corporation  has  given  usual  and  customary  covenants  for  an  agreement  of  the  nature  of  the
Amalgamation Agreement, including the following:
(a)
(b)
the  Corporation  will  use  its  commercially  reasonable  efforts  to  comply  with  all  regulatory 
requirements applicable to the Amalgamation including providing to the Shareholders the views of 
the  Special  Committee,  authorizing  the  Special  Committee  to  engage  a  qualified  independent 
financial  advisor  to  prepare  a  fairness  opinion  notwithstanding  the  exemption  from  a  formal 
valuation,  convening  the  Meeting  and  soliciting  proxies  in  favour  of  passing  the  Amalgamation 
Resolution; and
the  Corporation  will  not,  from  the  date  of  the  Amalgamation  to  and  including  the  Effective  Date, 
without the prior written consent of Newco (such consent not to be unreasonably withheld), incur or 
commit to incur any indebtedness, enter into any material contract other than in the ordinary course 
of business or as contemplated in connection with the privatization of the Corporation by way of the 
Amalgamation or take any action which would be outside the ordinary course of business or which 
may result in a material adverse change in its affairs.
In addition, the Corporation and Newco have covenanted to enter into an agreement with a depositary (the 
“Depositary”) to provide for the transfer by Newco’s counsel of $1,632,646.50 (the “Trust Amount”) held in trust for 
Newco  by  Newco’s  counsel  at  or  immediately  following  the  Effective  Time  to  the  Depositary  and  the  subsequent 
payment  by  the  Depositary  of  the  aggregate  Redemption  Amount  for  the  Amalco  Class  A  Preferred  Shares  in 
accordance with the articles of Amalco.
For detailed descriptions of the covenants of the Corporation, see the Amalgamation Agreement attached as
Appendix B to this Circular.
Covenants of Newco
Newco  has  given  usual  and  customary  covenants  for  an  agreement  of  the  nature  of  the  Amalgamation
Agreement, including the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
Newco  will  take  all  actions  necessary  to  comply  with  all  applicable  laws  and  regulatory 
requirements  relating  to  the  consummation  of  the  Amalgamation  and  other  transactions 
contemplated by the Amalgamation Agreement;
Newco will cause the Acquiror Group to continue to own or control at least 90% of the Common 
Shares until the earlier of the Effective Time and the termination of the Amalgamation Agreement, 
and to cause the Acquiror Group to vote their Common Shares in favour of the Amalgamation; and
Newco will not, from the date of the Amalgamation to and including the Effective Date, without the 
prior written consent of the Corporation (such consent not to be unreasonably withheld), incur or 
commit to incur any indebtedness other than the Convertible Loan, enter into any material contract 
other than as contemplated in connection with the Amalgamation.
In addition, Newco has covenanted to, within 10 business days prior to the Meeting, cause Newco’s counsel 
to deliver a letter to the Corporation’s legal counsel confirming that (i) it is holding in trust the Trust Amount for Newco 
and  (ii)  it  has  irrevocable  instructions  from  Newco  that  Newco’s  counsel  will  transfer  such  Trust  Amount  to  the 
Depositary  appointed  for  the  purpose  at  or  immediately  following  the  Effective  Time  to  permit  the  payment  by  the 
Depositary of the aggregate Redemption Amount for the Amalco Class A Preferred Shares in accordance with the 
articles of Amalco provided the Amalgamation Agreement is not terminated.
For  detailed  descriptions  of  the  covenants  of  Newco,  see  the  Amalgamation  Agreement  attached  as
Appendix B to this Circular.
14
Representations and Warranties
Each  of  the  Corporation  and  Newco  have  made  certain  customary  representations  and  warranties  in  the 
Amalgamation  Agreement  related  to,  among  others,  its  due  incorporation,  authorization  to  enter  into  the 
Amalgamation  Agreement  and  the  completion  of  the  transactions  contemplated  therein,  and  the  absence  of  any 
violation of, of conflict with, such party’s constating documents, applicable law or contracts as a result of entering into 
the Amalgamation Agreement and performing the transactions contemplated therein.
For detailed descriptions of the representations and warranties given by each of the Corporation and Newco,
see the Amalgamation Agreement attached as Appendix B to this Circular.
Amendment
The Amalgamation Agreement may be amended at any time and from time to time prior to the Effective Date 
by  mutual  written  agreement  of  the  Corporation  and  Newco,  provided  that  any  amendment  to  the  Amalgamation 
Agreement that would adversely affect the Redemption Amount of the Amalco Class A Shares shall be required to be 
adopted by the shareholders of the Corporation and Newco.
TSX-V Approval
Pursuant to Section 8.1 of TSX-V Policy 5.3 – Acquisitions and Dispositions of Non-Cash Assets, a reporting
issuer must not proceed with an amalgamation, until the TSX-V has accepted the same.
On  March  17,  2014,  the  TSX-V  granted  the  Corporation  conditional  approval  of  the  Amalgamation.    The 
TSX-V's final approval should be forthcoming once the voting results, if they are in compliance with Ml 61-101, are 
communicated to the TSX-V, and the TSX-V has received and reviewed all applicable documents that are required by 
Policy 5.3 of the TSX-V.
Failure to Complete Proposed Transaction
Subject to any actions that may be taken by Newco or its Affiliates, if the Amalgamation is not completed, 
the Corporation intends to continue operating its business and to continue as a reporting issuer in the provinces of 
British  Columbia  and  Alberta  while  the  Board  of  Directors  evaluates  any  viable  options  with  a  view  to  maximizing 
shareholder value.  Any Letter of Transmittal completed by a Shareholder will be of no effect and the Corporation will 
cause  Computershare  to  return  all  deposited  certificates  representing  Common  Shares  to  the  registered  holders 
thereof as soon as practicable.
Expenses of the Proposed Amalgamation
Costs to be incurred in relation to the Amalgamation including, without limitation, proxy solicitation and legal 
fees, fees associated with the Fairness Opinion, the preparation and printing of this Circular and other out-of-pocket 
costs associated with the Meeting, are estimated to be approximately $226,000.
Deposit of Share Certificates and Redemption of Common Shares
The Letter of Transmittal enclosed with this Circular sets forth the details of the procedure to be followed by 
each  Minority  Shareholder  for  tendering  the  certificates  representing  the  Common  Shares  owned  by  such 
Shareholder to Computershare.  If the Amalgamation does not proceed, the Letter of Transmittal will be of no effect 
and the Corporation will cause Computershare to return all deposited certificates representing the Common Shares to 
the registered Shareholders thereof.
No  share  certificate  representing  the  Amalco  Class  A  Preferred  Shares  will  be  issued  to  Minority
Shareholders upon the Amalgamation becoming effective.
Provided that a Minority Shareholder has presented and surrendered to the Corporation share certificates 
representing his/her Common Shares, following the Redemption Time, Amalco will cause a cheque to be sent to such 
Minority Shareholder representing the  Redemption Amount for each Common Share  of such Minority Shareholder 
which  has  been  deemed  to  be  exchanged  into  a  Amalco  Class  A  Preferred  Share  on  the  Effective  Time,  and 
redeemed at the Redemption Time.
If  a  Minority  Shareholder  fails  to  present  and  surrender  to  the  Corporation  share  certificates  representing 
Common Shares owed by such Shareholder in accordance with the Letter of Transmittal, such Shareholder will only 
be entitled to receive a cheque representing the proceeds payable to the Shareholder following the presentation and
15
surrender by the Shareholder to Amalco of all such share  certificates.  No interest  will be paid by Amalco on any 
outstanding amounts of money owed to a Shareholder.
Any redemption money held in trust for Minority Shareholders who have failed to present share certificates
representing Common Shares by the second anniversary of the Effective Date shall be paid to Amalco.
Redemption  monies  that  are  represented  by  a  cheque  which  has  not  been  presented  to  the  applicable 
bankers  for  payment  or  that  otherwise  remain  unclaimed  by  the  first  anniversary  of  the  Effective  Date  shall  be 
forfeited to Amalco.
The  foregoing  deposit  and  redemption  procedures  are  set  out  in  greater  detail  in  Schedule  A  to  the
Amalgamation Agreement attached as Appendix B to this Circular.
Lost Certificates
If a certificate representing Common Shares has been lost or destroyed, the Letter of Transmittal should be 
completed  as  fully  as  possible  and  forwarded,  together  with  a  letter  describing  the  loss,  to  Computershare.  
Computershare will respond with the replacement requirements, which must be properly completed and submitted in 
good order to Computershare.
Effect of the Amalgamation on Markets and Listing
Subsequent to the Amalgamation, Amalco will apply to the TSX-V for the delisting of the Common Shares.  
In  addition,  it  is  anticipated  that  the  Corporation  will  cease  to  be  a  “reporting  issuer”  under  applicable  Canadian 
securities  legislation.    As  a  result,  Amalco  will  no  longer  be  subject  to  the  ongoing  continuous  disclosure  and 
reporting obligations currently imposed upon the Corporation as a reporting issuer under such legislation.
INFORMATION CONCERNING NEWCO
Newco,  was  incorporated  under  the  BCBCA  on  March  10,  2014  solely  for  the  purpose  of  completing  the 
Amalgamation  with  the  Corporation  to  form  Amalco.    The  issued  and  outstanding  Newco  Common  Shares  were 
issued to each of Hong Kong Huakan (781 Newco Common Shares), Sun Luck (119 Newco Common Shares) and 
Power  Best  (100  Newco  Common  Shares)  at  an  issue  price  of  $0.001  per  share.    Newco’s  board  of  directors  is 
comprised of Xiang Shi, Hongfei Liu, Shicheng Song, Guixin Zhao and Yuandong (Jeffrey) Ren.  Newco’s registered 
office is located at c/o McMillans LLP, 1500 Royal Centre, 1055 West Georgia Street, P.O. Box 11117, Vancouver, 
B.C. V6E 4N7.
Newco has represented and warranted to the Corporation in the Amalgamation Agreement that Newco does 
not, and will not at the Effective Date, have liabilities other than the Convertible Loan and does not have any material 
assets or property, nor will it have any as of the Effective Date, except for the monies being held in trust by Newco’s 
counsel for the sole purpose of paying the aggregate Redemption Amount payable to the Minority Shareholders in 
respect of their Common Shares.
The Acquirors, being Hong Kong Huakan, Sun Luck and Power Best are the sole shareholders of Newco
and also hold, directly or indirectly, in aggregate, approximately 91.80% of the Common Shares.
If the Amalgamation Resolution is approved and the conditions set out in the Amalgamation Agreement are 
satisfied,  on  the  Effective  Date,  the  Corporation  and  Newco  will  amalgamate  and  continue  as  Amalco  as  at  the 
Effective Time.
The Acquirors will cause sufficient funds to be delivered to Computershare to pay the Redemption Amount
to the Shareholders at the Redemption Time.
INTERESTS OF DIRECTORS AND SENIOR OFFICERS
The  following  table  sets  out  the  securities  of  the  Corporation  owned  or  over  which  control  or  direction  is
exercised by each director and senior officer of the Corporation as at the date hereof:
16
Position with the Corporation
Chairman and Director
Director
Director
President and Director
Director
Chief Executive Officer
Chief Financial Officer
Ownership or Control  
over Common Shares
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Vice President, Exploration
16,335(1)
Name and Residence 
Pengzhi Guo 
Tianjin, China 
Shicheng Song 
Tianjin, China 
Garnet Dawson 
West Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada 
Wenhong (Wilson) Jin 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada 
David Bo 
Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada 
Guixin Zhao 
Vancouver, British Columbia 
Fiona Leung 
Vancouver, British Columbia 
Paul Cowley 
West Vancouver, British Columbia
(1)
indirectly through Buena Tierra Developments Ltd. a holding company wholly-owned by Mr. Cowley.
5,575  Common  Shares  are  held  directly  by  Mr.  Cowley.    Mr.  Cowley  also  holds  10,760  Common  Shares
PREVIOUS PURCHASES AND SALES
No securities of the Corporation have been purchased by the Corporation during the 12 month period prior
to the date of this Circular.
No securities of the Corporation, excluding any securities sold pursuant to the exercise of any stock options,
have been sold by the Corporation during the 12 month period prior to the date of this Circular.
PREVIOUS DISTRIBUTIONS
During the past 5 years, the Corporation has made the following distributions of Common Shares (excluding
Common Shares distributed pursuant to the exercise of options, warrants or other convertible security):
On May 11, 2009, the Corporation, satisfied a portion of a semi annual advance net smelter payment of by 
the  issuance  of  125,000  Common  Shares  (on  a  pre-consolidation  basis  following  a  50  to  1  share  consolidation 
announced by the Corporation on September 11, 2009) to the vendor of the J&L Property, pursuant to the terms and 
conditions of the J&L Property option agreement dated April 13, 2007.
On May 11, 2010, the Corporation, satisfied a portion of a semi annual advance net smelter payment of by 
the  issuance  of  2,500  Common  Shares  (on  a  post-consolidation  basis  following  a  50  to  1  share  consolidation 
announced by the Corporation on September 11, 2009) to the vendor of the J&L Property, pursuant to the terms and 
conditions of the J&L Property option agreement dated April 13, 2007.
On May 12, 2010, the Corporation closed the first tranche of a private placement to Hong Kong Huakan for 
aggregate gross proceeds of $9.5 million for 19,000,000 Common Shares at $0.50 per Common Share.  A finder’s 
fee was satisfied in part by the issuance of 190,000 Common Shares.
On June 29, 2010 the Corporation closed the second tranche of a private placement to Hong Kong Huakan 
for aggregate gross proceeds of $6 million for 8,955,223 Common Shares at $0.67 per Common Share.  A finder’s 
fee was satisfied in part by the issuance of 89,552 Common Shares.
On  December  1,  2010,  the  Corporation  closed  a  non-brokered  private  placement  for  aggregate  gross
proceeds of $3,000,500 for 3,530,000 Common Shares at $0.85 per Common Share.
17
On  October  19,  2011,  the  Corporation  closed  a  non-brokered  private  placement  for  aggregate  gross
proceeds of $3.75 million for 5,357,142 Common Shares at $0.70 per Common Share.
PRICE RANGE AND TRADING VOLUME OF COMMON SHARES
The Common Shares are listed and posted for trading on the TSX-V under the symbol “HK”.  The following 
table sets forth the high and low trading price and the trading volume of the Common Shares on the TSX-V for the 
periods indicated:
Period 
September 2013 
October 2013 
November 2013 
December 2013 
January 2014 
February 2014 
March 1 – March 17, 2014
High ($)
0.14 
0.18 
0.12 
0.15 
0.13 
0.17 
0.48
Low($)
0.06 
0.10 
0.10 
0.09 
0.06 
0.13 
0.12
Volume 
67,900 
23,700 
6,900 
24,400 
18,900 
3,000 
41,941
On March 13, 2014, being the last day the Common Shares traded on the TSX-V prior to the announcement
of the Amalgamation, the Common Shares closed at $0.12.
DIVIDEND RECORD AND POLICY
The Corporation has not paid dividends in the two years preceding the date of this Circular and does not
intend to pay dividends on the Common Shares in the foreseeable future.
CERTAIN CANADIAN FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS
The  following  is,  as  of  the  date  hereof,  a  fair  and  adequate  summary  of  the  principal  Canadian  federal 
income tax considerations under the Tax Act arising as a consequence of the Amalgamation and the redemption of 
Amalco Class A Preferred Shares generally applicable to the Minority Shareholders who, for purposes of the Tax Act 
and at all relevant times: (i) hold their Common Shares and Amalco Class A Preferred Shares received pursuant to 
the Amalgamation as capital property; and (ii) deal at arm’s length with and are not affiliated with the Corporation, 
Newco, Amalco or any of their respective affiliates.
The Common Shares and the Amalco Class A Preferred Shares will generally constitute capital property to a 
Minority Shareholder provided that the Minority Shareholder did not acquire such securities in the course of carrying 
on a business of trading or dealing in securities, and the Minority Shareholder did not acquire such securities in one 
or more transactions considered to be an adventure or concern in the nature of trade.  Certain Minority Shareholders 
who  are  resident  in  Canada  for  the  purposes  of  the  Tax  Act  and  whose  Common  Shares  or  Amalco  Class A 
Preferred Shares might not otherwise qualify as capital property may, in certain circumstances, be entitled to have 
the Common Shares, the Amalco Class A Preferred Shares and all other “Canadian securities” (as defined in the Tax 
Act) owned by such Minority Shareholders in the taxation year in which the election is made, and in all subsequent 
taxation years, deemed to be capital property by making the irrevocable election permitted by subsection 39(4) of the 
Tax Act.  Minority Shareholders whose Common Shares or Amalco Class A Preferred Shares might not otherwise be 
capital property should consult their own tax advisors regarding their particular circumstances.
This summary is not applicable to the members of the Acquiror Group or the Ongoing Shareholder.  This 
summary is also not applicable to a Minority Shareholder (a) that is a “financial institution” for purposes of the mark-
to-market rules; (b) a “specified financial institution”; (c) an interest in which would be a “tax shelter investment”; (d) 
that  has  elected  under  the  functional  currency  rules  in  the  Tax  Act  to  determine  its  “Canadian  tax  results”  in  a 
currency  other  than  Canadian  currency;  (e)  that  has  entered  or  enters  into  a  “derivative  forward  agreement”  or 
“synthetic disposition agreement” with respect to the Common shares or the Amalco Class A Preferred Shares; or (f) 
who is exempt from paying tax under Part I of the Tax Act, all as defined in the Tax Act.  Such Minority Shareholders 
should consult their own tax advisors having regard to their own particular circumstances.
18
This summary is based on the provisions of the Tax Act in force as of the date hereof and our understanding 
of the current administrative policies and assessing practices of the CRA published in writing prior to the date hereof.  
This summary takes into account all specific proposals to amend the Tax Act that have been publicly announced by 
or on behalf of the Minister of Finance (Canada) prior to the date hereof (the “Tax Proposals”), and assumes that all 
Tax Proposals will be enacted in the form proposed.  However, no assurances can be given that the Tax Proposals 
will be enacted as proposed, if at all.  This summary does not otherwise take into account or anticipate any changes 
in  law,  whether  by  judicial,  governmental  or  legislative  decision,  action  or  interpretation,  or  changes  in  the 
administrative  policies  or  assessing  practices  of  the  CRA,  nor  does  it  take  into  account  the  tax  legislation  or 
considerations  of  any  province,  territory  or  foreign  jurisdiction,  which  may  differ  from  those  discussed  herein.    In 
addition, this summary is based on the assumption that the “paid-up capital” of each Amalco Class A Preferred Share 
at the time of the redemption will not be less than its fair market value.  No legal opinion or tax ruling has been sought 
or  obtained  in  this  regard,  or  with  respect  to  any  other  assumption  made  for  purposes  of  this  summary.    The 
discussion below is qualified accordingly.
This  summary  is  not  exhaustive  of  all  Canadian  federal  income  tax  considerations  and  does  not 
purport  to  describe  the  tax  consequences  in  other  jurisdictions.    It  is  of  a  general  nature  only  and  is  not 
intended  to  be,  nor  should  it  be  construed  to  be,  legal,  business  or  tax  advice  or  representations  to  any 
particular Minority Shareholder.  Accordingly, Minority Shareholders should consult their own legal and tax 
advisors with respect to their particular  circumstances, including the application and effect of the income 
and other tax laws of any country, province, territory, state or local tax authority.  The discussion below is 
qualified accordingly.
Minority Shareholders Resident in Canada
The following portion of the summary is generally applicable to a Minority Shareholder who is or is deemed
to be, at all material times and for the purposes of the Tax Act, resident in Canada (a “Resident Shareholder”).
Exchange of Common Shares for Amalco Class A Preferred Shares
A Resident Shareholder who, in the course of the Amalgamation, exchanges Common Shares for Amalco 
Class A Preferred Shares will realize neither a capital gain nor capital loss as a result of the exchange.  The Resident 
Shareholder will be considered to have disposed of the Common Shares for proceeds of disposition equal to such 
Resident Shareholder’s aggregate adjusted cost base of the Common Shares immediately before the Amalgamation 
and  to  have  acquired  the  Amalco  Class  A  Preferred  Shares  at  an  aggregate  cost  equal  to  those  proceeds  of 
disposition,  which  will represent the aggregate adjusted cost base of the Amalco Class A Preferred Shares to the 
Resident  Shareholder.    There  will,  however,  be  income  tax  consequences  to  the  Resident  Shareholders  on  the 
redemption of the Amalco Class A Preferred Shares, as described below.
Redemption of Amalco Class A Preferred Shares
We  understand  that  the  paid-up  capital  of  each  Amalco  Class  A  Preferred  share  at  the  time  of  the 
redemption  will  be  not  less  than  its  fair  market  value,  and  for  this  reason,  no  deemed  dividend  will  arise  on  the 
redemption  of  the  Class  A  Preferred  Shares  provided  that  the  proceeds  of  disposition  equal  or  are  less  than  the 
aggregate  paid-up  capital  for  such  shares.    A  Resident  Shareholder  whose  Amalco  Class  A  Preferred  shares  are 
redeemed will generally realize a capital gain (or a capital loss) to the extent that the proceeds of disposition exceed 
(or are less than) the Resident Shareholder’s adjusted cost base of the Amalco Class A Preferred shares plus any 
reasonable  costs  incurred  by  the  Resident  Shareholder  in  connection  with  the  disposition.    The  tax  treatment  of 
capital gains and capital losses under the Tax Act is discussed below.
Dissenting Resident Shareholders
Under  the  current  administrative  practice  of  the  CRA,  Resident  Shareholders  who  are  Dissenting 
Shareholders,  who  therefore  do  not  acquire  Amalco  Class  A  Preferred  Shares  and  whose  Common  Shares  are 
purchased  by  Amalco  for  cash,  should  be  considered  to  have  disposed  of  their  Common  Shares  for  proceeds  of 
disposition equal to the amount paid to them by Amalco for such Common Shares less the amount of any interest 
awarded by the court.  Such Resident Shareholders will generally realize a capital gain (or capital loss) to the extent 
that those proceeds of disposition exceed (or are less than) the adjusted cost base of the Common Shares to the 
Dissenting Shareholder immediately before the Amalgamation plus any reasonable costs incurred by the Dissenting 
Shareholder in connection with the disposition.  Any interest awarded to a Resident Shareholder who is a Dissenting 
Shareholder will be included in the Resident Shareholder’s income.  The tax treatment of capital gains and capital 
losses under the Tax Act is discussed below.  As this is an administrative practice only, Resident Shareholders who
19
are Dissenting Shareholders should consult their own tax advisors with respect to the tax implications to them of the 
exercise of their right of dissent.
Taxation of Capital Gains or Losses
A Resident Shareholder who, as described above, realizes a capital gain or a capital loss on the redemption 
of Amalco Class A Preferred Shares or, in the case of a Resident Shareholder who is a Dissenting Shareholder, on 
the disposition of Common Shares, will generally be required to include in income one-half of any such capital gain 
(“taxable capital gain”) and may apply one-half of any such capital loss (“allowable capital loss”) against taxable 
capital gains in accordance with the detailed rules in the Tax Act.  Generally, allowable capital losses in excess of 
taxable capital gains realized in a taxation year may be carried back and applied to reduce taxable capital gains in 
any  of  the  three  preceding  taxation  years  or  carried  forward  and  applied  to  reduce  taxable  capital  gains  in  any 
subsequent taxation years in accordance with the detailed rules of the Tax Act.
If the Resident Shareholder is a corporation, or a partnership or trust of which a corporation is a member or 
a beneficiary, any capital loss realized on the disposition of any Common Shares or redemption of any Amalco Class 
A Preferred Shares may, in certain circumstances, be reduced by the amount of certain dividends previously received 
or deemed to have been received on such Common Shares and, in the case of the redemption of Amalco Class A 
Preferred Shares, on the Common Shares exchanged therefor, in accordance with the detailed provisions of the Tax 
Act.  Resident Shareholders should consult their own tax advisors for specific information regarding the application of 
these provisions.
A “Canadian controlled private corporation” (as defined in the Tax Act) may be liable to pay an additional
6⅔% refundable tax on certain investment income, including amounts of interest and taxable capital gains.
The  realization  of  a  capital  gain  (or  capital  loss)  by  an  individual  (including  most  trusts)  may  affect  an 
individual’s liability for alternative minimum tax under the Tax Act.  Resident Shareholders should consult their own 
tax advisors with respect to alternative minimum tax provisions.
Minority Shareholders Not Resident in Canada
This portion of the summary is generally applicable to a Minority Shareholder who (i) is or is deemed to be, 
at all material times and for the purposes of the Tax Act and any applicable income tax convention, not resident in 
Canada; (ii) does not hold or use, and is not deemed to hold or use the Common Shares in the course of carrying on 
business  in  Canada;  and  (iii) is  not  an  insurer  carrying  on  business  in  Canada  or  elsewhere  (a  “Non-Resident 
Shareholder”).    Non-Resident  Shareholders  should  consult  their  own  tax  advisors  having  regard  to  their  own 
particular circumstances.
Exchange of Common Shares for Amalco Class A Preferred Shares
A  Non-Resident  Shareholder  who,  in  the  course  of  the  Amalgamation,  exchanges  Common  Shares  for 
Amalco Class A Preferred Shares will realize neither a capital gain nor capital loss as a result of the exchange.  The 
Non-Resident Shareholder will be considered to have disposed of the Common Shares for proceeds of disposition 
equal to such Non-Resident Shareholder’s aggregate adjusted cost base of the Common Shares immediately before 
the Amalgamation and to have acquired the Amalco Class A Preferred Shares at an aggregate cost equal to such 
proceeds of disposition, which will represent the aggregate adjusted cost base of the Class A Preferred Shares to the 
Non-Resident Shareholder.
Redemption of Amalco Class A Preferred Shares
A Non-Resident Shareholder whose Amalco Class A Preferred shares are redeemed will generally realize a 
capital  gain  (or  a  capital  loss)  in  the  same  manner  as  a  Resident  Shareholder  as  generally  described  above.  
However, a Non-Resident Shareholder will not be subject to tax under the Tax Act on any capital gain realized on the 
redemption unless the Amalco Class A Preferred Shares constitute “taxable Canadian property” (as defined in the 
Tax Act) to the Non-Resident Shareholder at the time of the redemption and the Non-Resident Shareholder is not 
entitled  to  relief  under  an  applicable  income  tax  convention  between  Canada  and  the  country  in  which  the  Non-
Resident Shareholder is resident.
The Amalco Class A Preferred Shares will generally not constitute “taxable Canadian property” to a Non-
Resident Shareholder at the time of the redemption provided that: (i) the Common Shares and the Amalco Class A 
Preferred  Shares  are  listed  or  deemed  to  be  listed  on  a  designated  stock  exchange  (which  currently  includes  the 
TSX-V) at the time of the redemption, and (ii) the Non-Resident Shareholder, persons with whom the Non-Resident 
Shareholder  did  not  deal  at  arm’s  length,  or  the  Non-Resident  Shareholder  together  with  such  persons  have  not
20
owned 25% or more of the shares of any class or series of the capital stock of the Corporation or 25% or more of the 
Amalco  Class  A  Preferred  Shares  at  any  time  during  the  60-month  period  immediately  preceding  the  time  of  the 
redemption.  Provided that, immediately prior to the Amalgamation, the Common Shares are listed on a designated 
stock exchange (which currently includes the TSX-V), and provided that the Amalco Class A Preferred Shares are 
redeemed by Amalco within 60 days after the Amalgamation, the Amalco Class A Preferred Shares will be deemed to 
be listed on a designated stock exchange until the earliest time at which such Amalco Class A Preferred Shares are 
so redeemed.
If the Amalco Class A Preferred Shares are taxable Canadian property to a Non-Resident Shareholder at 
the time of the redemption, a capital gain realized on the disposition of such Amalco Class A Preferred Shares may 
be exempt from tax under the applicable income tax convention.  In the event that any capital gain realized by a Non-
Resident Shareholder on the redemption of the Amalco Class A Preferred Shares is not exempt from tax under the 
Tax Act by virtue of an applicable income tax convention, the tax consequences pertaining to capital gains (or capital 
losses) as generally described above will generally apply.  Non-Resident Shareholders should consult their own tax 
advisors regarding any Canadian reporting requirements arising from these transactions.
Dissenting Shareholders
Under  the  current  administrative  practice  of  the  CRA,  Non-Resident  Shareholders  who  are  Dissenting 
Shareholders,  who  therefore  do  not  acquire  Amalco  Class  A  Preferred  Shares  and  whose  Common  Shares  are 
purchased  by  Amalco  for  cash,  should  be  considered  to  have  disposed  of  their  Common  Shares  for  proceeds  of 
disposition equal to the amount paid to them by Amalco for such Common Shares less the amount of any interest 
awarded by the court.  Such Non-Resident Shareholders will generally realize a capital gain (or capital loss) to the 
extent that those proceeds of disposition exceed (or are less than) the adjusted cost base of the Common Shares to 
the  Dissenting  Shareholder  immediately  before  the  Amalgamation  plus  any  reasonable  costs  incurred  by  the 
Dissenting Shareholder in connection with the disposition.  Any interest awarded to a Non-Resident Shareholder who 
is a Dissenting Shareholder will not be subject to Canadian withholding tax.  As this is an administrative practice only, 
Non-Resident Shareholders who are Dissenting Shareholders should consult their own tax advisors with respect to 
the tax implications to them of the exercise of their right of dissent.
Provided  that  the  Common  Shares  do  not  constitute  taxable  Canadian  property,  a  Non-Resident 
Shareholder, who is a Dissenting Shareholder, will not be subject to tax under the Tax Act in respect of any capital 
gain realized on the disposition of the Common Shares.
Other Tax Considerations
This  Circular  does  not  address  any  tax  considerations  of  the  transactions  described  herein  other 
than  certain  Canadian  federal  income  tax  considerations.    Minority  Shareholders  who  are  resident  in 
jurisdictions other than Canada should consult their own tax advisors with respect to the tax implications of 
the  transactions  described  herein,  including  any  associated  filing  requirements  in  such  jurisdictions.  
Minority Shareholders should also consult their own tax advisors regarding Canadian federal, provincial or 
territorial considerations of the transactions described herein.
PRIOR VALUATIONS
To the knowledge of the Corporation and its directors and senior officers, after reasonable inquiry, there are 
no  prior  formal  valuations  (as  such  term  is  defined  in  MI 61-101)  of  the  Corporation,  its  material  assets  or  its 
securities made in the 24 months preceding the date hereof.
INTEREST OF PERSONS IN THE MATTERS TO BE ACTED UPON AT THE MEETING
The  Amalgamation  involves  the  amalgamation  of  the  Corporation  and  Newco  and  will  result  in  Amalco 
becoming a corporation that is wholly-owned, directly or indirectly, by the Acquirors and the Ongoing Shareholder.  
The  Acquirors  beneficially  own  38,972,360 Common  Shares  representing  approximately  91.8%  of  the  issued  and 
outstanding  Common  Shares.    Pengzhi  Guo  is  a  director  of  the  Corporation,  Shicheng  Song  is  a  director  of  the 
Corporation, Wenhong (Wilson) Jin is an officer and director of the Corporation and Guixin Zhao is an officer of the 
Corporation.  Each of Pengzhi Guo, Shicheng Song, Wenhong (Wilson) Jin and Guixin Zhao may have an interest in 
the Amalgamation as a result of being directors or officers of the entities that are affiliated with the Acquirors.
21
INTEREST OF INFORMED PERSONS IN MATERIAL TRANSACTIONS
Except  as  disclosed  herein,  the  Corporation  is  not  aware  that  any  directors,  executive  officers  or  other 
informed persons of the Corporation, or any associates or Affiliates of any informed person of the Corporation, has 
had any material interest, direct or indirect, in any transaction since the commencement of the Corporation’s most 
recently  completed financial  year  or in  any proposed transaction  which  has materially  affected  or  would materially 
affect the Corporation or any of its subsidiaries.
MATERIAL CHANGES IN THE AFFAIRS OF THE CORPORATION
Except  as  generally  disclosed  in  this  Circular,  the  Corporation  has  no  plans  or  proposals  for  material
changes in its affairs, business, corporate structure, management or personnel.
DIRECTORS’ AND OFFICERS’ INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION
The  Corporation  is  currently  covered  under  directors’  and  officers’  liability  insurance  policy  with  Great 
American Insurance Group  which comprises coverage against liability incurred by the  directors and officers  of the 
Corporation.  The Corporation currently renews such insurance on an annual basis.  The current annual coverage 
limit for the Corporation  is  $5,000,000.  The most recent  annual  premium paid by the  Corporation for this level  of 
coverage was $15,000, no part of which is payable by the directors and officers of the Corporation.  Subject to the 
limitations contained in the BCBCA, a director or officer is also entitled to indemnification by the Corporation.
The Corporation will arrange for customary directors’ and officers’ indemnification and trailing insurance to 
be in place for a period of 3 years following the completion of the Amalgamation  with an annual coverage limit of 
$2,000,000.
Management does not currently know of any matters to be brought before the Meeting other than those set
forth in the Notice accompanying this Circular.
OTHER BUSINESS
OTHER MATERIAL FACTS
There are no material facts concerning the securities of the Corporation or any other matter not disclosed in 
this Circular that has not previously been generally disclosed, is known to the Corporation, and would reasonably be 
expected to affect the decision of the Shareholders to accept or reject the Amalgamation.
AUDITOR, TRANSFER AGENT AND REGISTRAR
The auditor of the Corporation is Ernst & Young LLP who were first appointed as auditor to the Corporation 
on May 22, 2008.  The transfer agent and registrar of the Corporation is Computershare Investor Services Inc. at its 
office at 3rd Floor, 510 Burrard Street, Vancouver, B.C. V6C 3B9.
As at the date of this Circular, no third parties have been retained by or on behalf of the Corporation to make
solicitations in respect of the Amalgamation.
SOLICITATION
Additional  information  relating  to  the  Corporation  can  be  found  under  the  Corporation’s  profile  on  the 
SEDAR  website  at  www.sedar.com.    Financial  information  regarding  the  Corporation  is  included  in  its  audited
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
22
financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2012, the auditor’s report thereon and its unaudited financial 
statements  for  the  three  and  nine  month  period  ended  September  30,  2013,  together  with  the  corresponding 
management discussion and analysis.  Copies of the audited and unaudited financial statements and corresponding 
management  discussion  and  analysis,  as  well  as  additional  copies  of  this  Circular,  may  be  obtained  from  the 
Corporation  at  the  Corporation’s  head  and  registered  office  located  at  Suite  850,  580  Hornby  Street,  Vancouver, 
British  Columbia,  Canada.    The  Corporation’s  unaudited  financial  statements  for  the  three  and  nine  month  period 
ended September 30, 2013 will be sent without charge to any Shareholder requesting them.
23
CERTIFICATE OF THE CORPORATION
The foregoing contains no untrue statement of material fact and does not omit to state a material fact that is 
required to be stated or that is necessary to make a statement not misleading in light of the circumstances in which it 
was made.  The undersigned hereby certifies that the contents and the mailing of this Circular have been approved 
by the Board of Directors and that the Circular has been sent to the auditor of the Corporation, each director of the 
Corporation and each Shareholder entitled to notice of the Meeting.
DATED at Vancouver, British Columbia this 17th day of March, 2014.
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
(signed) “Wenhong Jin” 
Wenhong (Wilson) Jin 
President and Director
24
CONSENT
To:
The Board of Directors of Huakan International Mining Inc. (the “Corporation”)
I  refer  to  the  fairness  opinion  dated  March 13,  2014,  which  I  prepared  in  relation  to  the  proposed 
amalgamation  of the Corporation  with  0996059 B.C. Ltd., a corporation owned  by Hong Kong Huakan Investment 
Co.,  Limited,  Sun  Luck  Asia  Investment  Limited  and  Power  Best  Resources  Inc.    I  consent  to  the  inclusion  of  a 
summary of the fairness opinion in this document.
DATED at Vancouver, British Columbia this 17th day of March, 2014
(signed) “Stephen W. Semeniuk” 
Stephen W. Semeniuk, CFA
A-1
APPENDIX A
HUAKAN INTERNATIONAL MINING INC.
SPECIAL RESOLUTION
RESOLVED AS A SPECIAL RESOLUTION THAT:
The  amalgamation  (the  “Amalgamation”)  of  Huakan  International  Mining  Inc.  (the  “Corporation”)  with 
0996059  B.C.  Ltd.  (“Newco”),  a  corporation  owned  by  Hong  Kong  Huakan  Investment  Co.,  Limited,  Sun 
Luck Asia Investment Ltd. and Power Best Resources Inc., upon the terms and conditions set forth in the 
amalgamation  agreement  (the  “Amalgamation  Agreement”)  dated  March  14,  2014  between  the 
Corporation and Newco, attached as Appendix B to the management information circular (the “Circular”) of 
the Corporation dated March 17, 2014, as the Amalgamation may be modified or amended as approved by 
the  board  of  directors  of  the  Corporation  (provided  that  there  shall  be  no  modification  or  amendment  of 
terms that would adversely affect the redemption amount payable in respect of each Class A preferred share 
of Amalco), is hereby approved;
The entering into of the Amalgamation Agreement between the Corporation and Newco is hereby ratified 
and approved and the Amalgamation Agreement is hereby adopted;
The  delisting  of  the  Corporation’s  common  shares  from  the  TSX  Venture  Exchange  following  the 
Amalgamation is hereby approved;
Notwithstanding that this special resolution has been duly passed by the shareholders of the Corporation, 
the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Corporation  may,  in  its  sole  discretion  and  without  further  approval  of  the 
shareholders of the Corporation, (i) amend the Amalgamation Agreement (provided that there shall be no 
modification or amendment of terms that would adversely affect the redemption amount payable in respect 
of each Class A preferred share of Amalco), or (ii) not proceed with the Amalgamation; and
Any one officer or director of the Corporation is hereby authorized and directed for and on behalf of and in 
the name of the Corporation, to do all acts and things and to execute, whether under the corporate seal of 
the  Corporation  or  otherwise,  and  deliver  all  such  documents  and  instruments  as  he  or  she  considers 
necessary or desirable to give effect to this special resolution and the matters authorized hereby.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B-1
APPENDIX B
HUAKAN INTERNATIONAL MINING INC.
AMALGAMATION AGREEMENT
See attached.
Appendix B 2
AMALGAMATION AGREEMENT
Made as ofMarch 14, 2014
Between
HUAKAN INTERNATIONAL MINING INC.
@minaﬂer referred to as “Hunlmn”)
and
0996059 B.C. LTD.
(hereinaﬁet referred to as “Newco”)
mc m Illa n
:43?


Appendix B 3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.1 
1.2 Interpretation Not Affected by Headings, etc. 
1.4 Date for Any 
1.5 Knowledge 
1.6 
ARTICLE 2 — AMALGAMATION 
2.1 Agreement to 
2.2 Amalgamation
2.3 Eﬂ‘eetive 
2.4 Redemption ofAn-ialco Class A Shares 
2.5 Redemption ofAmaleo Class B Shares
2.6 Conversion ofthe Convertible Loan 
2.7 Effect ofCertiﬁcate 
ARTICLE 3 — REPRESENTATIONS AND 
3.1 Representations and Warranties ofNewco 
3.2 Representations and Warranties ofHuakan 
4.1 Negative Covenants 
4.2 Positive Covenants ofNewco 
4.3 Negative Covenants 
44 Positive Covenants ofHuakan 
4.5 Delisting; Non reporting 
4.6 No Shop Covenants 
4.7 Superior Proposal 
4‘8 Depositary 
ARTICLE 5 — CONDITIONS 
5.1 Newco Conditions Precedent
5.2 Huakan Conditions Precedent
5.3 Mutual Conditions 
5.4 Merger ofConditions 
6.1 Name 
6.2 Registered and Records 
6.3 Operational 
6.4 Fiscal Year and Aceomiting Standards
6.6 Restrictions on 
6.7 Restrictions on Share 
%_ Aft“;
(i) AVIALGAMATI N AGREEMJEVT


Appendix B 4
6.8 Articles ofAmaloo 
69 Minimum and Maximum Number ofDirectors 
ARTICLE 7 — AMENDMENT AND TERMINATION 
7.l 
7.3 Effect 
ARTICLE 8 -GENERAL PROVISIONS 
8.1 Governing Law and Jurisdiction 
8.3 
8.4 
8‘5 
8.6 
8.7 Enurement and Assignment
8.9 Time ofEssence 
8.10 Executionin 
SCHEDULE A — FORM OF ARTICLES OF 
SCHEDULE B — FORM 13 AMALGAMATION APPLICATION AND RELATED
SCHEDULE C — LIST OF NEWCO GROUP AND THEIR HK SHARES PURSUANT TO
SCHEDULE D — CONSENTS PURSUANT TO SECTION 5.1(C) 
WHOM AGREEMENT 
(ii)


Appendix B 5
AMALGAMATION AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT is made as of March 14, 2014, between

HUAKAN INTERNATIONAL MINING INC.,
a corporation incorporated under the laws of British Columbia
(hereinaﬁer referred to as “Huakan”)

and
0996059 B.C. LTD.
a corporation incorporated under the laws of British Columbia
(hereinaﬁer referred to as “Newco”)

WHEREAS:

At Huakan, incorporated under the BCBCA (as hereinaﬁer deﬁned), is a reporting issuer in
the provinces of Alberta and British Columbia, whose common shares (“HK Shares")
are listed on the TSX Venture Exchange (the “Exchange”) under the symbol of“HK”.

B. Newco (as hereinaﬂer deﬁned), incorporated under the BCBCA, is a privately-held
company owned by the Newco Shareholders (as hereinaﬁer deﬁned) who collectively
own or control over 90% of the outstanding HK Shares, and Newco has proposed the
transactions contemplated herein as a going private transaction (collectively the
‘Trmsaetion’ﬁ for Huakan.

C. Newco and Huakan are “related parties” within the meaning of Mlol-lOl (as hereinaﬁer
deﬁned) and consequently the transaction contemplated hereby will constitute a “business
combination” within the meaning of such instrument and the Exchange’s Policy 5.9 (as
hereinaﬂer deﬁned),

D. Each of Huakan and Newco has determined that the Transaction is in the best interest of
their respective corporations and that it be effected through an amalgamation upon the
terms and conditions hereinaﬁer set out

NOW THEREFORE this Agreement witnesses that, in consideration of the premises and the

covenants and agreements herein contained, the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE 1 — INTERPRETATION

1.1 Deﬁnitions

In this Agreement:
(a) “Agreement” means this amalgamation agreement; ﬂ/
\/
/LQA
AMALGAMATION AGREEMENT


Appendix B a
_ 2 .

(b) “Amnlco” means the corporation continuing from the amalgamation of the
Amalgamating Corporations;

(c) “Amalco Common Shares” means the common shares of Amalco;

(d) “Ame Class A Shares” means the Class A preferred shares of Amalco;

(e) “Amaleo Class B Shares" means the Class B preferred shares of Amalco;

(i) “Amalco Preferred Shares” means collectively, the Amaleo Class A Shares and
the Amalco Class B Shares;

(g) “Amalgamating Corporations” means Huakan and Neweo;

(h) “Amalgamation” means the amalgamation of Huakan and Neweo pursuant to
section 269 of the BCBCA to form Arnalco, upon the terms and subject to the
conditions set forth in this Agreement;

(i) “Amalgamation Application” means the amalgamation application in the form
attached hereto as Schedule B that shall be ﬁled with the Registrar under
subsection 275(l)(a) of the BCBCA in order to give effect to the Amalgamation;

G) "Articles of Amnleo” means the articles of Amalco in the form attached hereto as
Schedule A;

(k) “BCBCA” means the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia) as amended
ﬁom time to time;

(1) “Business Day” means a day other than a Saturday, Sunday or statutory holiday,
upon which Canadian chartered banks are open for business within the Province
of British Columbia;

(m) “Certiﬁcate of Amalgamation” means a certiﬁcate of amalgamation issued by
the Registrar in respect of the Amalgamation;

(n) “Converﬂhle Loan” means an unsecured loan of $1,632,646.50 which has been
advanced by the Newco Shareholders to Neweo and to be held in the trust account
of Newco’s counsel as the Trust Amount;

(0) “Depositary” has the meaning set out in Section 4.8 of this Agreement;

(1:) “Dissenting Shareholdeds)” means a shareholder of Huakan that has validly
exercised a dissent right in connection with the Amalgamation under the
provisions of the BCBCA and has completed the dissent procedure as set out in
Part 8 Division 2 of the BCBCA;

(q) “Effective Date" means the date the Amalgamation is effective under the
BCBCA; W

AMAIJEAMATION AGREEMENT
2%


Appendix B 7
_ 3 .

(r) “Effective Time" means the time at which the Amalgamation becomes eﬁ‘ective
on the Effective Date, as mutually agreed by the parties;

(s) “Exchange” means the TSX Venture Exchange;

(t) “Fairness Opinion" has the meaning set out in subsection 4.4(a)(ii) of this
Ageement;

(u) “Governmental Authority” means any domestic, foreign or multi-national,
national, state, provincial or municipal govemrnent, any political subdivision
thereof or any other govemmmtal, quasi-govemmental, judicial, public or
statutory instrumentality, authority, body, agency, department, bureau or entity, or
any court, tribunal or arbitrator with the authority to bind a party thereof at law
and includes the Exchange;

(v) “HK Shares” means common shares in the capital of Huakan;

(W) “Huakan” means Huakan International Mining Inc., and includm any and all
predecessors of Huakan;

(x) “Huakan Amalgamation Resolution” means the special resolution of the
Huakan Shareholders approving this Agreement and the Amalgamation and all
transactions ancillary thereto;

(y) “Hualran Shareholders" means the holders of HK Shares;

(2) “Material Adverse Change” means any event, condition, fact, change,
commence, effect or set of circumstances that, individually or in the aggregate
with any other event, fact, change, occurrence, effect or set of circumstances has
had, or could reasonably be expected to have, a materially adverse effect on the
business, assets, capitalization, properties, liabilitim (whether absolute, accrued,
conditional, contingent or otherwise), results of operations or condition (ﬁnancial
or otherwise) of a party hereto, provided that any event, condition, fact, change,
commence , effect or set of circumstances involving Huakan and/or Newco or any
action or omission by any of them relating to the transactions contemplated or
referred to in this Agreement shall be deemed not to be a Material Adverse
Change;

(aa) “Meeting” means the special meeting of Huakan Shareholders, including any
adjournment or adioutnments or postponement or postponements thereof, to be
held for the purpose of seeking approval of the Amalgamation by Huakan
Shareholdas;

(bh) “MEI-101” means Multilateral Instrument 61-101 - Protection ofMinority
Security Holders in Special Wanaactians of the Canadian Secutities
Administrators;

AMALGAMATION AGREEMENT


Appendix B a
. 4 _

(cc) “Neweo” means 0996059 B.C. Ltd, a corporation incorporated under the laws of
British Columbia;

(dd) "Newco’s counsel” means McMillan LLP or such other legal counsel retained by
Newoo;

(ee) “Newco Common Shares” means issued common shares in the authorized capital
of Newco all of which are and will be owned by the Newoo Shareholders;

(ﬂ) “Newoo Group” means the Huakan Shareholders listed in Schedule C attached
hereto;

(gg) “Newco Shareholders” means the holders of Newco Common Shares, being
Hong Kong Huakan Investment Co., Limited, Sun Luck Asia Investmmt Limited
and Power Best Resources Inc.;

(hh) “Ongoing Shareholder” means Shu-Fan Lee, a Huakan Shareholder holding
214,286 HK Shares;

(ii) “Policy 5.9” means Policy 5.9 — Protection of Minority Security Holders in
Special Yhznsactians of the Exchange;

ﬁj) “Public Record” means the continuous disclosure record of Huakan which is
found at www.sedar.com and on its website;

(kk) “Public Shareholders” means all the beneﬁcial owners of HK Shares other than
the Newco Group and the Ongoing Shareholder;

(11) “Redemption Price” means, in respect of the redemption price of each Amalco
Class A Share which will be issued in exchange for each HK Share owned by a
Public Shareholder (excluding Dissenting Shareholders), $0.50 in cash which is
the deemed paid up amount thereon;

(mm) "Registrar" means the Registrar of Companies appointed under section 400 of
the BCBCA;

(nn) “Special Committee” has the meaning set out in subsection 4.4(a)(i) of this

Agreement;
(00) “Tax Act” means the Income TaxAct (Canada) as amended form time to time;
(pp) “Transaction” means the privatization of Huakan by way of the Amalgamation
and related matters as provided for herein; and
(qq) “Trust Amount" means $1,632,646.50 to be held in trust by Newco’s counsel for
use by Newco and Amalco for the mere purpose of the payment of the aggregate
Redemption Price payable to the Public Shareholders pursuant to the
Amalgamation and this Agreement. 
AMALGAMA‘l'lDN AGREEMENT AW]


Appendix B 9
_ 5 _
1.2 Interpretation Not Affected by Headings, etc.
The division of this Agreement into articles, sections and paragraphs is for convenience of
reference only and shall not affect the construction or interpretation of this Agreement. The
terms “hereof”, “herein”, and “hereundef’ and similar expressions refertu this Agreement and
not to any particular article, section, paragraph or other portion hereof and include any agreement
or instrument supplementary or ancillary hereto.
1.3 Number, etc.
Words importing the singular number shall include the plural and vice versa, words importing
the use of any gender shall include all genders and words importing persons shall include ﬁrms
and corporations and vice versa
1.4 Date for Any Action
In the event that any date on which any action is required to be taken hereunder by any of the
parties is not a Business Day in the place where an action is required to be taken, such action
shall be required to be taken on the next succeeding day which is a Business Day in such place.
1 .5 Knowledge
Where any representation or warranty contained in this Agreement is expressly qualiﬁed by
reference to the knowledge of a party, as applicable, it shall be deemed to refer to the actual
knowledge, aﬁer having made due inquiry, of the directors and oﬂicers of the particular
company
1.6 Schedules
The following Schedules attached hereto form part of and are incorporated in this Agreement:
Schedule A Form of Articles of Amalco
Schedule B Form 13 Amalgamation Application and related Documents
Schedule C List of Neweo Group and their HK Shares Pursuant to Section 2.2
(0)
Schedule D Cements Pursuant to Section 5.1(c)
ARTICLE 2 — AMALGAMATION
2.] Agreement to Amalgamate
Subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement, Hualran and Newco shall amalgamate on
the Eﬁ'ective Date under the provisions of the BCBCA and continue as one corporation.
\ﬂt
AMALGAMATI'DN AGREEMENT N


Appendix B 10
_ 5 .
2.2 Amalgamation
At the Effective Time, the following shall be deemed to occur without any further act or
formality:

(a) the Amalgamating Corporations shall be amalgamated and continue as Amalco,
under the name of "Huakan International Mining Inc”;

(b) each of the issued and outstanding HK Shares held by Public Shareholders (other
than Dissenting Shareholders) shall be exchanged for one Amalco Class A Share,
and such Amalco Class A Shares shall be deemed to be immediately redeemed
aﬁer the Effective Time for the Redemption Price in accordance with the Articles
of Amalco Without further action by the holder thereof;

(c) each of the issued and outstanding HK Shares held by the Newco Group, as set
out in Schedule C, shall be exchanged for one Amalco Common Share;

(d) each of the issued and outstanding HK Shares owned by the Ongoing Shareholder
shall be exchanged for one Amalco Common Share;

(e) each of the issued and outstanding Newco Common Shm held by Newco
Shareholders shall be exchanged for one Amaleo Class B Share, and such Amalco
Class B Shares shall be immediately redeemed for their redemption price aﬁer the
Effective Time in accordance with the Articles of Amalco;

(i) all the unissued shares in the capital of Huakan and Newco shall be cancelled;

(g) Dissenting Shareholders shall be mtitled to be paid in cash the fair value of their
HK Shares; and

(h) the aggregate capital of Amalco shall be an amount equal to the aggregate paid up
capital of the HK Shares and Newco Common Shares for purposes of the Tax
Act, and shall, subject to the sufﬁciency of such aggregate capital, be allocated
among the classes of shares of Amalco in the following priority and manner such

that:
(i) the capital of Amalco Class A Shares is equal to the Redemption Price of
the Amalco Class A Shares,
(ii) the capital of Amalco Class B Shares is equal to the redemption price of
the Amalco Class B Shares determined in accordance with the Articles of
Amalco, and
(iii) the balance of the aggregate capital of Amalco is allocated to the capital of
the Amalco Common Shares.
JV
AMALGAMA‘I‘ION AGREEMENT ‘4’“


Appendix B 11
_ 7 .
2.3 Effective Date
The parties agree that they will use their commercially reasonable efforts to ensure that the
Etfective Date will occur within seven (7) Business Days of the date when the Huakan
Amalgamation Resolution is passed unless they otherwise agree in writing.
2.4 Redemption of Amalco Class A Shares
The patties agree that each of the issued and outstanding HK Shares held by Public Shareholders
(other than Dissenting Shareholders) shall be deemed to be immediately redeemed after the
Effective Time for the Redemption Pﬁce in accordance with the Articles of Amalco.
25 Redemption ofArnulco Class B Shares
Amalco shall immediately aﬂer the Effective Time, redeem all of the Amalco Class B Shares for
cash consideration of $0.001 per Amalco Class B Share in accordance with the Articles of
Amalco.
2.6 Conversion of the Convertible Loan
Immediately aﬁer the Effective Time, the outstanding principal amount of the Convertible Loan
shall be convened into Amalco Common Shares at a conversion price equal to $050 per share.
2.7 Effect of Certiﬁcate of Amalgamation
On the Effective Date at the Eﬂective Time: (i) the Amalgamation shall become effective and
Newco and Huakan shall he amalgamated and continue as one corporation under the terms and
conditions prescribed by this Agreement; (ii) the property of each of Newco and Huakan shall
continue to be the property of Amalco; (iii) Amalco shall continue to be liable for the obligations
of each of Newco and Huakan; (iv) any existing cause of action, claim or liability to prosecution
with respect to Newco or Huakan shall be unaffected; (V) any civil, criminal or administrative
action or proceeding pending by or against either Newco or Huakan may he continued to be
prosecuted by or against Amalco; (vi) a conviction against, or ﬁling, order or judgment in favour
of or against, either Newco or Huakan may be enforced by or against Amalco; and (vii) the
Articles of Amalco shall be in the form set out in Schedule A.
2.8 Filing
Upon fulﬁllment of the conditions set out herein, Huakan and Newco shall coordinate the ﬁling
of the Amalgamation Application attached hereto as Schedule B with the Registrar for the
purpose of bringing the Amalgamation into effect pursuant to the BCBCA.
AMAIﬂAMATION AGREEMENT IL“
2%


Appendix B 12
. 3 .
ARTICLE 3— REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
3.1 Representations and Warranties of Newco
Newco hereby as of the date hereof and as of the Effective Date represents and warrants to
Huakan that:

(a) Newco is a corporation duly incorporated, organized and validly subsisting under
the laws of the Province of British Columbia;

(b) the board of directors and shareholders of Newco have unanimously authorized
the execution and delivery of this Agreement and approved the completion of the
Transaction contemplated herein;

(c) Newco’s authorized capital consists of an unlimited number of common shares of
which 1,000 Newco Common Shares are issued and outstanding on the Effective
Date;

(d) Newco does not have any other outstanding subscriptions, warrants, options or
other agreements or commitments obligating it to issue Newco Common Shares
or any other shares in its capital;

(e) Apart from Hong Kong Huakan Investment Co., Limited, Sun Luck Asia
Investment Limited and Power Best Resources Inc., there are no other
shareholders of Newco;

(f) Trust Amount will be held in trust by Newco’s counsel as of the Effective Date;

(g) the aggregate Redemption Price payable pursuant to the Amalgamation and
transactions contemplated under this Agreement is now and shall remain available
to Newco and Amalco so that Amalco shall be in a position to redeem the Amaloo
Class A Shares in exchange for all the HK Shares owned by the Public
Shareholders pursuant to the Amalgamation;

(h) Newco does not have any material assets or property now nor will it have the
same as of the Effective Date except for the Trust Amount;

(i) Newco has no liabilities (other than disclosed in writing on the date hereof to
Huakan) and is not indebted to any party for any amormt except for the
Convertible Loan;

0) the Newco Group collectively own, directly or indirectly, over 90% of the
outstanding HK Shares;

(k) no person has any written or oral agreement, option, understanding or
commitment or any right or privilege capable of becoming an agreement for the

purchase, the exchange, transfer or other disposition ﬁom Newco of any of its
assets; \/(/
AMMAMATION AGREEMENT M


Appendix B 13
_ 9 .
(1) there are no contracts, agreements or engagements of any director or oﬂicer of

Newco, either written or verbal, providing for a ﬁxed period of employment;

(in) the entering into and performance of this Agreement and the transactions
contemplated herein will not:

(i) violate the constating documents of Newco;

(ii) constitute a violation of or default under, or conﬂict with, any restriction
of any kind or any contract, commitment, agreement, understanding or
arrangernent to which is a party or by which Newco is bound and will not
give any person any right to terminate, accelerate or cancel any material
agreement or any right enjoyed by Newco because of such agreement; or

(iii) violate any statute, regulation, order, judgment or decree by which Newco
is bound;

(n) Newco does not require the approval of any Governmental Authority in Canada or
elsewhere to consummate the Transaction;

(o) Newco has not guaranteed or indemniﬁed, or agreed to guarantee or indemnify,
any debt, liability or other obligation of any person;

(p) the corporate records and minute books of Newco contain complete and accurate
minutes of all meetings of the directors and shareholders ofNewco since its date
of incorporation, together with the full text of all resolutions of directors and
shareholders passed in lieu of such meetings, duly signed; and

(q) there is no suit, action, litigation, arbitration proceeding or governmental
proceeding, including appeals and applications for review, in progress, or, to the
knowledge of Newco, pending or threatened against or relating to Newco and
there is not presently outstanding against Newco any material judgment, decree,
injunction, rule or order of any court, governmental department, commission,
agency or arbitrator.

3.2 Representations and Warranties of Huakan
Huakan hereby represents and warrants to Newco that, except as disclosed in the Public Record‘

(a) Huakan is a corporation duly continued, organized and validly subsisting under
the laws of the Province of British Columbia;

(b) the board of directors of Huakan (excluding directors who are not entitled to vote
thereon) has unanimously authorized the execution and delivery of this
Agreement subject to receipt of an aﬁirmative Fairness Opinion in respect of the
Transaction contemplated herein, and has, subject to the foregoing, unanimously
resolved to recommend the Transaction to Huakan Shareholders;

AMAmAMATION AGREEMENT M


Appendix B 14
_ 10 _

(c) as of the date hereof, Huakan’s authorized capital consists of an unlimited number
of common shares of which 42,451,939 HK Shares are issued and outstanding,
2,230,000 HK Shares are issuable pursuant to options granted under the stock
option plan of Huakan, and there are no other securities;

(d) Huakan does not have any other outstanding subscriptions, warrants, options or
other agreements or commitments obliganng it to issue additional shares, other
than the options set out in (c) above;

(6) Huakan is not indebted to, and has no amounts due ﬁ'om:

(i) any director, ofﬁcer, employee or shareholder;

(ii) any individual related to any of the foregoing by blood, marriage or
adoption; or

(iii) any corporation controlled, directly or indirectly, by any one or more of
those persons referred to in the foregoing two sub—paragraphs;

(f) no person has any Written or oral agreement, option, understanding or
commitment or any ﬁght or privilege capable of becoming an agreanent for the
purchase, the exchange, transfer or other disposition from Huakan of any of its
assets;

(g) the entering into and performance of this Agreement and the transactions
contemplated herein will not:

(i) violate the constating docummts of Huakan;

(ii) constitute a violation of or default under, or conﬂict with, any restriction
of any kind or any contract, commitment, agreement, understanding or
arrangement to which Huakan is a party or by which Huakan is bound and
will not give any person any right to terminate, accelerate or cancel any
material agreement or any right enjoyed by Huakan because of such
agreement; or

(iii) violate any statute, regulation, order, judgment or decree by which Huakan
is bound;

(h) Huakan has not guaranteed or indemniﬁed, or agreed to guarantee or indemnify,
any debt, liability or other obligation of any person;

(i) the corporate records and minute books of Hualran contain complete and accurate
minutes of all meetings of the directors, and committees thereof, and Huakan
Shareholders since its date of incorporation, together with the full text of all
resolutions of directors and shareholders passed in lieu of such meetings, duly
signed;

JV
,xu’ak
AMALGAMATION AGREEMENT ‘


Appendix B 15
_ 1 1 _

(i) no person has any agreement, option, warrant or right to acquire or capable of
becoming an agreement for the purchase or acquisition of any of the unissued
share capital of Huakan, other than the options set out in (c) above, and there are
no outstanding securities or instruments which are convertible into or
exchangeable for HK Shares;

(k) there is no suit, action, litigation, arbitration proceeding or governmental
proceeding, including appeals and applications for review, in progress, or, to the
knowledge of Huakan, pending or threatened against or relating to Huakan and
there is not presently outstanding against Huakan any material judgment, decree,
injunction, rule or order of any court, govemmental department, commission,
agency or arbitrator;

(1) no undisclosed Material Adverse Change has occurred in the business or aﬁaim of
Huakan; and

(m) the Public Record of Huakan including all technical mineral information on its
projects is correct and up-to—date in all material respects as of the date hereof.

ARTICLE 4— COVENANTS
4.1 Negative Covenants ofNewco
Other than as speciﬁcally contemplated by this Agreement, Newco covenants and agrees with
Huakan that Newco will not, from the date hereof to and including the Effective Time, except
with the prior written consent of Huakan, such consent to not be unreasonably withheld:

(a) incur or commit to incur any additional indebtedness for borrowed money or issue
any debt securities or any other liabilities other than the Convertible Loan;

(b) declare or pay or set aside any dividends or distribute any of its properties or
assets or make any payment by way of return of capital to the Newco
Shareholders;

(0) enter into any material contract, other than as contemplated in connection with the
Amalgamation;
(d) alter or amend its articles or notice of articles as they exist on the date hereof;
(e) engage in any business enterprise or other activity different from that carried on
as of the date hereof;
(i) take any action or allow any action to be taken that will make unavailable or
reduce the Trust Amount; or
(g) omit to take any action or perform any act or enter into any transaction or
negotiation which might adversely affect or interfere with or be materially %
AMALGAMATION AGREEMENT


Appendix a 16
.12.
inconsistent with the consummation of the Amalgamation or the transactions
contemplated under this Agreement.
4.2 Positive Covenants of Newco
Newco covenants and agrees with Huakan that it will:

(a) Within 10 Business Days prior to the Meeting, cause Newco‘s counsel to deliver a
letter to the legal counsel of Huakan conﬁrming that: (i) it is holding in trust
$1,632,646.50 for Newco and (ii) it has irrevocable instruction from Newco that
Newco’s counsel will transfer such Trust Amount to the Depositary appointed for
the purpose at or immediately following the Effective Time to permit the payment
by the Depositary of the aggregate Redemption Price for the Amalco Class A
Shares in accordance with the Articles of Amalco provided this Agreement is not
terminated pursuant to Article 7;

(b) do all acts or things and execute all certiﬁcates, consents, documents or other
writings as Huakan1 acting reasonably, may deem necessary or advisable in the
fulﬁllment of their mandate in connection with the Transaction and the
consummation of the Amalgamation;

(c) take all actions necessary to comply with all applicable laws and regulatory
requirements relating to the consummation of the Amalgamation and other
transactions contanplated hereunder;

(d) take all actions necessary to ensure that all representations and warranties of
Newco are true and correct;

(e) cause the Newco Group to continue to continuously own or control at least 90%
of the outstanding HK Shares until the earlier of the Effective Time and
termination of this Agreement pursuant to the terms hereunder, and to cause the
Newco Group to vote their HK Shares in favour of the Amalgamation;

(0 use its commercially reasonable eﬁorts to obtain all necessary consents,
assignments or waivers from third parties and amendments or terminations to any
instrument or agreement, and take such other measures or actions necessary,
including without limitation causing each of the conditions precedent set forth in
Sections 5.2 and 5.3 of this Agreement to be complied with as soon as practicable,
to carry out the transactions contemplated by this Agreement;

(g) notify Huakan immediately upon becoming aware that any of the representations
and warranties contained in Section 3.] hereof are no longer true and correct in
any material respect or that Newco is in breach of any of its covenants hereunder,

(h) subject to the conditions in Sections 5.1 and 5.3 of this Agreement having been
satisﬁed, thereaﬁ/er jointly with Huaknn ﬁle with the Registrar the Form 13
Amalgamation Application and such other documents as may be required to give \ﬂ/

AMMAMATION AGREEMENT w
2&3


Appendix B 17
.13.
eﬁ'ect to the Amalgamation upon and subject to the terms, covenants and
conditions of this Agreement; and
(i) pen-nit Hualrnn and its representatives to conduct such investigations of ﬁnancial
conditions, contracnral obligations, business affairs and corporate affairs as
Huakan may deem reasonably necessary or advisable in order to ensure that the
representations, warranties, covenants and agreements are as required by Huakan;
any such investigation shall not, however, affect or mitigate the covenants,
representations and warranties of Newco hereunder.
4.3 Negative Covenants of Huakan
Other than as speciﬁcally contemplated by this Agreement, Huakan covenants and agrees with
Newco that it will not, from the date hereof to the Effective Time, except with the prior written
consent of Newco, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld:

(a) incur or commit to incur any indebtedness for borrowed money or issue any debt
securities, other than in the ordinary come of its business;

(b) declare or pay or set aside any dividends or distribute any of its properties or
assets or make any payment by way of return of capital to its shareholders;

(0) enter into any material contract, other than in the ordinary course of business or as
contemplated in connection with the Transaction;

(d) alter or amend its articles or notice of articles as they exist on the date hereof;

(e) engage in any business enterprise or other activity different ﬁom that carried on
as of the date hereof;

(i) sell, pledge, lease, dispose of, grant any interest in, encumber or agree to sell,
pledge, lease, dispose of, grant any interest in or encumber any material portion of
its assets;

(g) take any action which would be outside the ordinary course of business or which
may result in a Material Adverse Change in its affairs; or

(h) perform any act or enter into any transaction or negotiation which might
materially adversely interfere with or be materially inconsistent with the
consummation of the transactions contemplated under this Agreement.

4.4 Positive Covenants of Huakan
Huakan covenants and agrees with Newco that Huakan will:

(a) use its commercially reasonable efforts to comply with all regulatory

requirements applicable to the Amalgamation including, but not limited to, the
AMMAMA'HDN AGREEMENT M


Appendix B 18
.14.

provisions ofMI61-101 and Policy 5.9 which efforts shall include, without

limitation, the following:

(i) to provide to Huakan Shareholders the views of the special committee of
its board of directors (the “Special Committee”) which it has constituted
to consider the Transaction which committee consists of at least two
members who are “independent directors” (as such term is deﬁned in
M161-101) and who have a mandate to independently review and
supervise the Transaction process, to make a reconnndation to the
Huakan Shareholders about the fairness of the Transaction (but for
avoidance of doubt, not to make a recommendation as to whether or not
Huakan Shareholders should become Dissenting Shareholders) and for
such purpose to engage such professional, ﬁnancial and legal advisers as
they deem necessary or advisable;

(ii) to authorize the Special Committee to engage a qualiﬁed independent
ﬁnancial advisor to prepare a fairness opinion in respect of Huakan and
the Amalgamation (the “Fairness Opinion”) notwithstanding that there is
an exemption in 1V1161-101 for a formal valuation for Exchange listed
entities; and

(iii) to convene as soon as possible the Meeting of the Huakan Shareholders to
consider the approval of the Amalgamation by passing the Huakan
Amalgamation Resolution and in connection with same:

(A) for the purpose of such Meeting to prepare an information circular
and all other documents required by law to provide Huakan
Shareholders suﬂicient information to make a reasoned judgment
as to whether to approve the Amalgamation; and

(B) subject to the recommendations of the Special Committee, to
solicit proxies in favour of passing the Huakan Amalgamation
Resolution by at least two-thirds of the votes cast at such Meeting;

(b) use its commercially reasonable efforts to obtain all necessary consents,
assignments or waivers from third parties and amendments or terminations to any
instrument or agreement, and take such other measures, including without
limitation causing each of the conditions precedent set forth in Sections 5.1 (other
than Section 5.1(d)) and 5.3 of this Agreement to be complied with as soon as
practicable, to carry out the transactions contemplated by, this Agreement;

(c) notify Newco immediately upon becoming aware that any of the representations
and warranties contained in Section 3.2 hereof are no longer true and correct in
any material respect;

(d) subject to the conditions in Sections 5.2 and 53 of this Agreement having been
satisﬁed, thereaﬁer jointly with Neweo ﬁle with the Amalgamation Application W

ALI/ll
AMAICIAMATION AGREEMENT


Appendix B 19
. 15 _
and such other documents as may be required to give effect to the Amalgamation
upon and subject to the terms, covenants and conditions of this Agreement;

(e) permit Newco and its representatives to conduct such investigations of ﬁnancial
conditions, contractual obligations, business affairs and corporate affairs as
Newco may deem reasonably necessary or advisable in order to ensure that the
representations, warranties, covenants and agreements are as required by Newco;
any such investigation shall not, however, affect or mitigate the covenants,
representations and warranties of Huakan hereunder,

(i) take all actions necessary to comply with all applicable laws and regulatory
requirements relating to the consummation of the Amalgamation and other
transactions contemplated hereunder, and

(g) take all actions necessary to ensure that all representations and warranties of
Huakan are true and correct

4.5 Delisting; Non reporting Status

Subject to applicable laws, the parties shall use their commercially reasonable efforts to cause
the HK Shares to be delisted from the Exchange in a timely manner, with effect immediately
following the Effective Time. Thereupon Amalco shall forthwith make an application to cease
being a reporting issuer in Canada, which shall he made with all relevant securities commissions.
4.6 No Shop Covenants of Parties

Each of Huakan and Newco covenants and agrees with the other that prior to the Amalgamation,
such party shall not:

(a) solicit or cause or facilitate anyone else to solicit any offer (conﬁdential or
otherwise) or expression of interest to purchase any ofHuakan’s unissued
treasury securities or assets, or any of Newco’s unissued treasury securities
(except common shares) or assets;

(1:) provide information concerning either party’s securities, assets or business to
anyone for or in furtherance of anything mtioned in item (a) of this Section 4.6;

(c) pursue any other corporate acquisition, merger or sale of assets or make any other
material change to its business or affairs for either party,

provided that the foregoing shall not prevent the board of directors of either party from
responding as required by law to any bona ﬁde unsolicited submission or proposal requiring any
acquisition or disposition of assets or any bona ﬁde unsolicited proposal to amalgamate, merge
or aﬁ‘ect any agreement or any bona ﬁde unsolicited acquisition proposal generally or from
making any disclosure to Huakan Shareholders with respect thereto which upon written advice of
counsel is required under law.
AMALGAMATW AGREEMENT 
2/3


Appendix B 20
_ 15 _
4.7 Superior Proposal
In the event that prior to the time the Amalgamation becomes effective, a Superior Proposal (as
hereinaﬁer deﬁned) is offered or made to the Huakan Shareholders or Huakan, the board of
directors of Huakan may withdraw, modify or change any recommendation regarding the
Amalgamation.
For this purpose, a "Superior Proposal” means any bona ﬁde acquisition proposal which in the
opinion of Huakan’s board of directors, acting reasonably and in good faith and after
consultation with its ﬁnancial and legal advisors, constitutes a transaction which, if
consummated, would be superior to the Amalgamation from a ﬁnancial point of view to the
Public Shareholders.
For the purpose of this Section 4.7, an “acquisition proposal” means a proposal to Huakan or
the Huakan Shareholders li'om any person which constitutes, or may reasonably be expected to
lead to:
(i) an acquisition from Huakan or its securityholders of any securities of
Huakan or its subsidiaries;
(ii) any acquisition of a substantial amount of assets of either Huakan or its
subsidiaries;
(iii) an amalgamation, merger, or consolidation of either Huakan or its material
subsidiaries; or
(iv) any takeover bid, issuer bid, exchange offer, recapitalization, liquidation,
dissolution, winding-up, reorganization or similar transaction involving
Huakart
For greater certainty, Huakan and its officers and directors may not solicit or cause or facilitate
anyone else to solicit any oﬁer (conﬁdential or otherwise) or expression of interest to acquire
any of Huakan’s assets outside the ordinary course of businms, or securities, whether directly or
indirectly, or provide information concerning Huakan’s securities, assets or business to anyone
for or in furtherance of any offer or expression of interest as previously mentioned, provided that
the foregoing shall not prevent the board of directors of either party from responding as required
by law to any bona ﬁde unsolicited submission or proposal requiring any acquisition or
disposition of assets or any bona tide unsolicited proposal to amalgamate, merge or affect any
agreement or any bona ﬁde unsolicited acquisition proposal generally or from making any
disclosure to Huakan Shareholders with respect thereto which upon written advice of counsel is
required under law.
4.8 Depositary Agreement
Prior to the Effective Time, Huakan and Newco shall enter into an agreement with a depositary
(the “Depositary”) to provide for the transfer of the Trust Amount by Newco’s counsel at or
immediately following the Effective Time to the Depositary and the subsequent payment by the
 |
AMAWAMA‘I'ION AGREEMENT '
/3 1


Appendix B 21
_ 17 .
Depositary of the aggregate Redemption Price for the Amalco Class A Shares in accordance with
the Articles of Amalooi
ARTICLE 5— CONDITIONS PRECEDENT
5.1 Newco Conditions Precedent
The obligations of Newco to consummate the Amalgamation are subject to the conditions (which
conditions are inserted for the sole beneﬁt of Newco and may be waived by it, with or without
conditions, in whole or in part) that:

(a) all of the representations and warranties of Huakan made in this Agreement shall
be true and correct in all material respects as of the Effective Date and Huakan
shall have provided to Newec an ofﬁcer’s certiﬁcate, acceptable to Newco, acting
reasonably, certifying such accuracy on the Eﬂ‘ective Date;

(b) Huakan shall have complied in all material respects with its covenants contained
in this Agreement which are to be complied with or performed prior to the
Effective Date and Huakan shall have provided to Newco an ofﬁcer’s certiﬁcate,
acceptable to Newco, acting reasonably, certifying that it has so complied with its
covenants herein on the Effective Date;

(c) Huakan shall have obtained all third party and other consents, waivers, permits,
exemptions, orders, approvals, agreements and amendments and modiﬁcations to
agreements or arrangements that are necessary for the implementation of the
transactions contemplated in this Ageement as set out in Schedule D;

(d) holders of not more than two (2%) percent of the HK Shares shall have exercised
their right to dissent to be paid the fair market value of their HK Common Shares;

(e) all the outstanding options to purchase HK Shares shall have been exercised,
expired or cancelled prior to the Effective Time; and

(f) no Material Adverse Change shall have occurred since the date of this Agreement,
and Huakan shall have provided to Newco a certiﬁcate of an ofﬁcer of Huakan,
acceptable to Newco, acting reasonably, dated the Effective Date to that eﬂect.

5.2 Hunk-n Conditions Precedent

The obligations of Huakan to consummate the Amalgamation are subject to the conditions
(which conditions are inserted for the sole beneﬁt of Huakan and may be waived by it, with or
without conditions, in whole or in part) that:

(a) Newoo shall have obtained, if required, all third party and other consents, waivers,
pemrits, exemptions, orders, approvals, agreements and amendments and
modiﬁcations to agreements or arrangements that Huakan reasonably considers to

AMALGAMATIOV AGREEMENT m
2%


Appendix B 22
_  _
be necessary or desirable on terms that are satisfactory to Huakan, acting
reasonably,

(b) all of the representations and warranties of Newco made in this Agreement shall
be true and correct in all material respects as of the Eﬂective Date and Newco
shall have provided to Huakan an offer's certiﬁcate, acceptable to Huakan, acting
reasonably, certifying such accuracy on the Eﬁ‘ective Date;

(c) Newco shall have complied in all material respects with their covenants contained
in this Agreement which are to be performed or complied with prior to the
Effective Date and Newco shall have provided to Huakan an ofﬁcer’s certiﬁcate,
acceptable to Huakan, acting reasonably, certifying that it has so complied with its
covenants herein on the Effective Date; and

(d) no Material Adverse Change shall have occurred in the aﬂ‘airs of Newco since the
date of this Agremnent, and Newco shall have provided to Huakan a certiﬁcate of
an ofﬁcer ofNewco, acceptable to Huakan, acting reasonably, dated the Effective
Date to that effect.

5.3 Mutual Conditions Precedent
The obligations of Huakan and Newco to consummate the Amalgamation are subject to the
following conditions of which may only be waived if ageed by both parties:

(a) the Transaction shall have been accepted for ﬁling by the Exchange;

(b) this Agreement shall have received the approval of not less than two-thirds of the
votes cast by the Huakan Shareholders who are present in person or by proxy and
who vote in respect of the special resolution to approve the Amalgamation and the
Transaction at the Meeting;

(0) the Amalgamation Application shall be accepted by the Registrar under
subsection 275(1)(a) of the BCBCA;

(d) no act, action, suit, proceeding, objection or opposition shall have been
threatened, takm or commenced by any domestic or foreign Governmental
Authority, and no law, regulation, policy, judgment, decision, order, ruling or
directive shall have been proposed, macted, promulgated or applied, which:

(i) has the eﬁ'ect or may have the effect to cease trade, enjoin, prohth or
impose material limitations or conditions on the completion of the
Amalgamation or that would materially delay the completion of the
Amalgamation, or

(ii) would make the consummation of the Amalgamation illegal;

AMAWAMATION AGREEMENT


Appendix B 23
_ 19 _
(e) the Effective Date shall have occurred on or before July 17, 2014 unless otherwise
agreed by the parties; and
(i) this Agreement shall not have been terminated pursuant to Article 7.
5.4 Merger of Conditions
The conditions set out in sections 5.1, 5.2 and 513 shall be conclusively deemed to have been
satisﬁed, waived or released on the ﬁling by the Amalgamating Corporations of the Articles of
Amalco, and such other documents as are required to be ﬁled under the BCBCA for acceptance
by the Registrar to give eﬁect to the Amalgamation and the issuance by the Registrar of a
Certiﬁcate of Amalgamation.
ARTICLE 6 — AMALCO
6.1 Name
The name of Amalco shall be “Huakan lntemational Mining Inc”.
6.2 Registered and Records Ofﬁce
The registered and records ofﬁce of Amalco shall be determined by the directors of Arnalco.
6.3 Operational Ofﬁce
The operational ofﬁce of Arnalco shall be situated at Suite 850, 580 Hominy Street, Vancouver,
British Columbia V6C 3136,
6.4 Fiscal Year and Accounting Standards
Until changed by the board of directors of Arnalco, the ﬁscal year end of Amalco shall be
December 31 in each year and Amaleo will adopt Intemational Financial Reporting Standards in
preparing its ﬁnancial statements.
6.5 First Auditors
The ﬁrst auditors of Arnalco shall be determined by the shareholders of Amaloo, and shall hold
oﬁice until the ﬁrst annual meeting of the shareholders of Amalco following the Amalgamation
or until their successors are appointed or waived by unanimous approval of the shareholders of
Amalco.
6.6 Restrictions on Business
There shall he no restrictions on the businesses which Amalco may carry on and it shall have the
powers and authorities of a natural person
AMAIHAMATION AGREEMENT AM
£53


Appendix B 24
_ 20 .
6.7 Restrictions on Share Transfer
The transfer of shares of Arnalco shall be subject to the restrictions in the Articles of Amaloo.
6.8 Articles of Amalco
The authorized capital of Amalco and the rights, privileges, restrictions and conditions attaching
to each class and series of shares of Amalco shall be as set forth in the Articles ofAmalcor
6.9 Minimum and Maximum Number of Directors
The minimum number of directors of Amaloo shall be one (1) and the maximum number of
directors ofAmalco shall be ten (10).
6.10 First Directors
The ﬁrst directors of Arnalco and their addresses shall be as follows:
Name Address
Guo, Perrgzhi Suite 850, 580 Homby Street, Vancouver,
British Columbia V6C 336
Song, Shicheng Suite 850, 580 Homby Street, Vancouver,
British Columbia V6C 336
Jin, Wenhong (Wilson) Suite 850, 580 Homby Street, Vancouver,
British Columbia V6C 3136
Zhao, Guixin Suite 850, 580 Homby Street, Vancouver,
British Columbia V6C 3B6
Ren, Yuandong (Jeffrey) Suite 850, 580 Homby Street, Vancouver,
British Columbia V6C 3B6
Shi, Xiang Suite 850, 580 Homby Street, Vancouver,
British Columbia V6C 336
Liu, Hongfei Suite 850, 580 Homby Street, Vancouver,
British Columbia V6C 336
The ﬁrst directors shall hold ofﬁce until the ﬁrst annual meeting of the shareholders of Amalco
following the Amalgamation or until their successors are duly appointed or elected. The
subsequent directors shall be elected each year thereaﬁer as provided for in the Articles of
Amalco, although the board of directors of Amalco may, between annual meetings of the
shareholders of Amalco, appoint one or more additional directors of Arnalco to serve until the
next annual meeting, provided that the number of such additional directors shall not at any time
exceed one—third of the number of directors who held ofﬁce at the last annual meeting of
Amalco. The management and operation of the business and affairs of Amalco shall be under the
control of the board of directors as it is constituted from time to time. K/[/
AMALGAMATIDN AGREEMENT
2%


Appendix B 25
.21.
6.11 Ofﬁcers
The ofﬁcers of Amalco shall be those designated by the directors of Amaleo from time to time.
ARTICLE 7— AMENDMENT AND TERMINATION
7.1 Amendment
This Agreement may be amended at any time and from time to time prior to the Effective Time
by mutual written agreement of the patties hereto, provided that any amendmt to this
Agreement that would adversely affect the Redemption Price of the Amalco Class A Shares shall
be required to be adopted by the shareholders of the Amalgamating Corporations.
7.2 Termination
This Agreement may be terminated by written notice given to the other party:
(a) at any time prior to the Eﬁecﬁve Date , by mutual written consent ofHuakan and
Newco; or
(b) by Newco if the Effective Date has not occurred by July 17, 2014 because one or
more conditions in Sections 5.1 and 5.3 are not met and the failure to satisfy such
condition(s) is not the result, directly or indirectly, of Newco’s breach of this
Agreement; or
(c) by Huakan if the Effective Date has not occurred by July 17, 2014 because one or
more conditions in Sections 5.2 and 5.3 are not met and the failure to satisfy such
oondition(s) is not the result, directly or indirectly, of Huakan’s breach of this
Agreement.
7.3 Effect of Termination
In the event of the termination of this Agreement as provided in Section 7.2, this Agreement
shall forthwith have no further force or effect and there shall be no obligation on the part of
Huakan and Newco hereunder except for the obligations pursuant to Section 8.5 which provision
shall survive the termination of this Agreement. Except as otherwise provided herein, nothing
herein shall relieve any party from liability for any breach of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 8-GENERAL PROVISIONS
8.1 Governing Law and Jurisdiction
This Agreement and, unless otherwise speciﬁed therein, all other documents and instruments
delivered in accordance with this Agreement, shall be governed by and interpreted in accordance
with the laws of the Province of British Columbia and the laws of Canada applicable therein. The
parties hereby irrevocably submit to the non—exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of the Province 
M
MAMATION AGREEMENT


Appendix B 26
. 22 .
of British Columbia in respect of any matter or dispute arising under this Agreement, without
prejudice to the rights of the parties to take proceedings in any other jurisdictions.
8.2 Entire Agreement
This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the parties respecting the subject
matter hereof and supersedes all prior agreements, understandings, negotiations and discussions,
whether oral or written, between the parties with respect to the subject matter hereof.
8.3 Notices
Any notice which a party may desire to give or serve upon another party shall be in writing and
may be delivered or mailed by prepaid registered mail, return receipt requested, to the following
addresses:
(a) in the case of Huakan:

Suite 850, 580 Hornby Street

Vancouver, British Columbia V6C 3B6

Attention: David Bo, Director and Chair of Special Committee

(b) in the case of Newco:

Suite 604 — 566 Burrard Street

Vancouver, British Columbia V6C 2X8

Attention: Jeffrey Ren, President
or to such other addresses as the party to or upon whom notice is to be given or served has
communicated to the other party by notice given or served in the manner provided for in this
Section. In the case of delivery, notice shall be deemed to be given on the date of delivery and in
the case of mailing, notice shall be deemed to be given on the third Business Day aﬁer such
mailing.
8.4 Expenses
All fees, costs and expenses incurred in connection with this Agreement and the Transaction
contemplated herein shall be paid by the party incurring such cost or expense.
8.5 Conﬁdentiality
Subject to any disclosure obligations ofHuakan under applicable laws and rule of the Exchange,
the parties will keep conﬁdential the non-public information about the other learned by a party as
a consequence of this Agreement. If this Agreement terminates without consummation the
parties shall keep such information in conﬁdence for one year period subject only to customary
exceptions for infomration which has already become, through no breach of this commitment by k
a party, publicly available information or which is received from a party which is not under a 

AMALGAMATION AGREEMENT


Appendix B 27
.23.
conﬁdentiality obligation in respect to it. Newco shall cause Hong Kong Huakan Investment
Co., Limited and the Newco Group to comply with this section 8.5 in connection with Huakan’s
conﬁdential information.
8.6 Publicity
Subject to any disclosure obligations of Huakan under applicable laws and rule of the Exchange,
each of Huakan and Special Committee agrees that any press release related to the
Amalgamation or Transaction shall only be issued with prior consent by Newoo, acting
reasonably.
8.7 Enurement and Assignment
This agreement shall enure to the beneﬁt of and shall be binding upon the parties hereto and their
permitted assigns and respective successors according to law. Neither this Agreement nor any of
the rights, interesm or obligations hereunder shall be assigned by either of the parties without the
prior written consent of the other party.
8.8 Currency
All sums of money referred to in this Agreement shall mean Canadian ﬁmds.
8.9 Time of Essence
The parties agree that time is of the essence hereof.
8.10 Execution in Counterparts
This Agreement may he executed in counterparts, each of which when delivered (whether in
originally executed form or by facsimile or other electronic transmission) shall be deemed to be
an original and all of which together shall constitute one and the same document.
[Remainder of this page intentionally left blank. Signature page follows]
AMALGAMATION AGREEMENT
.23


Appendix B 28
.24.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto have duly executed this Agreement
as of the date ﬁrst written above.
HUAKANQ/ INTERNATIONAL MINING INC.
By: ‘ I ‘
6: David Bo '
Title: Director and Chair of Special
Committee
0996059 Ewl).
Name: Yuandong (Jeﬁi'ey) Rm
Title: Director and President
AMALGAMATION AGREEMENT


Appendix B 29
SCHEDULE A — FORM OF ARTICLES 0F AMALCO
[an attached]
AMALGAMATION AGREEMENT


Appendix B 30
Number: BCO~ ~
BUSINESS CQRPORA HONS ACT
ARTICLES
of
~1-IUAKAN INTERNATIONAL MJNH‘IG INC.
TABLE OF CONTENTS

PART 1 INTERPRETATION 
PART 2 SHARES AND SHARE CERTIFICATES m..«.................................,.........‘M.-.......u................................2
PART 3 ISSUE OF SHARES M...............................m........«..Wmm».m_...........‘...........................4
PART 4 SHARE REGISTERS.mumu....................................u..‘........,.......................-....-.u.u........w..............5
PART 5 SHARE TRANSFERS
PART 6 TRANSMISSION OF SHARES .........m.........m................................................u.u.................................7
PART 7 PURCHASE, REDEEM OR OTHERWISE ACQUIRE SHARES.....................m..................................7
PART 8 BORROWING POWERS ..........m.............._.......__.................................»...-.............‘............“m”!
PART 9 ALTERATIONS .........................mm.............................-........._..‘.4..‘..........m............_.................. 9
PART 10 MEETINGS OF SHAREHOLDERS 
PART 11 PROCEEDINGS AT MEETINGS OF 12
PART 12 VOTES 0F SHAREHOLDERS 
PART 13 DIRECTORS............................«mum....................................._............~m.........................................21
PART 14 ELECTION AND REMOVAL OF DIRECTORS—0...........mwmmw....................m..m..22
PART 15 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTORS“........................................................................................25
PART 16 INTERESTS OF DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS 
PART 17 PROCEEDINGS OF DIRECTORS ...m...........................................‘.......u..........................................27
PART 18 EXECUTIVE AND OTHER COMMITTEES .....................M...1....u.......m_...................................30
PART 19 OFFICERS -...............................................................-.....W..m.~m.u.“.w......mmm.-m31

PART 20 INDEMNIFICATION ..._................__........‘.........«.....................u..........u...........................................31
PART 11 DIVIDENDS ...................................................................................................M........1...............................34
PART 22 ACCOUNTING RECORDS AND AUDITOR
PART 13 NOTICES .....................m..............‘.-.....‘..........‘.............._............--~mmmm..................................36
PART 24 SEAL u.........................................................«................................................M..........m.m......m.38

PART 15 PROHIBITIONSWMSM........_“mm.........................................................._-....u.u_w.......~m.39
PART 26 SPECIAL RIGHTS AND RESTRICTIONS COMMON SHARESu...“~.u...m.......umm..m4ll

PART 17 SPECIAL RIGHTS AND RESTRICTIONS CLASS A AND CLASS B PREFERRED SHARES .41


Appendix B 31
Number: BCO~ ~
BUSINESS CORPORA TIONS ACT
ARTICLES
of
~HUAKAN INTERNATIONAL MmING INC.~
(the “Company”)
PART 1
INTERPRETATION
Deﬁnitions
1.1 In these Articles, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) “Act” means the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia) ﬁom time to time
in force and all amendments thereto and includes all regulations and amendments thereto
made pursuant to that Act;
(b) “Amalgamation” means the amalgamation of Huakan and Newco pursuant to
section 269 of the Act to form the Company, upon the terms and conditions set out in the
Amalgamation Agreement;
(c) “Amalgamation Agreement” means the amalgamation agreeth dated March
14, 2014 between Huakan and Newco to effect the Amalgamation;
(d) “board of directors”, “directors” and “board” mean the directors or sole
director of the Company for the time being;
(e) “Etl’ective Date” means the date the Amalgamation is effective under the Act;
(t) “Effective Time” means the time at which the Amalgamation becomes effective
on the Effective Date, as mutually agreed between the parties to the Amalgamation
Agreement;
(g) “Huakan” means Huakan International Mining Inc. (incorporation number:
BC03 10684);
(11) "Interpretation Act” means the Interpretation Act (Bﬁtish Columbia) from time
to u'me in force and all amendments thereto and includes all regulations and amendments
thereto made pursuant to that Act;
%


Appendix B 32
_ 2 _

(i) “legal personal representative” means the personal or other legal representative

of the shareholder;

(j) “Newco” means 0996059 B.C. Ltd., a corporation incorporated under the laws of

British Columbia which was amalgamated with Huakan to form the Company pursuant to

the terms of the Amalgamation Agreement;

(k) “registered address” of a shareholder means the shareholder’s address as

recorded in the central securities reg'ster;

(1) “seal” means the seal of the Company, if any;

(m) “share” means a share in the share structure of the Company; and

(n) “special majority" means the majority of votes described in §1 1.2 which is

required to pass a special resolution.
Act and Interpretation Act Deﬁnitions Applicable
1.2 The deﬁnitions in the Act and the deﬁnitions and rules of construction in the
Interpretation Act, with the necessary changes, so far as applicable, and except as the context
requires otherwise, apply to these Articles as if they were an enactment. Ifthere is a conﬂict
between a deﬁnition in the Act and a deﬁnition or mle in the Interpretation Act relating to a term
used in these Articles, the deﬁnition in the Act will prevail. If there is a conﬂict or inconsistency
between these Articles and the Act, the Act will prevail.

PART 2
SHARES AND SHARE CERTIFICATES
Authorized Share Structure
2.1 The authorized share structure of the Company consists of shares of the class or
classes and series, if any, described in the Notice of Articles of the Company.
Form of Share Certiﬁcate
2.2 Each share certiﬁcate issued by the Company must comply with, and be signed as
required by, the Act.
Shareholder Entitled to Certiﬁcate or Acknowledgment
2.3 Each shareholder is entitled, without charge, to (a) one share certiﬁcate
representing the shares of each class or scrim of shares registered in the shareholder‘s name or
(b) a non-transferable wriuen acknowledgment of the shareholder’s right to obtain such a share
certiﬁcate, provided that in respect of a share held jointly by several persons, the Company is not
bound to issue more than one share certiﬁcate or acknowledgment and delivery of a share
%


Appendix B 33
. 3 .

certiﬁcate or an acknowledgment to one of several joint shareholders or to a duly authorized
agent of one of the joint shareholders will be sufﬁcient delivery to all.
Delivery by Mail
2.4 Any share certiﬁcate or non-transferable written acknowledgment of a
shareholder’s right to obtain a share certiﬁcate may be sent to the shareholder by mail at the
shareholder’s registered address and neither the Company nor any director, ofﬁcer or agent of
the Company is liable for any loss to the shareholder because the share certiﬁcate or
acknowledgement is lost in the mail or stolen.
Replacement of Worn Out or Defaced Certiﬁcate or Acknowledgement
2.5 If a share certiﬁcate or a non-transferable Written achrowledgment of the
shareholder’s right to obtain a share certiﬁcate is worn out or defaced, the Company must, on
production of the share certiﬁcate or acknowledgment, as the case may be, and on such other
terms, if any, as are deemed ﬁt:

(a) cancel the share certiﬁcate or aclmowledgment; and

(b) issue a replacement share certiﬁcate or acknowledgment.
Replacement of Lost, Stolen or Destroyed Certiﬁcate or Acknowledgment
2.6 If a share certiﬁcate or a non-nansferable written acknowledgnent of a
shareholder’s right to obtain a share certiﬁcate is lost, stolen or destroyed, the Company must
issue a replacement share certiﬁcate or acknowledgment, as the case may be, to the person
entitled to that share certiﬁcate or acknowledgment, if it receives:

(a) proof satisfactory to it of the loss, theﬁ or destruction; and

(b) any indemnity the directors consider adequate.
Splitting Share Certiﬁcates
2.7 If a shareholder surrenders a share certiﬁcate to the Company with a written
requmt that the Company issue in the shareholder’s name two or more share certiﬁcates, each
representing a speciﬁed mnnber of shares and in the aggregate representing the same number of
shares as the share certiﬁcate so surrendered, the Company must cancel the surrendered share
certiﬁcate and issue replacement share certiﬁcates in accordance with that request.
Certiﬁcate Fee
2.8 There must be paid to the Company, in relation to the issue of any share
certiﬁcate under §2.5, {52.6 or (52.7, the amount, if any, not exceeding the amount prescribed
under the Act, determined by the directors.

%
2%


Appendix B 34
_ 4 _
Recognition of Trusts
2.9 Except as required by law or statute or these Articles, no person will be
recognized by the Company as holding any share upon any trust, and the Company is not bound
by or compelled in any way to recognize (even when having notice thereof) any equitable,
contingent, ﬁrture or partial interest in any share or ﬁaction of a share or (except as required by
law or statute or these Articles or as ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction) any other
rights in respect of any share except an absolute right to the entirety thereof in the shareholder.
PART 3
ISSUE OF SHARES
Directors Authorized
3.1 Subject to the Act and the rights, if any, of the holders of issued shares of the
Company, the Company may allot, issue, sell or otherwise dispose of the unissued shares, and
issued shares held by the Company, at the times, to the persons, including directors, in the
manner, on the terms and conditions and for the consideration (including any premium at which
shares with par value may be issued) that the directors may determine. The issue price for a share
with par value must be equal to or greater than the par value of the share.
Commissions and Discount:
3.2 The Company may at any time pay a reasonable commission or allow a
reasonable discount to any person in consideration of that person’s purchase or agreement to
purchase shares of the Company from the Company or any other person’s procurement or
agreement to procure purchasers for shares of the Company.
Brokerage
3.3 The Company may pay such brokerage fee or other consideration as may be
lawful for or in connection with the sale or placement of its securities.
Conditions of Issue
3.4 Except as provided for by the Act, no share may be issued until it is fully paid. A
share is fully paid when:
(a) consideration is provided to the Company for the issue of the share by one or
more of the following:

(i) past services performed for the Company,

(ii) Property,

(iii) money; and


Appendix B 35
. 5 _
(h) the value of the consideration received by the Company equals or exceeds the
issue price set for the share under §3.1.
Share Purchase Warrants and Rights
3.5 Subject to the Act, the Company may issue share purchase warrants, options and
rights upon such terms and conditions as the directors determine, which share purchase warrants,
options and rights may be issued alone or in conjunction with debentures, debenture stock,
bonds, shares or any other securities issued or created by the Company from time to time.
PART 4
SHARE REGISTERS
Central Securities Register
4.] As required by and subject to the Act, the Company must maintain in British
Columbia a central securities register and may appoint an agmt to maintain such register. The
directors may appoint one or more agents, including the agent appointed to keep the central
securities register, as transfer agent for shares or any class or series of shares and the same or
another agent as registrar for shares or such class or series of shares, as the case may be The
directors may terminate such appointment of any agent at any time and may appoint another
agent in its place.
PART 5
SHARE TRANSFERS
Registering Transfers
5.1 A transfer of a share must not be regstered unless the Company or the transfer
agent or registrar for the class or series of shares to be transferred has received:
(a) except as exempted by the Act, a duly signed proper instrument of transfer in
respect of the share;
(b) if a share certiﬁcate has been issued by the Company in respect of the share to be
transferred, that share certiﬁcate;
(c) if a non-transferable written acknowledgment of the shareholder’s right to obtain
a share certiﬁcate has been issued by the Company in respect of the share to be
transferred, that acknowledgan and
(d) such other evidence, if any, as the Company or the transfer agent or registrar for
the class or series of share to be transferred may require to prove the title of the transferor
or the transferor’s right to transfer the share, the due signing of the instrument of transfer
and the right of the transferee to have the transfer registered
ﬂv
9%


Appendix B 36
_ 5 _

Form of Instrument of Transfer
52 The instrument of transfer in respect of any share of the Company must be either
in the form, if any, on the back of the Company’s share certiﬁcates of that class or series or in
some other form that may be approved by the directors.
Transferor Remains Shareholder
5.3 Except to the extent that the Act otherwise provides, the transferor of a share is
deemed to remain the holder of it until the name of the transferee is entered in a securities
register of the Company in respect of the transfer.
Signing of Instrument of Transfer
5.4 lfa shareholder, or the shareholder’s duly authorized attorney, signs an
instrument of transfer in respect of shares registered in the name of the shareholder, the signed
instrument of transfer constitutes a complete and sufﬁcient authority to the Company and its
directors, ofﬁcers and agents to register the number of sham speciﬁed in the instrument of
transfer or speciﬁed in any other manner, or, if no number is speciﬁed, all the shares rqmesented
by the share certiﬁcates or set out in the written acknowledgments deposited with the instrument
of transfer.

(a) in the name of the person named as transferee in that instrument of transfer; or

(b) if no person is named as transferee in that instrument of transfer, in the name of

the person on whose behalf the instrument is dqaosited for the purpose of having the

transfer registered.
Enquiry as to Title Not Required
5.5 Neither the Company nor any director, ofﬁcer or agent of the Company is bound
to inquire into the title of the person named in the instrument of transfer as transferee or, if no
person is named as transferee in the instrument of transfer, of the person on whose behalf the
instrument is deposited for the purpose of having the transfer registered or is liable for any claim
related to registering the transfer by the shareholder or by any intermediate owner or holder of
the shares transferred, of any interest in such shares, of any share certiﬁcate quresenting such
shares or of any written acknowledgment of a right to obtain a share certiﬁcate for such shares.
Transfer Fe
5.6 There must be paid to the Company, in relation to the registration of a transfer,
the amount, if any, determined by the directors.

>660


Appendix B 37
_ 7 _
PART 6
TRANSMISSION OF SHARES
Legal Personal Representative Recognized on Death
6.1 In case of the death of a shareholder, the legal personal representative of the
shareholder, or in the case of shares registered in the shareholder’s name and the name of another
person in joint tenancy, the surviving joint holder, will be the only person recognized by the
Company as having any title to the shareholder’s interest in the shares. Before recognizing a
person as a legal personal representative of a shareholder, the Company shall receive the
documentation required by the Act.
Rights of Legal Personal Representative
6.2 The legal personal representative of a shareholder has the same rights, privileges
and obligations that attach to the shares held by the shareholder, including the right to transfer
the shares in accordance with these Articles, provided the documents required by the Act and the
directors have been deposited with the Company. This §6.2 does not apply in the case of the
death of a shareholder with respect to shares registered in the name of the shareholder and the
name of another person in joint tenancy.
PART 7
PURCHASE, REDEEM OR OTHERWISE ACQUIRE SHARES
Company Authorized to Purchase, Redeem or Otherwise Acquire Shares
7.1 Subject to §7.2, the special rights or restrictions attached to the shares of any class
or series and the Act, the Company may, if authorized by the directors, purchase, redeem or
otherwise acquire any of its shares at the price and upon the terms determined by the directors.
Purchase When Insolvent
7.2 The Company must not make a payment or provide any other consideration to
purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire any of its shares if there are reasonable grounds for
believing that:
(a) the Company is insolvent; or
(b) making the payment or providing the consideration would render the Company
insolvent.
Sale and Voting oanrehased, Redeemed or Otherwise Acquired Shares
7.3 If the Company retains a share redeemed, purchased or otherwise acquired by it,
the Company may sell, giﬁ or otherwise dispose of the share, but, while such share is held by the
Company, it:


Appendix B 38
_ g _

(a) is not entitled to vote the share at a meeting of its shareholders;

(b) must not pay a dividmd in respect of the share; and

(c) must not make any other distribution in respect of the share.
Company Entiﬂed to Purchase, Redeem or Otherwise Acquire Share Fractions
7.4 The Company may, without prior notice to the holders, purchase, redeem or
otherwise acquire for fair value any and all outstanding share fractions of any class or kind of
shares in its authorized share structure as may exist at any time and from time to time. Upon the
Company delivering the purchase funds and conﬁrmation of purchase or redemption of the share
fractions to the holders’ registered or last known address, or if the Company has a transfer agent
then to such agent for the beneﬁt of and forwarding to such holders, the Company shall
thereupon amend its central securities register to reﬂect the purchase or redemption of such share
fractions and if the Company has a transfer agent, shall direct the transfer agent to amend the
central securities register accordingly. Any holder of a share fraction, who upon receipt of the
funds and conﬁrmation of purchase or redemption of same, disputes the fair value paid for the
fraction, shall have the right to apply to the court to request that it set the price and terms of
payment and make consequential orders and give directions the court considers appropriate, as if
the Company were the “acquiring person” as contemplated by Division 6, Compulsory
Acquisitions, Section 300 under the Act and the holder were an “offeree” subject to the
provisions contained in such Division, mutatis mutandis.

PART 8
BORROWING POWERS

8.1 The Company, if authorized by the directors, may:

(a) borrow money in the manner and amount, on the security, from the sources and

on the terms and conditions that they consider appropriate;

(b) issue bonds, debentures and other debt obligations either outright or as security

for any liability or obligation of the Company or any other person and at such discounts

or premiums and on such other terms as the directors consider appropriate;

(c) guarantee the repayment of money by any other person or the performance of any

obligation of any other person; and

(d) mortgage, charge, whether by way of speciﬁc or ﬂoating charge, grant a security

interest in, or give other security on, the whole or any part of the present and ﬁiture assets

and undertaking of the Company.

ﬁt
9%


Appendix B 39
, 9 .
PART 9
ALTERATIONS
Alteration of Authorized Share Structure
9.1 Subject to §9.2 and the Act, the Company may by special resolution:
(a) create one or more classes or series of shares or, if none of the shares of a class or
series of shares are allotted or issued, eliminate that class or sa‘ies of shares;
(b) increase, reduce or eliminate the maximum number of shares that the Company is
authorized to issue out of any class or series of shares or establish a maximum number of
shares that the Company is authorized to issue out of any class or series of shares for
which no maximum is established;
(c) subdivide or consolidate all or any of its unissued, or fully paid issued, shares;
(d) if the Company is authorized to issue shares of a class of shares with par value:
(i) decrease the par value of those shares; or
(ii) if none of the shares of that class of shares are allotted or issued, increase
the par value of those shares;
(e) change all or any of its unissued, or fully paid issued, shares with par value into
shares without par value or any of its unissued shares without par value into shares with
par value;
(0 alter the identifying name of any of its shares; or
(g) otherwise alter its shares or authorized share structure when required or permitted
to do so by the Act,
and, if applicable, alter its Notice of Articles and Articles accordingly.
Special Rights or Restrictions
92 Subject to the Act and in particular those provisions of the Act relating to the
rights of holders of outstanding shares to vote if their rights are prejudiced or interfered with, the
Company may by special resolution:
(a) create special rights or restrictions for, and attach those special rights or
restrictions to, the shares of any class or series of shares, whether or not any or all of
those shares have been issued; or
(b) vary or delete any special rights or restrictions attached to the shares of any class
or series of shares, whether or not any or all of those shares have been issued,


Appendix B 40
.10.

and alter its Notice of Articles and Articles accordingly.
Change of Name
9.3 The Company may

(a) if the Company is a public company, by directors’ resolution, authorize an

alteration to its Notice of Articles, in order to change its name;

(b) if the Company is not a public company, by special resolution, authorize an

alteration to its Notice of Articles, in order to change its name, and

(c) by ordinary or directors’ resolution, authorize an alteration to its Notice of

Articles, in order to adopt or change any translation of that name.
Other Alterations
9.4 If the Act does not specify the type of resolution and these Articles do not specify
another type of resolution, the Company may by special resolution alter these Articles.

PART 10
MEETINGS OF SHAREHOLDERS
Annual General Meetings
10.1 Unless an annual general meeting is deferred or waived in accordance with the
Act, the Company must hold its ﬁrst annual general meeting within 18 months aﬁer the date on
which it was incorporated or otherwise recognized, and aﬁer that must hold an annual general
meeting at least once in each calendar year and not more than 15 months aﬁer the last annual
reference date at such time and place as may be determined by the directors.
Resolution Instead of Annual General Meeting
10.2 If all the shareholders who are entitled to vote at an annual general meeting
consent in writing by a unanimous resolution to all of the business that is required to be
transacted at that annual general meeting, the annual general meeting is deemed to have been
held on the date of the unanimous resolution The shareholders must, in any unanimous
resolution passed under this §10.2, select as the Company’s annual reference date a date that
would be appropriate for the holding of the applicable annual general meeting.
Calling of Meetings of Shareholders
10.3 The directors may, at any time, call a meeting of shareholders.
'/
2%


Appendix B 41
_ 11 _
Notice for Meetings of Shareholders
10.4 The Company must send notice of the date, time and location of any meeting of
shareholders (including, without limitation, any notice specifying the intention to propose a
resolution as an exceptional resolution, a special resolution or a special separate resolution, and
any notice to consider approving an amalgamation into a foreign jurisdiction, an arrangement or
the adoption of an amalgamation agreement, and any notice of a general meeting, class meen'ng
or series meeting), in the manner provided in these Articles, or in such other manner, if any, as
may be prescribed by ordinary resolution (whether previous notice of the resolution has been
given or not), to each shareholder entitled to attend the meeting, to each director and to the
auditor of the Company, unless these Articles otherwise provide, at least the following number of
days before the meeting:
(a) if the Company is a public company, 21 days;
(b) otherwise, 10 days.
Record Date for Notice
10.5 The directors may set a date as the record date for the purpose of determining
shareholders entitled to notice of any meeting of shareholders. The record date must not precede
the date on which the meeting is to be held by more than two months or, in the case of a general
meeting requisitioned by shareholders under the Act, by more than four months. The record date
must not precede the date on which the meeting is held by fewer than:
(a) if the Company is a pIJblic company, 21 days;
(b) otherwise, 10 days.
If no record date is set, the record date is 5 pm. on the day immediately preceding the ﬁrst date
on which the notice is sent or, if no notice is sent, the beginning of the meeting.
Record Date for Voting
10.6 The directors may set a date as the record date for the purpose of determining
shareholders entitled to vote at any meeting of shareholders. The record date must not precede
the date on which the meeting is to be held by more than two months or, in the case of a general
meeting requisitioned by shareholders under the Act, by more than four months. If no record date
is set, the record date is 5 pm. on the day immediately preceding the ﬁrst date on which the
notice is sent or, if no notice is sent, the beginning of the meeting.
Failure to Give Notice and Waiver of Notice
10.7 The accidental omission to send notice of any meeting of shareholders to, or the
non-receipt of any notice by, any of the persons entitled to notice does not invalidate any
proceedings at that meeting. Any person entitled to notice of a meeting of shareholders may, in
writing or otherwise, waive that entitlement or may agree to reduce the period of that notice.
Attendance of a person at a meeting of shareholders is a waiver of entitlement to notice of the


Appendix B 42
_ 12 .
meeting unless that person attends the meeting for the express purpose of objecting to the
transaction of any business on the grounds that the meeting is not lawfully called.
Notice of Special Business at Meetings of Shareholders
10.8 If a meeting of shareholders is to consider special business within the meaning of
§11i1, the notice ofmeeting must:
(a) mate the general nature of the special business; and
(b) if the special business includes considering, approving, ratifying, adopting or
authorizing any document or the signing of or giving of eifect to any docummt, have
attached to it a copy of the document or state that a copy of the document will be
available for inspection by shareholders:
(i) at the Company’s records emce, or at such other reasonably accessible
location in British Columbia as is speciﬁed in the notice; and
(ii) during statutory business hours on any one or more speciﬁed days before
the day set for the holding of the meeting.
Place of Meetings
10.9 In addition to any location in British Columbia, any general meeting may be held
in any location outside Biitish Columbia approved by a resolution of the directors
PART 11
PROCEEDINGS AT MEETINGS OF SHAREHOLDERS
Special Business
11.1 At a meeting of shareholders, the following business is special business:
(a) at a meeting of shareholders that is not an annual general meeting, all business is
special business except business relating to the conduct of or voting at the meeting;
(h) at an annual general meeting, all business is special business except for the
following:
(i) business relating to the conduct of or voting at the meeting;
(ii) consideration of any ﬁnancial statements of the Company presented to the
meeting;
(iii) consideration of any reports of the directors or auditor;
(iv) the setting or changing of the number of directors;


Appendix B 43
. 13 .
(v) the election or appointment of directors;
(vi) the appointment of an auditor;
(vii) the setting of the remuneration of an auditor;
(viii) business arising out of a rqaort of the directors not requiring the passing of
a special resolution or an exceptional resolution;
(ix) any other business which, under these Articles or the Act, may be
transacted at a meeting of shareholders without prior notice of the business being
given to the shareholders.
Special Majority
11.2 The majority of votes required for the Company to pass a special resolution at a
general meeting of shareholders is two-thirds of the votes cast on the resolution.
Quorum
11.3 Subject to the special rights or restrictions attached to the shares of any class or
series of shares, and to §11.4, the quorum for the transaction of business at a meeting of
shareholders is at least one person who is, or who represmts by proxy, one or more shareholders
who, in the aggregate, holds at least 5% of the issued shares entitled to be voted at the meeting
One Shareholder May Consﬁtute Quorum
11.4 If there is only one shareholder entitled to vote at a meeting of shareholders:
(a) the quorum is one person who is, or who represents by proxy, that shareholder,
and
(b) that shareholder, present in person or by proxy, may constitute the meeting.
Persons Entitled to Amend Meeting
11.5 In addition to those persons who are entitled to vote at a meeting of shareholders,
the only other persons entitled to be present at the meeting are the directors, the president (if
any), the secretary (if any), the assistant secretary (if any), any lawyer for the Company, the
auditor of the Company, any persons invited to be present at the meeting by the directors or by
the chair of the meeting and any persons entitled or required under the Act or these Articles to be
present at the meeting; but if any of those persons does attend the meeting, that person is not to
be counted in the quorum and is not entitled to vote at the meeting unless that person is a
shareholder or proxy holder entitled to vote at the meeting.
Requirement of Quorum
11.6 No business, other than the election of a chair of the meeting and the adjournment
of the meeting, may be transacted at any meeting of shareholders unless a quorum of
ﬁe


Appendix B 44
.14.
shareholders entitled to vote is present at the commencement of the meeting, but such quorum
need not he present throughout the meeting.
Lack of Quorum
11.7 If, within one-halfhour from the time set for the holding of a meeting of
shareholders, a quorum is not present:
(a) in the case of a general meeting requisitioned by shareholders, the meeting is
dissolved, and
(b) in the case of any other meeting of shareholders, the meeting stands adjourned to
the same day in the next week at the same time and place.
Lack of Quorum at Succeeding Meeting
11.8 If; atthemeetingtowhichthemeeting referredtoin §11.7(b) was adjotuned, a
quorum is not present within one-half hour from the time set for the holding of the meeting, the
person or persons present and being, or representing by proxy one or more shareholders, entitled
to attend and vote at the meeting shall be deemed to constitute a quonnn.
Chair
11.9 The following individual is entitled to preside as chair at a meeting of
shareholders:
(a) the chair of the board, ifany; or
(b) if the chair of the board is absent or unwilling to act as chair of the meeting, the
president, if any.
Selection of Alternate Chair
new If, at any meeting of shareholders, there is no chair of the board or president
present within 15 minutes aﬁer the time set for holding the meeting, or if the chair of the board
and the president are unwilling to act as chair of the meeting, or if the chair of the board and the
president have advised the secretary, if any, or any director present at the meeting, that they will
not be present at the meeting, the directors present may choose either one of their number or the
Lawyer of the Company to be chair of the meeting. Ifall of the directors present decline to take
the chair or fail to so choose or if no director is prest or the lawyer of the Company declines to
take the chair, the shareholders entitled to vote at the meeting who are present in person or by
proxy may choose any person present at the meeting to chair the meeting.
Adjournment:
11.11 The chair of a meeting of shareholders may, and if so directed by the meeting
must, adjourn the meeting from time to time and from place to place, but no business may be


Appendix B 45
.15.
transacted at any adjourned meeting other than the business leﬁ unﬁnished at the meeting li-om
which the adjournment took place.
Notice of Adjourned Meeting
11.12 It is not necessary to give any notice of an adjourned meeting of shareholders or
of the busins to be transacted at an adjoumed meeting of shareholders except that, when a
meeting is adjourned for 30 days or more, notice of the adjourned meeting must be given as in
the case of the original meeting.
Decisions by Show of Hands or Poll
11.13 Subject to the Act, every motion put to a vote at a meeting of shareholders will be
decided on a show of hands unless a poll, before or on the declaration of the result of the vote by
show of hands, is directed by the chair or demanded by any shareholder entitled to vote who is
present in person or by proxy.
Declaration of Result
11.14 The chair of a meeting of shareholders must declare to the meeting the decision
on every question in accordance with the result of the show of hands or the poll, as the case may
be, and that decision must be entered in the minutes of the meeting. A declaration of the chair
that a resolution is carried by the necessary majority or is defeated is, unless a poll is directed by
the chair or demanded under §l 1.13, conclusive evidence without proof of the number or
proportion of the votes recorded in ﬂavour of or against the resolution
Motion Need Not he Seconded
l 1.15 No motion proposed at a meeting of shareholders need be seconded unless the
chair of the meeting rules otherwise, and the chair of any meeting of shareholders is entitled to
propose or second a motion.
Casﬁng Vote
11.16 In case of an equality of votes, the chair of a meeting of shareholders does not,
either on a show of hands or on a poll, have a second or casting vote in addition to the vote or
votes to which the chair may be entitled as a shareholder.
Manner of Taking Poll
11.17 Subject to §l 1.18, ifs poll is duly demanded at a meeting ofshareholders:
(a) the poll must be taken:
(i) at the meeting, or within seven days after the date of the meeting, as the
chair of the meeting directs; and
%u


Appendix a 46
. 16 .
(ii) in the manner, at the time and at the place that the chair of the meeting
directs;

(b) the result of the poll is deemed to be the decision of the meeting at which the poll

is demanded; and

(c) the demand for the poll may be Withdrawn by the person who demanded it.
Demand for Poll on Adjournment
11.18 A poll demanded at a meeting of shareholders on a question of adjournment must
be taken immediately at the meeting.
Chair Mnst Resolve Dispute
11.19 In the case of any dispute as to the admission or rejection of a vote given on a
poll, the chair of the meeting must determine the dispute, and the detemrimltion of the chair
made in good faith is ﬁnal and conclusive.
Casting of Votes
11.20 On a poll, a shareholder entitled to more than one vote need not cast all the votes
in the same way.
No Demand for Poll on Election of Chair
11.21 No poll may he demanded in respect of the vote by which a chair of a meeting of
shareholders is elected.
Demand for Poll Not to Prevent Continuance of Meeting
11.22 The demand for a poll at a meeting of shareholders does not, unless the chair of
the meeting so rules, prevt the continuation of a meeting for the transacﬁon of any business
other than the question on which a poll has been demanded.
Retention of Ballots and Proxies
l 1.23 The Company must, for at least three months aﬁer a meeting of shareholders,
keep each ballot cast on a poll and each proxy voted at the meeting, and, during that period,
make them available for inspection during normal business hours by any shareholder or proxy
holder entitled to vote at the meeting. At the end of such three month period, the Company may
destroy such ballots and proxies.

2%


Appendix B 47
. 17 .
PART 12
VOTES 0F SHAREHOLDERS
Number of Votes by Shareholder or by Shares
12.1 Subject to any special rights or restrictions attached to any shares and to the
restrictions imposed on joint shareholders under §12.3:
(a) on a vote by show of hands, every person present who is a shareholder or proxy
holder and entitled to vote on the matter his one vote; and
(b) on a poll, every shareholder entitled to vote on the matter has one vote in respect
of each share entitled to be voted on the matter and held by that shareholder and may
exercise that vote either in person or by proxy.
Votes of Persons in Representative Capacity
12.2 A person who is not a shareholder may vote at a meeting of shareholders, whether
on a show of hands or on a poll, and may appoint a proxy holder to act at the meeting, if, before
doing so, the person satisﬁes the chair of the meeting, or the directors, that the person is a legal
personal representative or a trustee in bankruptcy for a shareholder who is entitled to vote at the
meeting.
Votes by Joint Holders
123 lfthere are joint shareholders registered in respect of any share:
(a) any one of the joint shareholders may vote at any meeting of shareholders,
personally or by proxy, in respect of the share as if that joint shareholder were solely
entitled to it; or
(b) if more than one of the joint shareholders is present at any meeting of
shareholders, personally or by proxy, and more than one of ﬂiem votes in respect of that
share, then only the vote of the joint shareholder present whose name stands ﬁrst on the
central securities register in respect of the share will be counted.
Legal Personal Representatives as Joint Shareholders
12.4 Two or more legal personal representatives of a shareholder in whose sole name
any share is registered are, for the purposes of §12.3, deemed to be joint shareholders registered
in respect of that share.
Representative of a Corporate Shareholder
12.5 It‘a corporation, that is not a subsidiary of the Company, is a shareholder, that
corporation may appoint a person to act as its representative at any meeting of shareholders of
the Company, and:
go
3%


Appendix a 48
. 13 .
(a) for that purpose, the instrument appointing a representative must be received:
(i) at the registered ofﬁce of the Company or at any other place speciﬁed, in
the notice calling the meeting, for the receipt of proxies, at least the number of
business days speciﬁed in the notice for the receipt of proxies, or if no number of
days is speciﬁed, two business days before the day set for the holding of the
meeting or any adjourned meeting; or
(ii) at the meeting or any adjourned meeting, by the chair of the meeting or
adjourned meeting or by a person designated by the chair of the meeting or
adjourned meeting;
(b) if a representative is appointed under this §12.5:
(i) the representative is entitled to exercise in respect of and at that meeting
the same rights on behalf of the corporation that the representative represents as
that corporation could exercise if it were a shareholder who is an individual,
including, without limitation, the right to appoint a proxy holder, and
(ii) the representative, if present at the meeting, is to be counted for the
purpose of forming a quorum and is deemed to be a shareholder present in person
at the meeting.
Evidence of the appointment of any such representative may be sent to the Company by written
instrument, fax or any other method of transmitting leginy recorded messages.
Proxy Provisions Do Not Apply to All Companies
12.6 Ifand for so long as the Company is a public company or a pre-existing reporting
company which has the Statutory Reporting Company Provisions as part of its Articles or to
which the Statutory Reporting Company Provisions apply, then §12.7 to §12.15 are not
mandatory, however the directors of the Company are authorized to apply all or part of such
sections or to adopt alternative procedures for proxy form, deposit and revocation procedures to
the extent that the directors deem necessary in order to comply with securities laws applicable to
the Company.
Appointment of Proxy Holders
12.7 Every shareholder of the Company, including a corporation that is a shareholder
but not a subsidiary of the Company, entitled to vote at a meeting of shareholders may, by proxy,
appoint one or more (but not more than ﬁve) proxy holders to attend and act at the meeting in the
manner, to the extent and with the powers conferred by the proxy.
Alternate Proxy Holders
12.8 A shareholder may appoint one or more altemate proxy holders to act in the place
of an absent proxy holder.
ya
93%


Appendix B 49
_ 19 _
Proxy Holder Need Not Be Shareholder
12.9 A person must not be appointed as a proxy holder unless the person is a
shareholder, although a person who is not a shareholder may be appointed as a proxy holder if:
(a) the person appointing the proxy holder is a corporation or a representative of a
corporation appointed under §12.5;
(b) the Company has at the time of the meeting for which the proxy holder is to be
appointed only one shareholder entitled to vote at the meeting; or
(c) the shareholders present in person or by proxy at and entitled to vote at the
meeting for which the proxy holder is to be appointed, by a resolution on which the proxy
holder is not entitled to vote but in respect of which the proxy holder is to be counted in
the quorum, permit the proxy holder to attend and vote at the meeting
Deposit of Proxy
1210 A proxy for a meeting of shareholders must:
(a) be received at the registered ofﬁce of the Company or at any other place
speciﬁed, in the notice calling the meeting, for the receipt of proxies, at least the number
of business days speciﬁed in the notice, or if no number of days is speciﬁed, two business
days before the day set for the holding of the meeting or any adjourned meeting; or
(b) unless the notice provides otherwise, be received, at the meeting or any adjourned
meeting, by the chair of the meeting or adjourned meeting or by a person designated by
the chair of the meeting or adjourned meeting.
A proxy may be sent to the Company by written instrument, fax or any other method of
transmitting leginy recorded messages, including through Internet or telephone voting or by
email, if permitted by the notice calling the meeting or the information circular for the meeting
Validity of Proxy Vote
12.11 A vote given in accordance with the terms of a proxy is valid notwithstanding the
death or incapacity of the shareholder giving the proxy and despite the revocation of the proxy or
the revocation of the authority under which the proxy is given, unless notice in writing of that
death, incapacity or revocation is received:
(a) at the registered ofﬁce of the Company, at any time up to and including the last
business day before the day set for the holding of the meeting or any adjourned meeting
at which the proxy is to be used; or
(b) at the meeting or any adjourned meeting by the chair of the meeting or adjourned
meeting, before any vote in respect of which the proxy has been given has been tak.
Form of Proxy
git;


Appendix B 50
.20.
12.12 A proxy, whether for a speciﬁed meeting or otherwise, must be either in the
following form or in any other form approved by the directors or the chair of the meeting:
[name of company]
(the “Company”)
The undersigned, being a shareholder of the Company, hereby appoints [name] or,
failing that person, [name], as proxy holder for the undersigned to attend, act and
vote for and on behalf of the undersigned at the meeting of shareholders of the
Company to be held on [month day, year] and at any adjournment of that
meeting.
Number of shares in respect of which this proxy is given (if no number is
speciﬁed, then this proxy is given in respect of all shares registered in the name of
the undersigned):
Signed [month day, year]
[Signature of shareholder]
[Name of shareholder—printed]
Revocation of Proxy
1113 Subject to §12.l4, every proxy may be revoked by an instrument in writing that is
received:
(a) at the registered ofﬁce of the Company at any time up to and including the last
business day before the day set for the holding of the meeting or any adjourned meeting
at which the proxy is to be used; or
(b) at the meeting or any adjourned meeting, by the chair of the meeting or adjourned
meeting, before any vote in respect of which the proxy has been given has been taken
Revocation of Proxy Must Be Signed
12.14 An instnnnent referred to in §12.13 must be signed as follows:
(a) if the shareholder for whom the proxy holder is appointed is an individual, the
instrument must be signed by the shareholder or the shareholder’s legal personal
representative or trustee in banlo'uptcy;
(b) if the shareholder for whom the proxy holder is appointed is a corporation, the
instrummt must be signed by the corporation or by a representative appointed for the
corporation under §12.5.
it;


Appendix B 51
_ 21 .
Production of Evidence of Authority to Vote
12.15 The chair of any meeting of shareholders may, but need not, inquire into the
authority of any person to vote at the meeting and may, but need not, demand ﬁom that person
production of evidence as to the existence of the authority to vote.
PART 13
DIRECTORS
First Directors; Number of Directors
13.1 The ﬁrst directors are the persons designated as directors of the Company in the
Notice of Articles that applies to the Company when it is recognized under the Act The number
of directors, excluding additional directors appointed under §14.8, is set at:
(a) subject to §(b) and §(c), the number of directors that is equal to the number of the
Company’s ﬁrst directors;
(b) if the Company is a public company, the greater of three and the most recently set
of:
(i) the number of directors set by ordinary resolution (whether or not previous
notice of the resolution was given); and
(ii) the number of directors in ofﬁce pursuant to §14.4;
(c) if the Company is not a public company, the most recently set of:
(i) the number of directors set by ordinary resolution (whether or not previous
notice of the resolution was given); and
(ii) the number of directors in ofﬁce pursuant to §l4l4.
Change in Number of Directors
13.2 lfthe number ofdirectors is set under §13.l(b)(i) or §l3.l(c)(i):
(a) the shareholders may elector appoint the directors needed to ﬁll any vacancies in
the board of directors up to that number; or
(b) if the shareholders do not elect or appoint the directors needed to ﬁll any
vacancies in the board of directors up to that number then the directors, subject to §14.8,
may appoint directors to ﬁll those vacancies.
J/Jm


Appendix B 52
.22.
Directors’ Acts Valid Despite Vacancy
13.3 An act or proceeding of the directors is not invalid merely because fewer than the
number of directors set or otherwise required under these Articles is in ofﬁce.
Qualiﬁcations of Directors
13.4 A director is not required to hold a share in the share structure of the Company as
qualiﬁcation for his or her ofﬁce but must be qualiﬁed as required by the Act to become, act or
continue to act as a director.
Remuneration of Directors
13.5 The directors are entitled to the remuneration for acting as directors, if any, as the
directors may from time to time determine. If the directors so decide, the remuneration of the
directors, if any, will be determined by the shareholders.
Reimbursement of Expenses of Directors
13.6 The Company must reimburse each director for the reasonable expenses that he or
she may incur in and about the business of the Company.
Special Remuneration for Directors
13.7 If any director performs any profﬁsional or other services for the Company that
in the opinion of the directors are outside the ordinary duties of a director, he or she may he paid
remuneration ﬁxed by the directors, or at the option of the directors, ﬁxed by ordinary resolution,
and such remuneration will be in addition to any other remuneration that he or she may be
entitled to receive.
Gratuity, Pension or Allowance on Retirement of Director
11% Unless otherwise determined by ordinary resolution, the directors on behalf of the
Company may pay a gratuity or pension or allowance on retirement to any director who has held
any salaried ofﬁce or place of proﬁt with the Company or to his or her spouse or dependants and
may make contributions to any fund and pay premiums for the purchase or provision of any such
gratuity, pension or allowance.
PART 14
ELECTION AND REMOVAL OF DIRECTORS
Election at Annual General Meeting
14.] At every annual general meeting and in every unanimous resolution contemplated
by §10.2:
>451


Appendix B 53
. 23 _

(a) the shareholders entitled to vote at the amrual general meeting for the election of

directors must elect, or in the manimous resolution appoint, a board of directors

consisting of the number of directors for the time being set under these Articles; and

(b) all the directors cease to hold ofﬁce immediately before the election or

appointment of directors under §(a), but are eligible for re-election or reappointment.
Consent to be a Director
14.2 No election, appointment or designation of an individual as a director is valid
unless:

(a) that individual consents to be a director in the manner provided for in the Act;

(b) that individual is elected or appointed at a meeting at which the individual is

present and the individual does not refuse, at the meeting, to be a director, or

(c) with respect to ﬁrst directors, the designation is otherwise valid under the Act.
Failure to Elect or Appoint Directors
14.3 If:

(a) the Company fails to hold an annual general meeting, and all the shareholders

who are entitled to vote at an annual general meeting fail to pass the unanimous

resolution contemplated by §10.2, on or before the date by which the annual general

meeting is required to be held under the Act; or

(b) the shareholders fail, at the annual general meeting or in the unanimous resolution

contemplated by §10.2, to elect or appoint any directors;
then each director then in ofﬁce continues to hold oﬁice until the earlier of:

(c) when his or her successor is elected or appointed; and

((1) when he or she otherwise ceases to hold ofﬁce under the Act or these Articles.
Places of Retiring Directors Not Filled
14.4 It; at any meeting of shareholders at which there should be an election of
directors, the places of any of the retiring directors are not ﬁlled by that election, those retiring
directors who are not re-elected and who are asked by the newly elected directors to continue in
ofﬁce will, if willing to do so, continue in ofﬁce to complete the number of directors for the time
being set pursuant to these Articles but their term of oﬂice shall expire when new directors are
elected at a meeting of shareholders convened for that pm'pose. If any such election or
continuance of directors does not result in the election or continuance of the number of directors
for the time being set pursuant to these Articles, the number of directors of the Company is
deemed to be set at the number of directors actually elected or continued in ofﬁce.

ego


Appendix B 54
_ 24 _
Directors May Fill Casual Vacancies
14.5 Any casual vacancy occurring in the board of directors may be ﬁlled by the
directors.
Remaining Directors Power to Act
14.6 The directors may act notwithstanding any vacancy in the board of directors, but
if the Company has fewer directors in ofﬁce than the number set pursuant to these Articles as the
quorum of directors, the directors may only act for the ptnpose of appointing directors up to that
number or of calling a meeting of shareholders for the purpose of ﬁlling any vacancies on the
board of directors or, subject to the Act, for any other purpose.
Shareholders May Fill Vacancies
14.7 Ifthe Company has no directors or fewer directors in oﬂice than the number set
pursuant to these Articles as the quorum of directors, the shareholdas may elect or appoint
directors to ﬁll any vacancies onthe board of directors.
Additional Directors
14.8 Notwithstanding §13.1 and §13.2, between annual general meetings or by
unanimous resolutions contemplated by §10.2, the directors may appoint one or more additional
directors, but the number of additional directors appointed under this §14.8 must not at any time
exceed:
(a) one-third of the number of ﬁrst directors, if, at the time of the appointments, one
or more of the ﬁrst directors have not yet completed their fast term of ofﬁce; or
(b) in any other case, one-third of the number of the current directors who were
elected or appointed as directors other than under this §14.8.
Any director so appointed ceases to hold ofﬁce immediawa before the next election or
appointment of directors under §l4.l(a), but is eligible for re-election or re-appointment.
Ceasing to be a Director
14.9 A director ceases to be a director when:
(a) the term of ofﬁce of the director expires;
(b) the director dies;
(0) the director resigns as a director by notice in writing provided to the Company or
a lawyer for the Company; or
(d) the director is removed ﬁom ofﬁce pursuant to §l4_10 or §l4.l l.


Appendix B 55
.25.
Removal of Director by Shareholders
14.10 The Company may remove any director before the expiration of his or her term of
oﬂice by special resolution. In that event, the shareholders may elect, or appoint by ordinary
resolution, a director to ﬁll the resulting vacancy. Ifthe shareholders do not elect or appoint a
director to ﬁll the resulting vacancy contemporaneously with the removal, then the directors may
appoint or the shareholders may elect, or appoint by ordinary resolution, a director to ﬁll that
vacancy.
Removal of Director by Directors
14.1 1 The directors may remove any director before the expiration of his or her term of
ofﬁce if the director is convicted of an indictable offence, or if the director ceases to be qualiﬁed
to act as a director of a company and does not promptly resign, and the directors may appoint a
director to ﬁll the resulting vacancy.
PART 15
POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTORS
Powers of Management
15.1 The directors must, subject to the Act and these Articles, manage or supervise the
management of the business and aﬂJairs of the Company and have the authority to exercise all
such powers of the Company as are not, by the Act or by these Articles, required to be exercised
by the shareholders of the Company.
Appointment of Attorney of Company
15.2 The directors may from time to time, by power of attomey or other instrument,
under seal if so required by law, appoint any person to be the attorney of the Company for such
purposes, and with such powers, authorities and discretions (not exceeding those vested in or
exercisable by the directors under these Articles and excepting the power to ﬁll vacancies in the
board of directors, to remove a director, to change the membership of, or ﬁll vacancies in, any
committee of the directors, to appoint or remove ofﬁcers appointed by the directors and to
declare dividends) and for such period, and with such remuneration and subject to such
conditions as the directors may think ﬁt Any such power of attorney may contain such
provisions for the protection or convenience of persons dealing with such attorney as the
directors think ﬁt. Any such attorney may be authorized by the directors to sub-delegate all or
any of the powers, authorities and discretions for the time being vested in him or her.
\/(/'
23 M


Appendix B 56
.25.
PART 16
INTERESTS OF DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS

Obligation to Account for Proﬁts

16.1 A director or senior ofﬁcer who holds a disclosable interest (as that term is used
in the Act) in a contract or transaction into which the Company has entered or proposes to enter
is liable to account to the Company for any proﬁt that accnres to the director or senior ofﬁcer
under or as a result of the contract or transaction only if and to the extent provided in the Act.
Restrictions on Voting by Reason of Interest

16.2 A director who holds a disclosable interest in a contract or transaction into which
the Company has entered or proposes to enter is not entitled to vote on any directors’ resolution
to approve that contract or transaction, unless all the directors have a disclosable interest in that
contract or transaction, in which case any or all of those directors may vote on such resolution
Interested Director Counted in Quorum

16.3 A director who holds a disclosahle interest in a contract or transaction into which
the Company has entered or proposes to enter and who is present at the meeting of directors at
which the contract or transaction is considered for approval may be counted in the quorum at the
meeting whether or not the director votes on any or all of the resolutions considered at the
meeting.

Disclosure of Conflict of Interest or Property

16.4 A director or senior ofﬁcer who holds any ofﬁce or possesses any property, right
or interest that could result, directly or indirectly, in the creation of a duty or interest that
materially conflicts with that individual’s duty or interest as a director or senior ofﬁcer, must
disclose the nature and extent of the conﬂict as required by the Act.

Director Holding Other Ofﬁce in the Company

16.5 A director may hold any oﬁice or place of proﬁt with the Company, other than the
ofﬁce of auditor of the Company, in addition to his or her ofﬁce of director for the period and on
the terms (as to remuneration or otherwise) that the directors may determine.
No Disqualiﬁcation

16.6 No director or intended director is disqualiﬁed by his or her ofﬁce from
connecting with the Company either with regard to the holding of any oﬁice or place of proﬁt
the director holds with the Company or as vendor, purchaser or otherwise, and no contract or
transaction entered into by or on behalf of the Company in which a director is in any way
interested is liable to be voided for that reason


Appendix B 57
. 27 _
Professional Services by Director or Ofﬁcer
16.7 Subject to the Act, a director or ofﬁcer, or any person in which a director or
ofﬁcer has an interest, may act in a professional capacity for the Company, except as auditor of
the Company, and the director or ofﬁcer or such person is entitled to remuneration for
professional services as if that director or ofﬁcer were not a director or ofﬁcer.
Director or Ofﬁcer in Other Corporations
163 A director or oﬂicer may be or become a director, oﬁieer or employee of, or
otherwise interested in, any person in which the Company may be interested as a shareholder or
otherwise, and, subject to the Act, the director or oﬂicer is not accountable to the Company for
any remuneration or other beneﬁts received by him or her as director, ofﬁcer or employee of, or
ﬁ'om his or her interest in, such other person
PART 17
PROCEEDINGS OF DIRECTORS
Meetings of Directors
17.1 The directors may meet together for the conduct of business, adjoum and
otherwise regulate their meetings as they think ﬁt, and meetings of the directors held at regular
intervals may be held at the place, at the time and on the notice, if any, as the directors may ﬁcm
time to time determine.
Voting at Meetings
17.2 Questions arising at any meeting of directors are to be decided by a majority of
votes and, in the case of an equality of votes, the chair of the meeting does not have a second or
casting vote.
Chair of Meetings
17.3 The following individual is entitled to preside as chair at a meeting of directors:
(a) the chair of the board, if any;
(h) in the absence of the chair of the board, the president, if any, if the president is a
director; or
(c) any other director chosen by the directors if:
(i) neither the chair of the board nor the president, if a director, is present at
the meeting within 15 minutes after the time set for holding the meeting;
(ii) neither the chair of the board nor the presidmt, if a director, is willing to
chair the meeting; or
£5


Appendix B 58
.28.
(iii) the chair of the board and the president, if a director, have advised the
secretary, if any, or any other director, that they will not be present at the meeting.

Meetings by Telephone or Other Communications Medium
17 .4 A director may participate in a meeting of the directors or of any committee of the
directors:

(a) in person; or

(b) by telephone or by other communications meditnn if all directors participating in

the meeting, whether in person or by telephone or other communications medium, are

able to oommtmicate with each other.
A director who participates in a meeting in a manner contemplated by this §17.4 is deemed for
all purposes of the Act and these Articles to be present at the meeting and to have agreed to
participate in that manner.
Calling of Meetings
17.5 A director may, and the secretary or an assistant secretary of the Company, if any,
on the request of a director must, call a meeting of the directors at any time.
Notice of Meetings
17.6 Other than for meetings held at regular intervals as determined by the directors
pursuant to §17.1, reasonable notice of each meeting of the directors, specifying the place, day
and time of that meeting must be given to each of the directors and the alternate directors by any
method set out in §23.1 or orally or by telephone.
When Notice Not Required
17.7 It is not necessary to give notice of a meeting of the directors to a director or an
alternate director 

(a) the meeting is to be held immediawa following a meeting of shareholders at

which that director was elected or appointed, or is the meeting of the directors at which

that director is appointed; or

(b) the director or alternate director has waived notice of the meeting.
Meeting Valid Despite Failure to Give Notice
173 The accidental omission to give notice of any meeting of directors to, or the non-
receipt of any notice by, any director or alternate director, does not invalidate any proceedings at
that meeting.

X113;


Appendix B 59
. 29 _

Waiver of Notice of Meetings
[7.9 Any director or alternate director may send to the Company a doctunent signed by
him or her waiving notice of any past, present or future meeting or meetings of the directors and
may at any time withdraw that waiver with respect to meetings held aﬁer that withdrawal. Aﬁer
sending a waiver with respect to all ﬁrture meetings and until that waiva is withdrawn, no notice
of any meeting of the directors need be given to that director and all meetings of the directors so
held are deemed not to be improperly called or constituted by reason of notice not having been
given to such director. Attendance of a director or alternate director at a meeting of the directors
is a waiver of notice of the meeting unless that director or alternate director attends the meeting
for the express purpose of objecting to the transaction of any business on the grounds that the
meeting is not lawfully called.
Quorum
17.10 The quorum necessary for the transaction of the business of the directors may be
set by the directors and, if not so set, is deemed to be a majority of the directors or, if the number
of directors is set at one, is deemed to be set at one director, and that director may constitute a
meeting
Validity of Acts Where Appointment Defective
17.11 Subject to the Act, an act of a director or ofﬁcer is not invalid merely because of
an irregularity in the election or appointment or a defect in the qualiﬁcation of that director or
ofﬁcer.
Consent Resolutions in Writing
17.12 A resolution of the directors or of any committee of the directors may be passed
without a meeting:

(a) in all cases, if each of the directors entitled to vote on the resolution consents to it

in  or

(b) in the case of a resolution to approve a conuact or transaction in respect of which

a director has disclosed that he or she has or may have a disclosable interest, if each of

the other directors who have not made such a disclosure consents in writing to the

resolution
A consent in writing under this §17. 12 may be by signed document, fax, email or any other
method of transmitting leginy recorded messages. A consent in writing may he in two or more
counterparts which together are deed to constitute one consent in writing. A resolution of the
directors or of any committee of the directors passed in accordance with this §17.12 is effective
on the date stated in the consent in writing or on the latest date stated on any counterpart and is
deemedtobeaprooeedingatameetingofdirectorsorofthecommitteeofthedirectorsandto
be as valid and eﬁ‘ective as if it had been passed at a meeting of the direcwrs or of the committee
of the directors that satisﬁes all the requirements of the Act and all the requirements of these
Articles relating to meetings of the directors or of a committee of the directors.

>454


Appendix B so
.30.
PART 18
EXECUTIVE AND OTHER COMMITTEES
Appointment and Powers of Executive Committee
18.1 The directors may, by resolution, appoint an executive committee consisting of
the director or directors that they consider appropriate, and this committee has, during the
intervals between meetings of the board of directors, all of the directors’ powers, except:
(a) the power to ﬁll vacancies in the board of directors;
(1:) the power to remove a director;
(c) the power to change the manbership of, or ﬁll vacancies in, any committee of the
directors; and
(d) such other powers, if any, as may be set out in the resolution or any subsequent
directors’ resolution.
Appointment and Powers of Other Committees
18.2 The directors may, by resolution:
(a) appoint one or more committees (other than the executive committee) consisting
of the director or directors that they consider appropriate;
(b) delegate to a committee appointed under §(a) any of the directors’ powers, except:
(i) the power to ﬁll vacancies in the board of directors;
(ii) the power to remove a director;
(iii) the power to change the membership of, or ﬁll vacancies in, any
committee of the directors; and
(iv) the power to appoint or remove ofﬁcers appointed by the directors; and
(:2) make any delegation referred to in §(b) subject to the conditions set out in the
resolution or any subsequent directors’ resolution.
Obligations of Committees
18.3 Any committee appointed under (518.1 or §18.2, inthe exercise of the powers
delegated to it, must:
(a) conform to any rules that may from time to time be imposed on it by the dilectors;
and


Appendix B 61
.31.
(b) report every act or thing done in exercise of those powers at such times as the
directors may require.
Powers of Board
18.4 The directors may, at any time, with respect to a committee appointed under §18.1
or § 18.2
(a) revoke or alter the authority given to the committee, or override a decision made
by the committee, except as to acts done before such revocation, alteration or overriding;
(b) terminate the appointment of; or change the membership of, the committee; and
(c) ﬁll vacancies in the committee.
Committee Meetings
18.5 Subject to §18.3(a) and unless the directors otherwise provide in the resolution
appointing the committee or in any subsequent resolution, with respect to a committee appointed
under §18.1 or §18.2:
(a) the committee may meet and adjourn as it thinks proper;
(b) the committee may elect a chair of its meetings but, if no chair of a meeting is
elected, or if at a meeting the chair of the meeting is not present within 15 minutes aﬂer
the time set for holding the meeting, the directors present who are members of the
committee may choose one of their number to chair the meeting;
(0) a majority of the members of the committee constitutes a quonim of the
committee; and
(d) questions arising at any meeting of the committee are determined by a majority of
votes of the memben's present, and in case of an equality of votes, the chair of the meeting
does not have a second or casting vote.
PART 19
OFFICERS
Directors May Appoint Ofﬁcers
19.1 The directors may, ﬁ'om time to time, appoint such ofﬁcers, if any, as the
directors determine and the directors may, at any time, terminate any such appointment.
Functions, Dutia and Powers of Ofﬁcers
19.2 The directors may, for each ofﬁcer:
[sq/ﬁfe
2%


Appendix B 62
.32.
(a) determine the functions and duties of the ofﬁcer,
(b) entrust to and confer on the ofﬁcer any of the powers exercisable by the directors
on such terms and conditions and with such restrictions as the directors think ﬁt; and
(c) revoke, withdraw, alter or vary all or any of the ﬁrnctions, duties and powers of
the ofﬁcer.
Qualiﬁcations
19.3 No person may be appointed as an ofﬁcer unless that person is qualiﬁed in
accordance with the Act. One person may hold more than one position as an ofﬁcer of the
Company. Any person appointed as the chair of the board or as a managing director must be a
director. Any other oﬁcer need not be a directorr
Remuneration and Terms of Appointment
19.4 All appointments of ofﬁcers are to be made on the terms and conditions and at the
remuneration (whether by way of salary, fee, commission, pam'cipation in proﬁts or otherwise)
that the directors thinks ﬁt and are subject to termination at the pleasure of the directors, and an
ofﬁcer may in addition to such remuneration be entitled to receive, alter he or she ceases to hold
such ofﬁce or leaves the employment of the Company, a pension or gratuity.
PART 20
INDEMNIFICATION
Deﬁnitions
20.1 In this Part 20:
(9.) “eligible party”, in relation to a company, means an individual who:
(i) is or was a director, alternate director or ofﬁcer of the Company;
(ii) is or was a director, alternate director or ofﬁcer of another corporation
(A) at a time when the corporation is or was an afﬁliate of the
Company, or
(B) at the request of the Company, or
(iii) at the request of the Company, is or was, or holds or held a position
equivalent to that of, a director, alternate director or ofﬁcer of a partnership, trust,
joint venture or other unincorporated entity,


Appendix B 63
_ 33 _
and includes, except in the defmition of “eligible proceeding” and Sections 163(1)(c) and
(d) and 165 of the Act, the heirs and personal or other legal representatives of that
individual;
(1)) “eligible penalty” means a judgment, penalty or ﬁne awarded or imposed in, or
an amount paid in settlement of, an eligible proceeding;
(c) “eligible proceeding” means a proceeding in which an eligible party or any of the
heirs and personal or other legal representatives of the eligible party, by reason of the
eligible party being or having been a director, alternate director or ofﬁcer of; or holding
or having held a position equivalent to that of a director or oﬂicer of, the Company or an
associated corporation
(i) is or may be joined as a party; or
(ii) is or may be liable for or in respect of a judgment, penalty or ﬁne in, or
expenses related to, the proceeding;
(d) “expenses” has the meaning set out in the Act and includes costs, charges and
expenses, including legal and other fees, but does not include judgments, penalties, ﬁnes
or amounts paid in settlement of a proceeding; and
(e) “proceeding” includes any legal proceeding or investigative action, whether
current, threatened, pending or completed.
Mandatory Indemniﬁcation of Eligible Parties
20.2 Subject to the Act, the Company must indemnify each eligible party and his or her
heirs and legal personal representatives against all eligible penalties to which such person is or
may be liable, and the Company must, aﬁer the ﬁnal disposition of an eligible proceeding, pay
the expenses actually and reasonably incurred by such person in respect of that proceeding. Each
eligible party is deemed to have contracted with the Company on the terms of the indemnity
contained in this §20.2.
Indemniﬁcation of Other Persons
20.3 Subject to any restrictions in the Act, the Company may agree to indemnify and
may indemnify any person (including an eligible party) against eligible penalties and pay
expenses incurred in connection with the performance of services by that person for the
Company
Authorlty to Advance Expenses
20.4 The Company may advance expenses to an eligible party to the extmt permitted
by and in accordance with the Act.
Jﬁi


Appendix B 64
.34.

Non-Compliance with Act

20.5 Subject to the Act, the failure of an eligible party of the Company to comply with
the Act or these Articles or, if applicable, any former Companies Act or former Articles does not,
of itself, invalidate any indemnity to which he or she is entitled under this Part 20.

Company May Purchase Insurance

20.6 The Company may purchase and maintain insurance for the beneﬁt of any eligible
party (or the heirs or legal personal rqaresentatives of any eligible party) against any liability
incurred by any eligible party.

PART 21
DIVIDENDS

Payment of Dividends Subject to Special Rights

21.1 The provisions of this Part 21 are subject to the rights, if any, of shareholders
holding shares with special rights as to dividends.

Declaration of Dividends

21.2 Subject to the Act, the directors may from time to time declare and authorize
payment of such dividends as they may deem advisable.

No Notice Required

21.3 The directors need not give notice to any shareholder of any declaration under
{521 .2.

Record Date

21.4 The directors must set a date as the record date for the purpose of detemrinjng
shareholders entitled to receive payment of a dividend. The record date must not precede the date
on which the dividend is to be paid by more than two months.

Manner of Paying Dividend

21.5 A resolution declaring a dividend may direct payment of the dividend wholly or
partly in money or by the distribution of speciﬁc assets or of fully paid shares or of bonds,
debermnes or other securities of the Company or any other corporation, or in any one or more of
those ways.

Settlement of Diﬂiculties
2L6 If any diﬁimllty arises in regard to a distribution under {521.5, the directors may
settle the difﬁculty as they deem advisable, and, in particular, may:


Appendix a as
. 35 _

(a) set the value for distribution of speciﬁc assets;

(b) determine that money in substitution for all or any part of the speciﬁc assets to

which any shareholders are entitled may be paid to any shareholders on the basis of the

value so ﬁxed in order to adjust the rights of all parties; and

(c) vest any such speciﬁc assets in trustees for the persons entitled to the dividend.
When Dividend Payable
21.7 Any dividend may be made payable on such date as is ﬁxed by the directors.
Dividends to be Paid in Accordance with Number of Shares
21.8 All dividends on shares of any class or series of shares must be declared and paid
according to the number of such shares held.
Receipt by Joint Shareholders
21.9 If several persons are joint shareholders of any share, any one of than may give
an eﬁ'ective receipt for any dividend, bonus or other money payable in respect of the share.
Dividend Bears No Interest
21.10 No dividend bears interest against the Company
Fractional Dividends
21.11 If a dividend to which a shareholder is entitled includes a ﬁacn'on of the smallest
monetary unit of the currency of the dividend, that traction may be disregarded in making
payment of the dividend and that payment represents full payment of the dividend.
Payment of Dividends
21.12 Any dividend or other distribution payable in money in respect of shares may be
paid by cheque, made payable to the order of the person to whom it is st, and mailed to the
registered address of the shareholder, or in the case of joint shareholders, to the registered
address of the joint shareholder who is ﬁrst named on the central securities register, or to the
person and to the address the shareholder or joint shareholders may direct in writing. The mailing
of such cheque will, to the extent of the sum represented by the cheque (plus the amount of the
tax required by law to be deducted), discharge all liability for the dividend unless such cheque is
not paid on prmentation or the amount of tax so deducted is not paid to the appropriate taxing
authority.
Capitalization of Retained Earnings or Surplus
21.13 Notwithstanding anything contained in these Articles, the directors may ﬁom time
to time capitalize any retained earnings or surplus of the Company and may from time to time


Appendix a as
.35.
issue, as fully paid, shares or any bonds, debentures or other securities of the Company as a
dividend representing the retained earnings or surplus so capitalized or any part thereof.
PART 22
ACCOUNTING RECORDS AND AUDITOR
Recording of Financial Affairs
22.1 The directors must cause adequate accounting records to be kept to record
properly the ﬁnancial affairs and condition of the Company and to comply with the Act
Inspection of Accounting Records
22.2 Unless the directors determine otherwise, or unless otherwise determined by
ordinary resolution, no shareholder of the Company is entitled to inspect or obtain a copy of any
accounting records of the Company.
Remuneration of Auditor
22.3 The directors may set the remuneration of the auditor of the Company.
PART 23
NOTICES
Method of Giving Notice
23.1 Unless the Act or these Articles provide otherwise, a notice, statement, report or
other record required or permitted by the Act or these Articles to be sent by or to a person may
be sent by.
(a) mail addressed to the person at the applicable address for that person as follows:
(i) for a record mailed to a shareholder, the shareholder’s regist address;
(ii) for a record mailed to a director or ofﬁcer, the prescribed address for
mailing shown for the director or ofﬁcer in the records kept by the Company or
the mailing address prow'ded by the recipit for the sending of that record or
records of that class;
(iii) in any other case, the mailing address of the intended recipient;
(b) delivery at the applicable address for that person as follows, addressed to the
person;
(i) for a record delivered to a shareholder, the shareholder’s registered
address;
%


Appendix a s7
-37.
(ii) for a record delivered to a director or ofﬁcer, the prescribed address for
delivery shown for the director or ofﬁcer in the records kept by the Company or
the delivery address provided by the recipient for the sending of that record or
records of that class;
(iii) in any other case, the delivery address of the intended recipient;
(c) sending the record by fax to the fax number provided by the intended recipient for
the sending of that record or records of that class;
(d) sending the record by email to the email address provided by the intended
recipit for the sending of that record or records of that class;
(e) physical delivery to the intended recipient.
Deemed Receipt of Mailing
23.2 A notice, statement, report or other record that is:
(a) mailed to a person by ordinary mail to the applicable address for that person
referred to in §23.1 is deemed to be received by the person to whom it was mailed on the
day (Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excepted) following the date of mailing;
(b) faxed to a person to the fax number provided by that person under §23.1 is
deemed to be received by the person to whom it was faxed on the day it was faxed; and
(c) emailed to a person to the e-mail address provided bythat person under §23.l is
deemed to be received by the person to whom it was e-mailed on the day that it was
emailed
Certificate of Sending
23.3 A certiﬁcate signed by the secretary, if any, or other officer of the Company or of
any other corporation acting in that capacity on behalf of the Company stating that a notice,
statemmt, report or other record was sent in accordance with §23.1 is conclusive evidence of that
fact.
Notice to Joint Shareholders
23.4 A notice, statement, report or other record may be provided by the Company to
the joint shareholders of a share by providing such record to the joint shareholder ﬁrst named in
the central securities register in respect of the share
Notice to Legal Personal Representatives and Trustees
23.5 A notice, statement, report or other record may be provided by the Company to
the persons enn'tled to a share in consequence of the death, bankruptcy or incapacity of a
shareholder by:
ﬂt
2k;


Appendix a as
-33.
(a) mailing the record, addressed to them:
(i) by name, by the title of the legal personal representative of the deceased or
incapacitated shareholder, by the title of trustee of the bankrupt shareholder or by
my similar description; and
(ii) at the address, if any, supplied to the Company for that purpose by the
persons claiming to be so entitled; or
(b) if an address referred to in §(a)(ii) has not been supplied to the Company, by
giving the notice in a manner in which it might have been given if the death, bankruptcy
or incapacity had not occurred.
Undelivered Notices
23.6 If on two consecutive occasions, a notice, statement, report or other record is sent
to a shareholder pursuant to (523.1 and on each of those occasions any such record is returned
because the shareholder cannot be located, the Company shall not be required to send any further
records to the shareholder until the shareholder informs the Company in writing of his or her new
address
PART 24
SEAL
Who May Attest Seal
24.1 Except as provided in §24.2 and §24,3, the Company’s seal, if any, must not be
impressed on any record except when that impression is attested by the signatures of:
(a) any two directors;
(b) any ofﬁcer, together with any director;
(c) if the Company only has one director, that director; or
(d) any one or more directors or oﬁcers or persons as may be determined by the
directors.
Sealing Copies
24.2 For the purpose of certifying under seal a certiﬁcate of incumbency of the
directors or ofﬁcers of the Company or a true copy of any resolution or other document, despite
§24. l , the impression of the seal may be attested by the signature of any director or ofﬁcer or the
signature of any other person as may be determined by the directors.
ﬂu


Appendix B 69
_ 39 _
Mechanical Reproduction of Seal
24.3 The directors may authorize the seal to be impressed by third parties on share
certiﬁcates or bonds, debentures or other securities of the Company as they may determine
appropriate ﬁ-om time to time. To enable the seal to be impressed on any share certiﬁcates or
bonds, debentures or other securities of the Company, whether in deﬁnitive or interim form, on
which facsimiles of any of the signatures of the directors or ofﬁcers of the Company are, in
accordance with the Act or these Articles, printed or otherwise mechanically reproduced, there
may be delivered to the person employed to engrave, lithograph or print such deﬁnitive or
interim share certiﬁcates or bonds, debentures or other securities one or more unmounted dies
reproducing the seal and such persons as are authorized under §24.1 to attest the Company’s seal
may in writing authorize such person to cause the seal to be impressed on such deﬁnitive or
interim share certiﬁcates or bonds, debentures or other securities by the use of such dies. Share
certiﬁcates or bonds, debentures or other securities to which the seal has been so impressed are
for all purposes deemed to be under and to bear the seal impressed on them.
PART 25
PROHIBITIONS
Deﬁnitions
251 In this Part 25:
(a) “designated securitf’ means:
(i) a voting security of the Company;
(ii) a security of the Company that is not a debt security and that carries a
residual right to participate in the earnings of the Company or, on the liquidation
or winding up of the Company, in its assets; or
(iii) a security of the Company convertible, directly or indirectly, into a
security described in §(a) or §(b);
(b) “security” has the meaning assigned in the Securities Act (British Columbia); and
(c) “voting security” means a security of the Company that:
(i) is not a debt security; and
(ii) canies a voting right either under all cimnnstances or under some
circumstances that have occurred and are continuing.
%«


Appendix B 70
.40.
Application
25.2 §25.3 does not applyto the Company if and for so long as it is a public company,
a private company which is no longer eligible to use the private issuer exemption under the
Securities Act (British Columbia) or a pre-existing reporting company which has the Statutory
Reporting Company Provisions as part of its Articles or a company to which the Statutory
Reporting Company Provisions apply.
Consent Required for Transfer of Shares or Designated Securities
25.3 No share or designated security may be sold, transferred or otherwise disposed of
without the consent of the directors and the directors are not required to give any reason for
refusing to consent to any such sale, transfer- or other disposition
PART 26
SPECIAL RIGHTS AND RESTRICTIONS
COMJVION SHARES
Attachment of Special Rights and Restrictions
26.1 There are attached to the Common shares without par value the special rights and
restrictions set forth in this Part.
Voting Rights for Common shares
26.2 The holders of Common shares will be entitled to receive notice of, attend and
vote at any general meeting of the Company and to cast one vote for each Common share held on
the applicable record date in respect of any matter put to vote by poll at such a meeting.
Dividends on Common shares
26.3 Subject to the special rights and restrictions attached to the shares of any other
class, in each year, at the discretion of the directors, dividends may be paid on the Common
shares out of all amounts available for dividends; provided however, that such dividends will not
be declared or paid on any Common share if to do would reduce the value of the net assets of the
Company to less than the total redemption price of all of the Preferred shares issued and
outstanding.
Liquidation Entitlement
26.4 In the event of the liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company, utter
payment of all amormts due on Preferred shares, the holders of the Common shares shall share in
the remaining assets of the Company, if any, pro rate based on the number of such shares held by
each of them.
95 2421


Appendix B 71
.41.
PART 27
SPECIAL RIGHTS AND RESTRICTIONS
CLASS A AND
CLASS B PREFERRED SHARES
27.1 Attachment of Rights and Restrictions
There are attached to the Class A preferred shares (“Class A Shares”) and Class B preferred
shares (“Class B Shares”) of the Company the rights and restrictions set forth in this Part.
Class A Preferred Shares
27.2 Dividend Restriction
The holders of Class A Shares shall not. be entitled to receive dividends.
27.3 Dissolution
In the event of the dissolution, liquidation or winding up of the Company, whether voluntary or
involuntary, or any other distribution of assets of the Company among its shareholders for the
purpose of winding up its affairs, the holders of the Class A Shares shall be entitled to receive
$0.50 for each such share held by them in priority to the holders of the Common shares and any
other class of shares of the Company. Aﬁer payment to the holders of the Class A Shares of the
amount so payable to them as above provided, they shall not be entitled to share in any further
distribution of the property or assets of the Company.
27.4 Redemption by the Company
Subject to the provisions of the Act, the Company shall, effective immediawa alter the Eﬁective
Time (the “Redemption Time"), redeem all of the then outstanding Class A Shares at a price of
$0.50 (the “Redemption Price”) for each such Class A Share as follows:
(a) No notice of redemption or other act or formality on the part of the Company shall be
required to call Class A Shares for redemption. No share certiﬁcate representing the Class
A Shares shall be issuable by the Company.
(b) At the Redemption Time:
(i) provided that a holder of any such Class A Shares shall have presented
and surrendered to the Company such documents as the directors may reasonably
require, including letters of transmittal and/or share certiﬁcates issued by the
%\


Appendix B 72
. 42 .

Company or any predecessor of the Company, the Company shall pay or cause to
be paid to such holder (with the right to such payment being the sole right of such
holder) the sum equal to the Redemption Price, without interest, for each Class A
Share so redeemed Without limitation, the Company shall be deemed to have
paid to such holder the sum equal to the Redemption Price for each Class A Share
so redeemed when a cheque representing such amount has been mailed (or
electronically remitted) to the most recmt address of such holder as it appeared on
the records of the Company at the Effective Time, has been delivered to such
holder, or has been set aside for pick up in accordance with the delivery
instructions provided by the holder.
(ii) the holder of such Class A Shares shall not be entitled to exercise any of
the rights of a shareholder in respect thereof, other than the right to receive
payment, without interest, of the Redemption Price as aforesaid or as provided in
Article 27.4(0) below, unless payment of the aforesaid Redemption Price has not
been made in accordance with the foregoing provisions or as provided in Article
27.4(c) below, in which case the rights of such shareholder shall remain
unaffected.

(c) The holders of Class A Shares who have not at the Redemption Time presented and/or
surrendered to the Company any docinrrents requested by the directors pursuant to Article
27.4(b) shall:

(i) be entitled to receive, and the Company shall pay or cause to be paid to such
holder, the sum equal to the Redemption Price for each Class A Share redeemed
only upon presentation and surrender by such holder to the Company documents
requested by the directors pursuant to Article 27.4(b);

(ii) not be entitled to exercise any of the rights of shareholders in respect thereof,
other than the right to receive payment, without interest, of the Redemption Price
as aforesaid or as provided in Article 27 .4(d) and subject to Article 27.4(g).

(d) The Company shall have the right at any time to deposit the Redemption Price for such of
the redeemed Class A Shares registered in the names of shareholders who have not at the
date of such deposit presented and surrendered to the Company the documents requested
by the directors pursuant to Article 27.4(b) in a special account with a Canadian chartered
bank, trust company or depositary to be paid without interest to or to the order of the
respective holders of such Class A Shares upon presentation and/or surrender- by them
respectively to the Company of the documents requested. Any interest earned on such
deposit shall belong to the Company.

(e) If the respective holders of such Class A Shares have not presented and/or surrendered to
the Company any documents requested by the directors pursuant to Article 27.4(b) by the
second anniversary date of the Effective Date, the Redemption Price payable in respect of
such Class A Shares shall be paid to the Company.

A/i»


Appendix B 73
_ 43 _

(0 Upon the redemption of the Class A Shares at the Redemption Time, the Class A Shares
and the certiﬁcates for the common shares in the capital of Huakan shall be deﬁned to be
cancelled.

(g) Monies that are represented by a cheque issued to the holder of Class A Shares pursuant
to this Article 27.4 which has not been presented to the applicable bankers for payment or
that otherwise remain unclaimed (including monies held on deposit in a special account
provided in Article 27.4(d)) by the ﬁrst anniversary date of the Effective Date shall be
forfeited to the Company.

275 Voting Restrictions

The holders of the Class A Shares shall not as such be entitled to receive notice of or to attend

meetings of the shareholders of the Company and shall not be entitled to vote at such meeting,
except as speciﬁcally provided in the Act.

27.6 Non-Convertible and Non-Exchangeable

For greater certainty, the Class A Shares shall not be convertible or exchangeable into any other
class or series of shares of the Company.

Class B Preferred Shares

27.7 Dividend Restriction

The holders of the Class B Shares shall not be entitled to receive dividends.

27.8 Dissolution

In the event of a dissolution, liquidation or winding up of the Company, whether voluntary or
involuntary, or any other distribution of assets of the Company among its shareholders for the
purpose of winding up its affairs, the holders of the Class B Shares shall be entitled to receive
$0001 for each such share held by them in priority to the Common shares and any other class of
shares of the Company ranking junior to the Class B Shares. Aﬁer payment to the holders of the
Class B Shares of the amount so payable to them as above provided, they shall not be entitled to
share in any further distribution of the property or assets of the Company.

27.9 Redemption by the Company

Subject to the provisions of the Act, the Company shall, immediately aﬁer the Effective Time,
redeem and cancel the Class B Shares, upon surrender for cancellation of the certiﬁcates
representing such shares for $0.001 per share multiplied by the number of Class B Shares held
by such registered holder, and upon such payment being made, the certiﬁcates representing such

\/V
/l/LQ


Appendix B 74
.44.

shares shall be cancelled and the Class B Shares represented thereby shall be deemed to be
redeemed.

27.10 Voting Restriction

The holders of the Class B Shares shall not as such be entitled to receive notice of or to attend
meetings of the shareholders of the Company and shall not be entitled to vote at any such
meeting except as speciﬁcally provided in the Act.

27.11 Priority

The Common shares shall rank junior to the Class B Shares and shall be subject in all respects to
the rights, privileges, restrictions and conditions attaching to the Class B Shares. The Class B
Shares shall rank junior to the Class A Shares in all respects, unless otherwise provided for
herein.

Full name and signature of ineorporator Date of signing

~NAME 0F COMPANYM ~insert date signed~

Per.

Authorized Signatory

~NAMIE. OF COMPANY ~


Appendix B 75
SCIEDULE B — FORM 13 AMALGAMATION APPLICATION
AND RELATED DOCUMENTS
a BRITISH Mlnlltry wﬁmﬁ. we” AMALGAMATTON APPLICATION
COLUMBIA ofth 1r;ch vow av: FORM 13 - ac COMPANY
The a... M.“ m. my. 39 Mi”, W M FPO} _ w minim 3m amnion» 2:71;"s A“
Vlclone BC
mllwvbcmlhuuw

Telephone: 250 356-8626
Do NOT MAIL mus FORM to the ac Registry Services
“layoummwdowhyrwimm
Th- mulnlon under ttlo amines: mush: Personal Information provided on this form I oolected, used and
mumthcoloclronlc venlunrnﬂtlsfonntnb- ﬁled disclosed under the authority of the FOIPFA and the Business
ontha lnternnetwwvrxerponteonllneawhmca Corporations Act for the purposes at mam. Guam: rewriting

the collection, use and dedoeure of personal Information can be directed

to an Executive Coordinator ofthe BC Realm Services at 250 356-1198,

Poemsm stnProvG Victorians vswwa,
A. INITIAL INFORMATION - When the amalgamation is complete, your company will be a BC limited company.
What kind of companyﬂes) will be involved In the amalgamation?
( Check all applicable boxes)
M BC company
D BC unllmited liability company
5. NAME OF COMPANY — Choose one of the following:

D The name is the name reserved for the amalgamated company. The name
reservation number is: OR

D The company is to be amalgamated with a name created by adding “Bic. Ltd." alter the incorporation
number, OR

B The amalgamated company Is to adopt, as its name. the name of one of the amalgamating companies

The name of the amalgamating company being adopted is:
Hugﬁn [ntematlonal Mining Inc
The incorporation number cflhat company lemmas-1
Please note: If you want the name of an amalgaman corporation that Is a foreign corporation, you must obtain a
name approval before completing this amalgamation appllcatz‘on.
c. AMALGAMATION STATEMENT — Please indicate the statement applicable to the amalgamation.
with Court Approval:

D Thls amalgamation has been approved by the court and a copy of the entered court order approving the
amalgamation has been oblalned and has been deposited in the records ofﬁce of each of the
amalgamating companies.

OR
Without Coll-t Approval:

This amalgamation has been effected without court approval, A copy of all ofthe required afﬁdavits
under section 277(1) have been obtained and the afﬁdavit obtained from each amalgamating company
has been deposited in that company's records ofﬁce.

D. AMALGAMAIION EFFECTIVE DATE — Choose one of the following: %
FORM 13-Huakan lmrtilbtul Ina—Approved 2014 P3991


Appendix B 76
D The amalgamation Is to take effect at the time that this application is ﬁled with the registrar.
D The amalgamation is to take effect at 12:01 am. Paciﬁc 11me on being a date
that is not more than ten days after the date of the ﬁling of this application.
D The amalgamation Is to take effect at D am. or Cl pm. Paciﬁc Time on being
a date and time that is not more than ten days after the date of the ﬁling of this application
E. AMALGAMAHNG CORPORATIONS
Enter the name of each amalgamatan corporation below. For eadl company. enter the incorporation number.
If the amalgamatan corporation is a foreign corporationl enter the foreign corporation's jurisdiction and If registered
in BC as an extrapnwinciel oompany, enter the extraprovincial company: registration number, Attach an additional
sheet If more s z a Is ulred.
BC INCORPORATION NUMBER OR FOREIGN
NAME OFAMALGAMATING OORPORATION ExrRAPROJsagEIA; mEBGISTRATION commune“ JURBDIWON
1. Huakan International Mining Inc. 300310684
2. 0996059 B.C. Ltd. 300996059
F. FORMALITIES T0 AMALGAMATION
If any amalgamatan corporation is a foreign corporation, section 215 (1)(b) requires an authorization for the
amalgamation from the foreign corporation‘s jurisdiction to be ﬁled.
This is to conﬁrm that each authorization for the amalgamation required under section 275(1)(b) ls being
submitted for ﬁling concurrently with this application
G. CERTIFIED CORRECT- I have read this form and found it to be correct.
This form must be signed by an authorized signing authority for each of the amalgamatlng companies as set out in Item E.
NAME OF AUTHORIZED SIGNING AUTHORITV FOR SIGNATURE OF AUTHORIZED SIGNING AUTHORrrv DATE SIGNED
THE AMALGAMATING CORPORATION FOR THE AMALGAMATING CORPORATION (YYYVI MMI DD)
1.Wenhon: lson Jln X
NAME OF AUTHORIZED SIGNING AUTHORITY FOR SIGNATURE OF AUTHORIZED SIGNING AUTHORITV DATE SIGNED
THE AMALGAMATING CORPORATION FOR THE AMALGAMATING OORPORATION (YYYY I m I DD)
2.Yuandon: Jeffre Ren X
FORM I3 - Hulk-n Imam-ﬁend Mining lm—Awrwed— mm Page 2


Appendix B 77
NOTICE OF ARTICLES
A. NAME OF COMPANY
Set out the name of the company as set out in Item B of the Amalgamation Application.
Huakan Intematlonal Mining Inc.
B. TRANSLATION OF COMPANY NAME
Set out every translation of the company name that the company intends to use outside of Canada.
$3! were FE’A‘ 5]
C. DIRECTOR NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)
Set out the full name. dellvery address and mailing address (if different) 0! every director 01 the company. The director
may select to provide either (a) the delivery address and, It different. the mailing eddres tor the oriﬁce at which the
individual can usually be sewed with records between 9 am. and 4 pm, on business days or (b) the delivery
address and, it ﬁllererrt. the mailing address of the individuals residence. The delivery address must not be a post
ofﬁce box Attach an additional sheet It more space Is required.
DELIVERV ADDRESS INCLUDING MAILING ADDREss INCLUDING
W NAME FIW WE "mm-E WE PWVINCEISTATE. COlllI'RY AND POSTAL/ll? OODE "(WINE/STATE, COUNTRY” mm ODDS
Suite 850 - 580 Homby Street,
Guo Pengzhi Vancouver, British Columbia V66 Same as delivery
336
Suite 850 - 580 Homby Street,
Song Shlcheng Vancouver, Brltlsh Columbia V60 Same as delivery
336
Suite 850 — 580 Homby Street,
Jln Wenhong Vancouver. British Columbia V60 Same as delivery
3B6
Suite 850 - 580 Homby Street.
Zhao Guixln Vancouver, British Columbia VBC Same as delivery
336
Suite 850 - 580 Homby Street.
Ren Yuendong Vancouver, British Columbia V60 Same as delivery
3B6
Suite 850 - 580 Homby Street.
Shi Xiang Vancouver, British Columbia V6C Same as delivery
336
Suite 850 - 580 Homby Street.
Llu Hongfei Vancouver, British Columbia V60 Same as delivery
336
D. REGISTERED OFFICE ADDRESSES
D.E_IVERV ADDRESS OF THE COMPANY‘S REGISTERED OFFICE (INCLUDING BC and POSTAL CODE)
m
E. RECORDS OFFICE ADDRESSES
:EIVERV ADDREss OF THE COMPANY’S RECORDS OFFICE (INCUJDING Bo and POSTAL CODE)
MAILING ADDRESS OF THE COMPANY‘S RECORDS OFFICE (INCLUDING ac and POSTAL CODE)
9
lag %
FORM 13- Hum IW M'litg Inc. -Apprmed 2014 P399 3


Appendix B 78
W—
Maximum number of
shamaﬁhlsdauor mmemspeu‘alﬂglm‘x
seriasaishnmthetme ﬁndofshueso'ﬂllsdas maxi-saw
ounpanylsamarludm ofseﬁeumshales «Matthiade
Issue, or Indicate here is me: «sham?
no maximum number
U , MAXIMUM NUMBER OF
ldamﬂagn: Drum
N ” no MAXIWM NUMEER
no maximum
wmmm par value _
no maximum .
Class A Pmened Whom par value
no maximum .
Class B Prefm mm.“ par value
FORM 13 - Hm lnhmaﬁnnul Mining In; - Appmd am Page 4


Appendix B 79
CANADA ) IN THE MATTER of the amalgamation of
) Huakan International Mining Inc. and 0996059
PROVINCE OF ) B.C. Ltd. under ss. 275 and 277 of the Business
BRITISH COLUMBIA ) Corporations Act (British Columbia) (the
) “Amalgamation")
TO WIT: )
AFFIDAVIT
I, , of Suite 850 - 580 Homby Street, Vancouver, British Columbia V6C
336 do solemnly declare that:
1. I am an officer of Huakan Intemational Mining Inc. (the “Company”) and, as such have
knowledge of the matters addressed in this declaration.
2. The Company has entered into an amalgamation agreement with 0996059 B.C. Ltd. and
that amalgamation agreement
(a) complies with s. 270 of the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia) (the
“Act”); and
(b) has been adopted in aocordance with s. 271 of the Act.

3. I believe, and have reasonable gmunds for believing, that no creditor of the Company
will be prejudiced by the Amalgamation.
I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing it to be true and knowing it is of the
same force and effect as if made under oath and by vinue of the Canada Evidence Act.
DECLARE!) BEFORE NE at Vancouver, )
British Columbia, this _ day of O, 2014. )

)

)
— ;
Name: +—
A Notary Public in and for the Province of ) Wmhm‘g M115“) "n
Bn‘n'sh Columbia ;

FORM 15— Hulltln Immﬂ Minlng Ina-Approved 2014 PM 5


Appendix B so
CANADA ) IN THE MA'l'I'ER of the amalgamation of
) Huakan International Mining Inc. and 0996059
PROVINCE OF ) B.C. Ltd. under 35. 275 and 277 of the Business
BRITISH COLUMBIA ) Corporations Act (British Columbia) (the
) “Amalgamation”)
TO WIT: )
AFFIDAVIT
I, , of Suite 604 7 666 Burrard Street, Vancouver, British Columbia V6C
3X8 do solemnly declare that:
4. I am an ofﬁcer of 0996059 B,C. Ltd. (the “Company”) and, as such have knowledge of
the matters addressed in this declaration.
5. The Company has entered into an amalgamation agreement with Huakan International
Mining Inc. and that amalgamation agreement
(a) complies with s. 270 of the Business Corporations Ac! (British Columbia) (the
“Act”); and
(b) has been adopted in accordance with s. 271 of the Act.

6. Ihelieve, and have reasonable grounds for believing, that no creditor of the Company
will be prejudiced by the Amalgamation.
I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing it to be true and knowing it is of the
same force and elTect as if made under oath and by w’rtue of the Canada Evidence Act.
DECLARE!) BEFORE ME at Vancouver, )
British Columbia, this _ day of O, 2014. )

)

)
W %
ANotary Public inand for the Province of ) “mamaﬁeymm
British Columbia ;

FORM 1:- Hum immiml wing Inn-Appr mu g Page a


Appendix B 51
SCHEDULE C — LIST OF NEWCO GROUP AND THEIR HK SHARES PURSUANT TO
SECTION 2.2 (c)
HK Shareholder that is a member of BK Shares Directly Owned by HR Shareholder
Newco Group that is a member of Neweo Group
Huakan Resources Inc. 21,955,223
Hun Kim International Mining Co., Ltd. 6,000,000
Shauchuan Mining Limited 3,000,000
Dashan Mining Limited 1,000,000
Sun Luck Asia Investment Limited 3,942,852
Power Best Resources Inc. 3,074,285
FORM 15- mm International Min-no um -va— mm Page 7


Appendix B 82
SCHEDULE 1) — CONSENTS PURSUANT TO SECTION 5.1(c)
Nil
375 yéfc
FORM 13 - Hunknn Inhmlﬁmﬂ Mhinu Inc. am 2014 Page a


C-1
APPENDIX C
HUAKAN INTERNATIONAL MINING INC.
SUMMARY OF FAIRNESS OPINION
See attached.
Introduction 
 
The writer was asked by the Special Committee (‘SC’) of the Board of Directors of Huakan International 
Mining  Inc.  (‘Huakan’  or  the  ‘Company’)  to  opine  on  the  proposal  by  Hong Kong Huakan Investment Co., 
Limited  (‘HK  Huakan’),  Sun  Luck  Asia  Investment  Limited  (‘Sun  Luck’)  and  Power  Best  Resources  Inc. 
(‘Power  Best’)  (HK  Huakan,  Sun  Luck  and  Power  Best  together  shall  be  referred  to  herein  as  the  ‘HK 
Huakan Parties’) to take Huakan private by way of an amalgamation transaction whereby $0.50 cash per 
share will be paid for all issued and outstanding shares (‘Shares’) of the Company that are currently held 
by  Huakan’s  shareholders  other  than  the  HK  Huakan  Parties  and  an  ongoing  shareholder  holding 
214,286 Shares (‘the Minority Shareholders’). 
 
HK  Huakan,  through  four  of  its  directly  or  indirectly  wholly‐owned  subsidiaries,  namely,  Huakan 
Resources Inc., Hua Kan International Mining Co., Ltd., Shanchuan Mining Limited and Dashan Mining 
Limited, holds collectively 31,955,223 shares i.e. 75.27% of Huakan’s 42,451,939 outstanding common 
shares (‘Shares’) and Sun Luck and Power Best hold interests in 3,942,852 shares (9.29%) and 3,074,285 
shares (7.24%), respectively.  Consequently, the offer by HK Huakan Parties of $0.50 cash per Huakan 
Share  will  be  made  to  Minority  Shareholders  owning  approximately  3,265,293  Shares  or  7.69%  of 
Huakan’s Shares, giving the offer a cash value of $1,632,646.50.   
 
HK Huakan, Sun Luck and Power Best are not related parties, but are acting in concert through 0996059 
B.C. Ltd., a privately held company that they jointly own, to acquire the remaining Huakan Shares that 
they do not own in order to complete the going private transaction. 
 
Assignment 
 
The writer was engaged by the Special Committee of the Company (the ‘Special Committee’) to provide 
a fairness opinion on the terms of the cash offer by the HK Huakan Parties to the Minority Shareholders 
of $0.50 a Share to take the Company private and delist the shares from the TSXV.   
 
Qualifications of the Writer 
 
The writer is a CFA® charter holder awarded by the CFA Institute, a global membership organization that 
awards the Chartered Financial Analyst® (CFA®) designation upon completion of an assigned curriculum 
and examinations.  The CFA Institute leads the investment industry by setting the highest standards of 
ethics and professional excellence and vigorously advocating fair and transparent capital markets.  The 
writer also holds an M.B.A. degree with a major in finance granted by Michigan State University. 
 
From 1987 to 1991, the writer was Vice President, Research, LOM Western Securities Ltd., now known 
as  Canaccord  Genuity  Corp.,  a  leading  underwriter  of  resources  and  industrial  companies  in  Western 
Canada.  As a condition of his employment, the writer was required to pass the Partners, Directors and 
Officers examination administered by the Canadian Securities Institute and was subsequently registered 
by the British Columbia Securities Commission under the category: Trading Partner, Director, Officer. 
 
The writer is a past director of the Canadian Council of Financial Analysts and since 1991, the writer has 
been  an  Independent  Financial  Consultant  providing  securities  valuation  services,  fairness  opinions,
financial research and related consulting services and assignments for over two hundred Canadian and 
International  clients  such  as  mining  and  exploration  companies  and  companies  operating  in  other 
sectors, financial institutions, law firms, governments and investment dealers.   
 
The writer is knowledgeable in the valuation of mineral resources and his two peer reviewed articles 
pertaining to this subject appeared in the August 2002 and April 2011 issues of Mining Engineering, a 
publication  of  the  Society  for  Mining,  Metallurgy  and  Exploration.    The  writer  is  a  member  in  good 
standing of that organization.  The writer co‐authored one of the high quality submissions for the 2011 
Toronto CFA Society and Hillsdale Management Research Award.  
 
The writer also acts as an advisor to companies on merger and acquisition matters.  The writer has been 
accepted by the Tax Court of Canada, the British Columbia Supreme Court and the Alberta Court of the 
Queen’s Bench as an expert witness on matters relating to the stock market and mineral exploration 
company share prices, coal mining, placer gold mining, gold company share prices and mineral claims 
and mineral royalty matters.  The writer served as a Research and Financial Analyst with the Vancouver 
Stock Exchange & Securities Regulation Commission (i.e. Matkin Commission) in 1993. 
 
The writer meets the independence requirements as set out in Part 6 of Multilateral Instrument 61‐101 
– Protection of Minority Security Holders in Special Transactions. 
 
Relationship of the Writer with Interested Parties 
 
The writer has no past, present interest in the shares and interests of Huakan or with the HK Huakan 
Parties and the respective companies’ associates, customers and suppliers. The writer has had no prior 
association or affiliation with such parties before accepting this engagement.  The writer will be paid a 
fee  for  this  work  in  accordance  with  normal  professional  consulting  practice.    The  writer  may  in  the 
future ‐ in the course of conducting financial advisory services to a broad spectrum of corporate clients ‐ 
perform financial and research services for companies referred to in the preparation of this report. 
 
Scope of Review and Considerations of Fairness 
 
In performing this assignment, the writer relied on information provided by the management of Huakan 
and the Special Committee and referred to publicly available information primarily on the exploration 
activities of other companies active in British Columbia, where required.  
 
In  the  course  of  this  engagement,  the  writer  held  a  number  of  discussions  with  certain  directors  of 
Huakan and their legal advisor.  The writer had access to all information requested from the Company 
and  no  suggestions  were  requested  of  or  offered  as  to  the  approach  or  methodology  used  in  the 
preparation of this report.  Documents and sources of information accessed by the writer include:
  Original going private proposal made by Huakan Resources on behalf of the HK Huakan Parties 
to Huakan, memorandum dated January 22, 2014 as well as a revised offer dated January 28, 
2014
  Final draft Amalgamation Agreement between Huakan and 0996059 B.C. Ltd. dated March 14,
2014
  Merit,  news  release  dated  December  22,  2009  announcing  agreement  with  Tianjin  Huakan 
Group  Co.  Ltd.  to  subscribe  for  27,955,223  Shares  for  aggregate  proceeds  to  Merit  of 
$15,500,000
  Huakan, audited  consolidated financial  statements and management’s discussion and analysis 
(‘MD&A’) for the years 2010, 2011 and 2012 and unaudited consolidated financial statements 
and MD&A for the nine month period ended on September 30, 2013
  Huakan, news release dated January 1, 2014 clarifying technical disclosure 
  Asset Purchase Agreement between Huakan and Gold Crown LLC dated March 25, 2011 
  Technical Report and Resource Estimate for the J&L Property as of May 16, 2011, prepared by
P&E Mining Consultants Inc.
  PEA of the J&L Property as of April 24, 2012 prepared by Micon International Limited 
  Annual Information Form, Jantri Resources Inc. (‘Jantri’) dated January 7, 2004 
  Gold City Industries Ltd., news release announcing plans to option B.C. assets to Jantri  
  Historical daily trading data for Huakan shares available on Canada Stockwatch  
  Annual summaries of trading volumes and values provided by TMX Datalinx 
  Historical gold and silver prices (London) available on Kitco Metals 
  Recent performance of gold and metals prices and the impact on the trading prices and volumes
of junior mining related companies on the TSXV and impact on the TSX Venture Index
  The performance of Huakan Shares relative to the TSX Venture Exchange Index  subsequent to
the reorganization of the Company in 2010
  The trading volumes of Huakan shares in the same corresponding period 
  The cash consideration offered for the minority Huakan Shares and the prior trading prices of
the Shares over an  extended period of time
  The  current  financial  position  of  Huakan  based  on  historical  as  well  as  current  financial
operating statements
  The PEA completed on the J&L property submitted by the Company's consultants  
  Huakan filings on SEDAR 
  The  pricing  of  any  proposed  future  financing  required  by  Huakan  within  the  context  of  the 
current trading prices of Huakan Shares and the potential dilution to the interests of current 
Minority Shareholders
  The  value  of  the  proposed  buyout  of  Huakan  Minority  Shareholders  for  approximately  $1.63 
million to the Minority Shareholders’ share of the Huakan’s mineral resources on a contained 
value basis and relating such value to recent market comparable transactions pertaining to the 
acquisitions of mineral resources as reported in the financial press and other sources
  Huakan’s shareholders’ equity in the Company immediately subsequent to the reorganization of 
its affairs in 2010 and the increases thereon attributable to the subsequent private placement
financings  by  the  Company  compared  to  the  impact  of  the  Company’s  reported  profitability 
over the same period of time.
Conclusions as to Fairness  
 
Based on the information, observations and analyses conducted by the writer contained in the Fairness 
Opinion as well as other relevant factors, it is the writer’s considered opinion that the offer of $0.50 in 
cash  per  Share  by  the  HK  Huakan  Partners  to  the  Minority  Shareholders  in  order  to  take  Huakan 
private, is fair, from a financial point of view, to the Minority Shareholders 
 
The above summary of the Fairness Opinion dated March 13, 2014 is approved by:
Stephen W. Semeniuk, CFA
D-1
APPENDIX D
HUAKAN INTERNATIONAL MINING INC.
SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE TO EXERCISE DISSENT RIGHT
Shareholders  who  wish  to  dissent  should  take  note  that  strict  compliance  with  the  dissent 
procedure  is  required.  Non-Registered  Holders  who  exercise  Dissent  Rights  must  do  so  through  their 
intermediary  registered  Shareholder.  A  Shareholder  is  not  entitled  to  exercise  Dissent  Rights  if  the 
Shareholder votes any Common Shares in favour of the Amalgamation Resolution.
The  procedure  to  be  followed  by  a  Shareholder  who  intends  to  dissent  in  respect  of  the  Amalgamation 
Resolution approving the Amalgamation as described in the accompanying Circular and who wishes to require the 
Corporation  to  acquire  his,  her  or  its  Common  Shares  and  pay  him,  her  or  it  the  “fair  value”  thereof,  determined 
immediately before the Amalgamation Resolution is passed, is set out in sections 237 to 247 of the BCBCA.
Section 238 of the BCBCA provides that if a Shareholder wishes to dissent, such Shareholder must dissent 
with respect to all of the Common Shares for which it is the beneficial owner (the “Dissent Shares”).  However, a 
registered Shareholder, such as a broker who holds shares as a nominee for others, may exercise his or her rights of 
dissent  with respect to Common Shares held for one or more beneficial owners,  while not exercising this right for 
other beneficial owners.
A registered Shareholder who wishes to dissent must send to the Corporation a written notice of dissent in 
respect of the Amalgamation Resolution (the “Notice of Dissent”) at least 2 days before the date of the Meeting at 
which the Amalgamation Resolution is to be voted on. This Notice of Dissent must be in addition to and separate from 
any proxy or vote abstaining from or voting against the Amalgamation Resolution.  A vote either in person or by proxy 
against, or failing to vote for, the Amalgamation Resolution does not itself constitute a Notice of Dissent. However, a 
vote in favour of the Amalgamation Resolution will deprive the Shareholder of its dissent rights under the BCBCA.
Any Notice of Dissent to the Amalgamation pursuant to sections 237 to 247 of the BCBCA and any materials
associated therewith should be sent to the Corporation c/o its solicitors, Dentons Canada LLP at:
Huakan International Mining Inc. 
c/o Dentons Canada LLP 
20th Floor, 250 Howe Street 
Vancouver, B.C.  V6C 3R8
Attention: 
Fax No.
Michael Stephens 
(604) 622-5179
The Corporation is required to notify in writing each Dissenting Shareholder of its intention to proceed, as
follows:
(a) if the Corporation intends to act on the authority of the Amalgamation Resolution, promptly after the later 
of  (i)  the  date  on  which  the  Corporation  forms  the  intention  to  proceed,  and  (ii)  the  date  on  which  the  Notice  of 
Dissent was received; or
(b) if the Corporation has acted on the authority of the Amalgamation Resolution, promptly thereafter.
If a Dissenting Shareholder wishes to proceed with the dissent, the Dissenting Shareholder must, within one 
month after the date of the Corporation’s notice described above, send to the Corporation (or, following the Effective 
Time,  Amalco)  or  its  transfer  agent  for  the  Common  Shares,  certain  items  required  under  section  244(1)  of  the 
BCBCA,  including  (i) a  written  notice  (the  “Demand  for  Payment”)  containing  a  statement  that  the  Dissenting 
Shareholder requires the Corporation to purchase all of the Dissent Shares held by the Dissenting Shareholder, and 
(ii) the certificates, if any, representing the Dissent Shares.
If a Dissenting Shareholder fails to send the Notice of Dissent, the Demand for Payment, or the certificates 
representing his, her or its Common Shares, or fails to comply with certain other applicable requirements under the 
BCBCA, he, she or it loses his, her or its right of dissent with respect to the Dissent Shares and to receive payment 
for the Dissent Shares.
D-2
After complying with the requirements of section 244(1) of the BCBCA, a Dissenting Shareholder ceases to 
have any rights as a holder of the Common Shares other than the right to be paid the “fair value” of such Common 
Shares as determined under section 245 of the BCBCA.
The Corporation (or, following the Effective Time, Amalco) and the Dissenting Shareholder may agree on 
the “fair value” of the Dissent Shares.  Where Amalco and the Dissenting Shareholder cannot agree on the fair value 
of the Dissent Shares, the Dissenting Shareholder or Amalco may apply to court to have the court determine the fair 
value of the Dissent Shares.
Promptly  after  a  determination  of  the  fair  value  of  the  Dissent  Shares  (whether  by  agreement  between 
Amalco and the Dissenting Shareholder, or by the court), Amalco must pay to each Dissenting Shareholder who has 
complied with section 244(1) of the BCBCA, the applicable fair value of the Dissent Shares.
Amalco  must  not  make  payment  under  the  Demand  for  Payment  if  there  are  reasonable  grounds  for 
believing that Amalco is insolvent, or, after the payment, would be rendered insolvent and must notify the Dissenting 
Shareholder that Amalco cannot make payment.
The  above  is  only  a  summary  of  certain  dissenting  shareholder  provisions  of  the  BCBCA,  which  are 
technical and complex. The full text of these provisions is set out below. In view of the complexity of these provisions, 
a Shareholder wishing to exercise a right to dissent should seek legal advice, as failure to comply precisely with the 
provisions of the BCBCA may result in the loss or unavailability of the right to dissent.
Circular.
All  capitalized  terms  used  but  not  defined  herein  have  the  respective  meaning  ascribed  to  them  in  this
PART 8, DIVISION 2 OF THE BUSINESS CORPORATIONS ACT (BRITISH COLUMBIA)
DISSENT PROVISIONS
Definitions and application
237 (1) In this Division:
“dissenter” means a shareholder who, being entitled to do so, sends written notice of dissent when and as required 
by section 242;
“notice shares” means, in relation to a notice of dissent, the shares in respect of which dissent is being exercised 
under the notice of dissent;
“payout value” means,
(a) in the case of a dissent in respect of a resolution, the fair value that the notice shares had immediately 
before the passing of the resolution,
(b) in the case of a dissent in respect of an arrangement approved by a court order made under section 291 
(2) (c) that permits dissent, the fair value that the notice shares had immediately before the passing of the 
resolution adopting the arrangement, or
(c)  in  the  case  of  a  dissent  in  respect  of  a  matter  approved  or  authorized  by  any  other  court  order  that 
permits dissent, the fair value that the notice shares had at the time specified by the court order,
excluding  any  appreciation  or  depreciation  in  anticipation  of  the  corporate  action  approved  or  authorized  by  the 
resolution or court order unless exclusion would be inequitable.
(2) This Division applies to any right of dissent exercisable by a shareholder except to the extent that
(a) the court orders otherwise, or
(b) in the case of a right of dissent authorized by a resolution referred to in section 238 (1) (g), the court 
orders otherwise or the resolution provides otherwise.
D-3
Right to dissent
238 (1) A shareholder of a company, whether or not the shareholder's shares carry the right to vote, is entitled to 
dissent as follows:
(a) under section 260, in respect of a resolution to alter the articles to alter restrictions on the powers of the 
company or on the business it is permitted to carry on;
(b) under section 272, in respect of a resolution to adopt an amalgamation agreement;
(c) under section 287, in respect of a resolution to approve an amalgamation under Division 4 of Part 9;
(d) in respect of a resolution to approve an arrangement, the terms of which arrangement permit dissent;
(e) under section 301 (5), in respect of a resolution to authorize or ratify the sale, lease or other disposition 
of all or substantially all of the company's undertaking;
(f)  under  section  309,  in  respect  of  a  resolution  to  authorize  the  continuation  of  the  company  into  a 
jurisdiction other than British Columbia;
(g) in respect of any other resolution, if dissent is authorized by the resolution;
(h) in respect of any court order that permits dissent.
(2) A shareholder wishing to dissent must:
(a) prepare a separate notice of dissent under section 242 for:
(i) the shareholder, if the shareholder is dissenting on the shareholder's own behalf, and
(ii) each other person who beneficially owns shares registered in the shareholder's name and on 
whose behalf the shareholder is dissenting,
(b) identify in each notice of dissent, in accordance with section 242 (4), the person on whose behalf dissent 
is being exercised in that notice of dissent, and
(c)  dissent  with  respect  to  all  of  the  shares,  registered  in  the  shareholder's  name,  of  which  the  person 
identified under paragraph (b) of this subsection is the beneficial owner.
(3) Without limiting subsection (2), a person who wishes to have dissent exercised with respect to shares of which the 
person is the beneficial owner must:
(a) dissent with respect to all of the shares, if any, of which the person is both the registered owner and the 
beneficial owner, and
(b)  cause  each  shareholder  who  is  a  registered  owner  of  any  other  shares  of  which  the  person  is  the 
beneficial owner to dissent with respect to all of those shares.
Waiver of right to dissent
239 (1) A shareholder may not waive generally a right to dissent but may, in writing, waive the right to dissent with 
respect to a particular corporate action.
(2) A shareholder wishing to waive a right of dissent with respect to a particular corporate action must:
(a) provide to the company a separate waiver for:
(i) the shareholder, if the shareholder is providing a waiver on the shareholder's own behalf, and
(ii) each other person who beneficially owns shares registered in the shareholder's name and on 
whose behalf the shareholder is providing a waiver, and
(b) identify in each waiver the person on whose behalf the waiver is made.
D-4
(3) If a shareholder waives a right of dissent with respect to a particular corporate action and indicates in the waiver 
that  the  right  to  dissent  is  being  waived  on  the  shareholder's  own  behalf,  the  shareholder's  right  to  dissent  with 
respect  to  the  particular  corporate  action  terminates  in  respect  of  the  shares  of  which  the  shareholder  is  both  the 
registered owner and the beneficial owner, and this Division ceases to apply to:
(a) the shareholder in respect of the shares of which the shareholder is both the registered owner and the 
beneficial owner, and
(b) any other shareholders, who are registered owners of shares beneficially owned by the first mentioned 
shareholder, in respect of the shares that are beneficially owned by the first mentioned shareholder.
(4) If a shareholder waives a right of dissent with respect to a particular corporate action and indicates in the waiver 
that the right to dissent is being waived on behalf of a specified person who beneficially owns shares registered in the 
name of the shareholder, the right of shareholders who are registered owners of shares beneficially owned by that 
specified  person  to  dissent  on  behalf  of  that  specified  person  with  respect  to  the  particular  corporate  action 
terminates  and  this  Division  ceases  to  apply  to  those  shareholders  in  respect  of  the  shares  that  are  beneficially 
owned by that specified person.
Notice of resolution
240  (1)  If  a  resolution  in  respect  of  which  a  shareholder is  entitled  to  dissent  is  to  be  considered  at  a  meeting  of 
shareholders, the company must, at least the prescribed number of days before the date of the proposed meeting, 
send to each of its shareholders, whether or not their shares carry the right to vote,
(a) a copy of the proposed resolution, and
(b) a notice of the meeting that specifies the date of the meeting, and contains a statement advising of the 
right to send a notice of dissent.
(2) If a resolution in respect of which a shareholder is entitled to dissent is to be passed as a consent resolution of 
shareholders or as a resolution of directors and the earliest date on which that resolution can be passed is specified 
in  the  resolution  or  in  the  statement  referred  to  in  paragraph  (b),  the  company  may,  at  least  21  days  before  that 
specified date, send to each of its shareholders, whether or not their shares carry the right to vote,
(a) a copy of the proposed resolution, and
(b) a statement advising of the right to send a notice of dissent.
(3) If a resolution in respect of which a shareholder is entitled to dissent was or is to be passed as a resolution of 
shareholders  without  the  company  complying  with  subsection  (1)  or  (2),  or  was  or  is  to  be  passed  as  a  directors' 
resolution without the company complying with subsection (2), the company must, before or within 14 days after the 
passing of the resolution, send to each of its shareholders who has not, on behalf of every person who beneficially 
owns  shares  registered  in  the  name  of  the  shareholder,  consented  to  the  resolution  or  voted  in  favour  of  the 
resolution, whether or not their shares carry the right to vote,
(a) a copy of the resolution,
(b) a statement advising of the right to send a notice of dissent, and
(c) if the resolution has passed, notification of that fact and the date on which it was passed.
(4) Nothing in subsection (1), (2) or (3) gives a shareholder a right to vote in a meeting at which, or on a resolution on 
which, the shareholder would not otherwise be entitled to vote.
Notice of court orders
241 If a court order provides for a right of dissent, the company must, not later than 14 days after the date on which 
the company receives a copy of the entered order, send to each shareholder who is entitled to exercise that right of 
dissent,
(a) a copy of the entered order, and
(b) a statement advising of the right to send a notice of dissent.
D-5
Notice of dissent
242 (1) A shareholder intending to dissent in respect of a resolution referred to in section 238 (1) (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) 
or (f) must,
(a) if the company has complied with section 240 (1) or (2), send written notice of dissent to the company at 
least 2 days before the date on which the resolution is to be passed or can be passed, as the case may be,
(b) if the company has complied with section 240 (3), send written notice of dissent to the company not more 
than 14 days after receiving the records referred to in that section, or
(c) if the company has not complied  with section  240 (1), (2) or (3), send  written notice of dissent to the 
company not more than 14 days after the later of,
(i) the date on which the shareholder learns that the resolution was passed, and
(ii) the date on which the shareholder learns that the shareholder is entitled to dissent.
(2) A shareholder intending to dissent in respect of a resolution referred to in section 238 (1) (g) must send written 
notice of dissent to the company
(a) on or before the date specified by the resolution or in the statement referred to in section 240 (2) (b) or 
(3) (b) as the last date by which notice of dissent must be sent, or
(b) if the resolution or statement does not specify a date, in accordance with subsection (1) of this section.
(3) A shareholder intending to dissent under section 238 (1) (h) in respect of a court order that permits dissent must 
send written notice of dissent to the company,
(a)  within  the  number  of  days,  specified  by  the  court  order,  after  the  shareholder  receives  the  records 
referred to in section 241, or
(b) if the court order does not specify the number of days referred to in paragraph (a) of this subsection, 
within 14 days after the shareholder receives the records referred to in section 241.
(4) A notice of dissent sent under this section must set out the number, and the class and series, if applicable, of the 
notice shares, and must set out whichever of the following is applicable:
(a) if the notice shares constitute all of the shares of which the shareholder is both the registered owner and 
beneficial owner and the shareholder owns no other shares of the company as beneficial owner, a statement 
to that effect;
(b) if the notice shares constitute all of the shares of which the shareholder is both the registered owner and 
beneficial owner but the shareholder owns other shares of the company as beneficial owner, a statement to 
that effect and
(i) the names of the registered owners of those other shares,
(ii) the number, and the class and series, if applicable, of those other shares that are held by each 
of those registered owners, and
(iii) a statement that notices of dissent are being, or have been, sent in respect of all of those other 
shares;
(c) if dissent is being exercised by the shareholder on behalf of a beneficial owner who is not the dissenting 
shareholder, a statement to that effect and
(i) the name and address of the beneficial owner, and
(ii) a statement that the shareholder is dissenting in relation to all of the shares beneficially owned 
by the beneficial owner that are registered in the shareholder's name.
D-6
(5)  The  right  of  a  shareholder  to  dissent  on  behalf  of  a  beneficial  owner  of  shares,  including  the  shareholder, 
terminates and this Division ceases to apply to the shareholder in respect of that beneficial owner if subsections (1) to 
(4) of this section, as those subsections pertain to that beneficial owner, are not complied with.
Notice of intention to proceed
243 (1) A company that receives a notice of dissent under section 242 from a dissenter must,
(a)  if  the  company  intends  to  act  on  the  authority  of  the  resolution  or  court  order  in  respect  of  which  the 
notice of dissent was sent, send a notice to the dissenter promptly after the later of
(i) the date on which the company forms the intention to proceed, and
(ii) the date on which the notice of dissent was received, or
(b) if the company has acted on the authority of that resolution or court order, promptly send a notice to the 
dissenter.
(2) A notice sent under subsection (1) (a) or (b) of this section must
(a) be dated not earlier than the date on which the notice is sent,
(b) state that the company intends to act, or has acted, as the case may be, on the authority of the resolution 
or court order, and
(c) advise the dissenter of the manner in which dissent is to be completed under section 244.
Completion of dissent
244 (1) A dissenter who receives a notice under section 243 must, if the dissenter wishes to proceed with the dissent, 
send to the company or its transfer agent for the notice shares, within one month after the date of the notice,
(a) a written statement that the dissenter requires the company to purchase all of the notice shares,
(b) the certificates, if any, representing the notice shares, and
(c) if section 242 (4) (c) applies, a written statement that complies with subsection (2) of this section.
(2) The written statement referred to in subsection (1) (c) must,
(a) be signed by the beneficial owner on whose behalf dissent is being exercised, and
(b) set out whether or not the beneficial owner is the beneficial owner of other shares of the company and, if 
so, set out,
(i) the names of the registered owners of those other shares,
(ii) the number, and the class and series, if applicable, of those other shares that are held by each 
of those registered owners, and
(iii) that dissent is being exercised in respect of all of those other shares.
(3) After the dissenter has complied with subsection (1),
(a) the dissenter is deemed to have sold to the company the notice shares, and
(b) the company is deemed to have purchased those shares, and must comply with section 245, whether or 
not it is authorized to do so by, and despite any restriction in, its memorandum or articles.
(4) Unless the court orders otherwise, if the dissenter fails to comply with subsection (1) of this section in relation to 
notice shares, the right of the dissenter to dissent with respect to those notice shares terminates and this Division, 
other than section 247, ceases to apply to the dissenter with respect to those notice shares.
D-7
(5) Unless the court orders otherwise, if a person on whose behalf dissent is being exercised in relation to a particular 
corporate action fails to ensure that every shareholder who is a registered owner of any of the shares beneficially 
owned  by  that  person  complies  with  subsection  (1)  of  this  section,  the  right  of  shareholders  who  are  registered 
owners of shares beneficially owned by that person to dissent on behalf of that person with respect to that corporate 
action terminates and this Division, other than section 247, ceases to apply to those shareholders in respect of the 
shares that are beneficially owned by that person.
(6) A dissenter who has complied with subsection (1) of this section may not vote, or exercise or assert any rights of a 
shareholder, in respect of the notice shares, other than under this Division.
Payment for notice shares
245 (1) A company and a dissenter who has complied with section 244 (1) may agree on the amount of the payout 
value of the notice shares and, in that event, the company must
(a) promptly pay that amount to the dissenter, or
(b)  if  subsection  (5)  of  this  section  applies,  promptly  send  a  notice  to  the  dissenter  that  the  company  is 
unable lawfully to pay dissenters for their shares.
(2) A dissenter who has not entered into an agreement with the company under subsection (1) or the company may 
apply to the court and the court may
(a)  determine  the  payout  value  of  the  notice  shares  of  those  dissenters  who  have  not  entered  into  an 
agreement with the company under subsection (1), or order that the payout value of those notice shares be 
established by arbitration or by reference to the registrar, or a referee, of the court,
(b) join in the application each dissenter, other than a dissenter who has entered into an agreement with the 
company under subsection (1), who has complied with section 244 (1), and
(c) make consequential orders and give directions it considers appropriate.
(3) Promptly after a determination of the payout value for notice shares has been made under subsection (2) (a) of 
this section, the company must,
(a) pay to each dissenter who has complied with section 244 (1) in relation to those notice shares, other than 
a dissenter who has entered into an agreement with the company under subsection (1) of this section, the 
payout value applicable to that dissenter's notice shares, or
(b) if subsection (5) applies, promptly send a notice to the dissenter that the company is unable lawfully to 
pay dissenters for their shares.
(4) If a dissenter receives a notice under subsection (1) (b) or (3) (b),
(a) the dissenter may, within 30 days after receipt, withdraw the dissenter's notice of dissent, in which case 
the company is deemed to consent to the withdrawal and this Division, other than section 247, ceases to 
apply to the dissenter with respect to the notice shares, or
(b)  if  the  dissenter  does  not  withdraw  the  notice  of  dissent  in  accordance  with  paragraph  (a)  of  this 
subsection,  the  dissenter  retains  a  status  as  a  claimant  against  the  company,  to  be  paid  as  soon  as  the 
company is lawfully able to do so or, in a liquidation, to be ranked subordinate to the rights of creditors of the 
company but in priority to its shareholders.
(5)  A  company  must  not  make  a  payment  to  a  dissenter  under  this  section  if  there  are  reasonable  grounds  for 
believing that,
(a) the company is insolvent, or
(b) the payment would render the company insolvent.
D-8
Loss of right to dissent
246 The right of a dissenter to dissent with respect to notice shares terminates and this Division, other than section 
247, ceases to apply to the dissenter with respect to those notice shares, if, before payment is made to the dissenter 
of the full amount of money to which the dissenter is entitled under section 245 in relation to those notice shares, any 
of the following events occur:
(a) the corporate action approved or authorized, or to be approved or authorized, by the resolution or court 
order in respect of which the notice of dissent was sent is abandoned;
(b) the resolution in respect of which the notice of dissent was sent does not pass;
(c) the resolution in respect of which the notice of dissent was sent is revoked before the corporate action 
approved or authorized by that resolution is taken;
(d) the notice of dissent was sent in respect of a resolution adopting an amalgamation agreement and the 
amalgamation is abandoned or, by the terms of the agreement, will not proceed;
(e) the arrangement in respect of which the notice of dissent was sent is abandoned or by its terms will not 
proceed;
(f) a court permanently enjoins or sets aside the corporate action approved or authorized by the resolution or 
court order in respect of which the notice of dissent was sent;
(g)  with  respect  to  the  notice  shares,  the  dissenter  consents  to,  or  votes  in  favour  of,  the  resolution  in 
respect of which the notice of dissent was sent;
(h) the notice of dissent is withdrawn with the written consent of the company;
(i) the court determines that the dissenter is not entitled to dissent under this Division or that the dissenter is 
not entitled to dissent with respect to the notice shares under this Division.
Shareholders entitled to return of shares and rights
247 If, under section 244 (4) or (5), 245 (4) (a) or 246, this Division, other than this section, ceases to apply to a 
dissenter with respect to notice shares,
(a)  the  company  must  return  to  the  dissenter  each  of  the  applicable  share  certificates,  if  any,  sent  under 
section 244 (1) (b) or, if those share certificates are unavailable, replacements for those share certificates,
(b) the dissenter regains any ability lost under section 244 (6) to vote, or exercise or assert any rights of a 
shareholder, in respect of the notice shares, and
(c)  the  dissenter  must  return  any  money  that  the  company  paid  to  the  dissenter  in  respect  of  the  notice 
shares under, or in purported compliance with, this Division.