
TRUE ENERGY TRUST
VOTING DIRECTION FOR
HOLDERS OF EXCHANGEABLE SHARES
OF TRUE ENERGY INC.
The  undersigned  holder  (the  "Holder")  of  exchangeable  shares  ("Exchangeable  Shares")  of  True  Energy  Inc.  (“True 
Energy”) has the right to instruct Computershare Trust Company of Canada (the "Trustee") in respect of the exercise of 
their votes at the annual meeting of the unitholders of True Energy Trust (the "Trust") to be held on April 24, 2006 (the 
"Meeting"), as follows:
To instruct the Trustee to exercise the votes to which the Holder is entitled as indicated below; OR
•  To  instruct  the  Trustee  to  appoint  a  representative  of  the  Trust's  management  as  proxy  to  exercise  the  votes  to
which the Holder is entitled as indicated below; OR
•  To instruct the Trustee to appoint the Holder, or the Holder's designee as a proxy to exercise personally the votes to
which the Holder is entitled as indicated below.
The Holder directs that their Exchangeable Shares be voted as follows: 
FOR (cid:133) or AGAINST (cid:133) fixing the number of directors of True Energy to be elected as a result of the Meeting at 
seven (7) members;
FOR (cid:133) or WITHHOLD FROM VOTING FOR (cid:133) the election as directors of True Energy for the ensuing year 
of the seven (7) nominees proposed by management in the Trust's Information Circular – Proxy Statement dated 
March 21, 2006 (the "Information Circular – Proxy Statement"); and
FOR (cid:133) or WITHHOLD FROM VOTING FOR (cid:133) the appointment of KPMG LLP, Chartered Accountants, as 
our auditors and to authorize the directors to fix their remuneration as such.
IMPORTANT  NOTE:  IF  NO  DIRECTION  IS  MADE,  FOR  OR  AGAINST,  THE  HOLDER'S 
EXCHANGEABLE SHARES WILL NOT BE VOTED 
 
PLEASE SELECT ONE OF THE FOLLOWING: 
(cid:133)
Direct the Trustee to Vote Exchangeable Shares 
The Holder hereby directs the Trustee to vote as indicated. 
Appointment of Management as Proxy 
The  Holder  hereby  appoints  Paul  R.  Baay,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  True  Energy,  or, 
failing him, W.C. (Mickey) Dunn, Chairman of the Board of Directors of True Energy, as proxyholder of 
the Holder, with power of substitution, and authorizes them to represent and vote, as indicated above, all of 
the Exchangeable Shares which the Holder may be entitled to vote at the Meeting, and at any adjournment 
or  adjournments  thereof  and  on  every  ballot  that  may  take  place  in  consequence  thereof,  and  with 
discretionary authority as to any other matters that may properly come before the Meeting. 
Appointment of the Holder, or the Holder's Designee as Proxy 
The  Holder  hereby  appoints  _____________________________  as  proxyholder  of  the  Holder  and 
authorizes them to represent and vote, as indicated above, all of the Exchangeable Shares which the Holder 
may be entitled to vote at the Meeting, and at any adjournment or adjournments thereof and on every ballot 
that may take place in consequence thereof, and with discretionary authority as to any other matters that 
may properly come before the Meeting.
(cid:133)
(cid:133)
IF THE HOLDER DOES NOT COMPLETE ONE OF THE FOREGOING, COMPLETES MORE THAN 
ONE OF THE FOREGOING OR COMPLETES THE THIRD SELECTION BUT DOES NOT SPECIFY A 
DESIGNEE,  THE  HOLDER  WILL  BE  DEEMED  TO  HAVE  DIRECTED  THE  TRUSTEE  TO  VOTE 
THEIR EXCHANGEABLE SHARES AS INDICATED.
2
Interim Financial Statements Mark this box if you would like to receive interim financial statements and accompanying Management’s Discussion and Analysis by 
mail:. □  
Annual Report Mark this box if you would NOT like to receive the audited annual financial statements and accompanying Management’s Discussion and Analysis by 
mail:  □
DATED: _______________________, 2006.
Signature of Holder
Name of Holder (please print)
Name of Exchangeable Shares held (please print)
(Number of votes is equal to the number of Exchangeable 
Shares  held  multiplied  by  the  Exchange  Ratio  as  at 
March 22, 2006 or 0.60146)
NOTES:
1.  This voting direction will not be valid and not be acted 
upon  unless  it  is  completed  as  outlined  herein  and  is 
received  by  Computershare  Trust  Company  of  Canada, 
Attention:  Proxy  Department,  100  University  Avenue, 
9th Floor, Toronto, ON  M5J 2Y1 not less than 48 hours  
before  the  time  for  holding  the  Meeting  or  any 
adjournment thereof.  The voting direction is valid only 
for the Meeting or any adjournment of the Meeting.
2.
3.
If  this  voting  direction  is  not  signed  by  the  Holder  of 
Exchangeable  Shares,  the  votes  to  which  the  Holder  of 
the Exchangeable Shares is entitled will not be exercised.
If the Holder is a corporation, its corporate seal must be 
affixed  or  it  must  be  signed  by  an  officer  or  attorney 
thereof duly authorized.
4.  This  voting  direction  must  be  dated  and  the  signature 
hereon should be exactly the same as the name in which 
the Exchangeable Shares are registered.
5.  Persons  signing  as  executors,  administrators,  trustees,
etc., should so indicate and give their full title as such.
6.  This proxy is solicited on behalf of management of True
Energy.
7.  A  Holder  who  has  submitted  a  voting  direction  may 
revoke it at any time prior to the Meeting.  In addition to 
revocation in any other manner permitted by law a voting 
direction  may  be  revoked  by  instrument  in  writing 
executed  by  the  Holder  or  his  attorney  authorized  in 
writing  or,  if  the  Holder  is  a  corporation,  under  its 
corporate  seal  or  by  an  officer  or  attorney  thereof  duly
3
authorized and deposited at the office of Computershare 
Trust  Company  of  Canada  at  any  time  up  to  and 
including the last business day preceding the day of the 
Meeting, or any adjournment thereof at which the voting 
direction is to be acted upon or with a representative of 
the Trustee in attendance at the Meeting on the day of the 
Meeting or any adjournment thereof, and upon either of 
such deposits, the voting direction is revoked.