
EX-99.1 8 d797579dex991.htm EX-99.1 EX-99.1
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE:
September 30, 2014
Exhibit 99.1
Centrus Energy Corp. Emerges from Chapter 11 Restructuring
•
•
Stronger balance sheet positions company to compete in global nuclear
fuel market; supports U.S. energy and national security
Company formerly known as USEC Inc.
BETHESDA, Md. – Centrus Energy Corp. (NYSE: LEU) today announced that it has satisfied all
conditions for emergence from Chapter 11 bankruptcy as set forth in its Plan of Reorganization
that was approved by the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware on September 5,
2014. The Plan becomes effective today, and Centrus, formerly known as USEC Inc. (NYSE:
USU), emerges from restructuring in a stronger position to supply customers with nuclear fuel
and support the energy and national security needs of the United States.
Centrus stock is expected to begin trading on the New York Stock Exchange today under the
ticker symbol LEU. Throughout the restructuring process that began March 5, 2014, the Company
has continued to meet all of its obligations to customers and vendors and will not require external
exit financing upon emergence. The Company has maintained its NYSE listing throughout the
Chapter 11 process.
“With this restructuring, we have accomplished a great deal,” said John Welch, president and
chief executive officer of Centrus. “We have dramatically improved our capital structure by
replacing $530 million in debt due this October and $114 million in preferred stock with new debt
and new common stock. During this time, we met all of our customers’ needs on schedule as we
have always done and achieved important performance objectives with our advanced uranium
enrichment technology.
“Looking ahead, we will continue as a reliable supplier to our customers with an improved
financial foundation. We strongly believe in the future value that the American Centrifuge
technology can provide for domestic uranium enrichment and will build on the innovation of our
employees, America’s leading experts on uranium enrichment, to support the national security
objectives of the United States Government.”
Welch thanked Centrus customers, suppliers, creditors, business partners and employees for
their support throughout the bankruptcy process. He said Centrus will remain positioned to
commercialize the American Centrifuge technology when market conditions permit to supply the
global fleet of commercial power reactors.
A new board of directors consisting of up to 11 directors will provide governance and strategic
direction for Centrus. Five members of the previous USEC Inc. board, including one
- more -
Centrus Energy Corp. Emerges from Chapter 11 Restructuring
Page 2 of 2
member appointed by Toshiba America Nuclear Energy Corporation, and five newly appointed
directors under the Plan approved by the bankruptcy court will comprise the new board. One seat
on the board remains vacant, which may be filled by a person appointed by The Babcock &
Wilcox Company.
Under the Plan of Reorganization, Centrus will issue 9 million shares of new common stock
today, September 30, 2014. Centrus will also issue new debt totaling $240.4 million that matures
in five years. Subject to certain conditions, the debt can be extended an additional five years. The
noteholders will receive $200 million of the new debt and approximately 79 percent of the new
common stock. The two preferred shareholder investors, Toshiba and B&W, will each receive
$20.19 million of new debt and approximately 8 percent of the new common stock. Current
common stockholders will receive approximately 5 percent of the new common stock in
exchange for existing common stock. Distribution of the new common stock is subject to dilution
on account of a new management incentive plan and will be made to holders of record as of 5:00
p.m. EDT on September 29, 2014.
Under the terms of the Plan of Reorganization, all previously existing securities of USEC Inc. will
be cancelled prior to the opening of trading today. Current stockholders do not need to take
any action to receive their shares of new common stock LEU as the new equity will be
distributed electronically by Computershare, the Company’s transfer agent, or through the
Depository Trust Corp. The exchange ratio is approximately 0.0917, which means 1000 shares
of USU will be exchanged for approximately 92 shares of LEU.
About Centrus Energy Corp.
Centrus Energy Corp. is a trusted supplier of enriched uranium fuel for a growing fleet of
international and domestic commercial nuclear power plants. Centrus is working to deploy the
American Centrifuge technology for commercial needs and to support U.S. energy and national
security.
Forward-Looking Statements
###
This press release contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 21E of
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 - that is, statements related to future events. In this context,
forward-looking statements may address our expected future business and financial
performance, and often contain words such as “expects”, “anticipates”, “intends”, “plans”,
“believes”, “will” and other words of similar meaning. Forward-looking statements by their nature
address matters that are, to different degrees, uncertain. For Centrus Energy Corp., particular
risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual future results to differ materially from those
expressed in our forward-looking statements include, uncertainty regarding our ability to maintain
the listing of our common stock on the NYSE; uncertainty regarding our ability to improve our
operating structure, financial results and profitability following emergence from Chapter 11; risks
related to the ongoing transition of our business, and other risks and uncertainties discussed in
our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including our Annual Report on Form
10-K and quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, which are available on our website
www.centrusenergy.com. We do not undertake to update our forward-looking statements except
as required by law.
Contacts:
Investors: Steven Wingfield (301) 564-3354
Media: Paul Jacobson (301) 564-3399