
4
Notice of Annual Meeting of Stockholders  
on April 28, 2010
We will hold our 2010 annual meeting of stockholders in the Conference Center Auditorium of 
the Marathon Oil Tower, 5555 San Felipe Road, Houston, Texas 77056 on Wednesday, April 
28, 2010 at 10:00 a.m. Central Time, in order to: 
• elect twelve directors; 
• ratify the selection of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as our independent auditor for 2010; 
• consider a stockholder proposal to amend our by-laws to lower the threshold for stockholders
to call special meetings;
• consider a stockholder proposal to adopt a policy for ratification and approval of executive
compensation policies and practices; and
• transact any other business that properly comes before the meeting. 
You are entitled to vote at the meeting if you were an owner of record of Marathon Oil 
Corporation common stock at the close of business on March 1, 2010. If your ownership is 
through a broker or other intermediary, you will need to have proof of your stockholdings in 
order to be admitted to the meeting. A recent account statement, letter or proxy from your 
broker or other intermediary will suffice.
If, as of the close of business on March 1, 2010, you were a record holder of exchangeable 
shares issued by Marathon Oil Canada Corporation and entitled to vote, you will be entitled to 
receive notice of the meeting, attend the meeting and vote by way of the enclosed Voting 
Instruction Form on matters to come before the meeting. Holders of exchangeable shares may 
vote by signing the enclosed Voting Instruction Form and remitting it to Valiant Trust 
Company of Canada, Suite 310, 606 – 4th Street S.W., Calgary, Alberta T2P 1T1. In order to 
be valid and acted upon at the meeting, the Voting Instruction Form must be received no later 
than 10:00 a.m. Central Time on Tuesday, April 27, 2010.
Marathon is taking advantage of the Securities and Exchange Commission rules which allow 
issuers to furnish proxy materials to their stockholders over the Internet. We believe these 
rules allow us to provide our stockholders with the information they need, while lowering the 
costs of delivery and reducing the environmental impact of our annual meeting.
If you received a printed copy of the materials, we have enclosed a copy of the Company’s 2009 
Annual Report to stockholders with this notice and proxy statement.
By order of the Board of Directors,
Sylvia J. Kerrigan 
Secretary 
Dated: March 8, 2010
Marathon Oil Corporation 
5555 San Felipe Road 
Houston, TX 77056