
February 25, 2005
British Columbia Securities Commission 
Alberta Securities Commission 
Saskatchewan Securities Commission 
Manitoba Securities Commission 
Ontario Securities Commission 
Autorité des marchés financiers  
New Brunswick Securities Administration Branch 
Nova Scotia Securities Commission 
Prince Edward Island Department of Community Affairs and Attorney General 
Securities Commission of Newfoundland and Labrador 
Registrar of Securities, Northwest Territories 
Registrar of Securities, Yukon 
Registrar of Securities, Nunavut 
 
Re:  EnCana Corporation ("EnCana") Annual Information Form
dated February 25, 2005
Dear Sirs/Mesdames: 
 
We  are  a  firm  of  independent  petroleum  engineering  consultants  and  have  prepared  reports  for  EnCana 
evaluating a portion of EnCana's petroleum and natural gas reserves as at December 31, 2004, as described in 
the Annual Information Form ("AIF") of EnCana dated February 25, 2005. 
 
We hereby consent to the use and reference to our name and reports and the inclusion of information derived 
from our reports in the AIF, which is incorporated by reference into the following prospectuses (collectively, the 
"Prospectuses"): (i) the short form shelf prospectus of EnCana dated September 16, 2004, (ii) the short form shelf 
prospectus of EnCana Holdings Finance Corp. dated March 26, 2004, and (iii) the short form shelf prospectus of 
EnCana dated August 20, 2003. 
 
We also confirm that we have read the AIF and the Prospectuses and that we have no reason to believe that 
there  are  any  misrepresentations  in  the  information  contained  in  these  documents  that  are  derived  from  the 
above-mentioned report or that are within our knowledge as a result of the services we performed in connection 
with the reports.
Very truly yours,
NETHERLAND, SEWELL & ASSOCIATES, INC.
By:
/s/ Frederic D. Sewell, P.E.
Frederic D. Sewell, P.E. 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 
Dallas, Texas
Please be advised that the digital document you are viewing is provided by Netherland, Sewell & Associates Inc. (NSAI) as a convenience 
to our clients.  The digital document is intended to be substantively the same as the original signed document maintained by NSAI.  The 
digital document is subject to the parameters, limitations, and conditions stated in the original document.  In the event of any differences 
between the digital document and the original document, the original document shall control and supersede the digital document.