
EX-1.1 2 v445863_ex1-1.htm EXHIBIT 1.1
Exhibit 1.1
EXECUTION VERSION
UNDERWRITING AGREEMENT
August 2, 2016
Vista Gold Corp.
Suite 5, 7961 Shaffer Parkway
Littleton, Colorado
80127 USA
Attention: Mr. Frederick H. Earnest, President and Chief Executive Officer
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Cantor Fitzgerald Canada Corporation (“CFCC”) and Rodman & Renshaw a unit of H.C.
Wainwright & Co., LLC (together with CFCC, the “Co-Lead Underwriters” and acting as joint
bookrunners), together with Sprott Private Wealth LP, Roth Capital Partners, LLC and Jett
Capital Advisors, LLC acting as co-managers (collectively with the Co-Lead Underwriters, the
“Underwriters”), understand that, subject to the terms and conditions stated herein, Vista Gold
Corp., a company continued under the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia) (the
“Company”), proposes to issue and sell to the Underwriters an aggregate of 10,750,000 units
(the “Firm Units”), each Firm Unit consisting of one common share in the capital of the Company
(a “Unit Share”) and one-half of one common share purchase warrant in the capital of the
Company (each full warrant, a “Warrant”), with each Warrant entitling the holder thereof to
purchase one common share in the capital of the Company (each a “Warrant Share”) at any time
prior to 4:30 p.m. (Toronto time) on the date that is thirty-six months following the Closing Date
(as defined in Section 2(3)) upon payment of the exercise price of US$1.92 per Warrant Share.
The Warrants will be issued pursuant a warrant indenture to be dated the Closing Date between
the Company and Computershare Trust Company of Canada, as warrant agent, providing for the
creation and issuance of the Warrants (the “Warrant Indenture”). The Units will separate into
Unit Shares and Warrants upon closing of the offering.
Based on the foregoing, and subject to the terms and conditions contained in this Underwriting
Agreement (this “Agreement”), the Underwriters severally and not jointly, in respect of their
percentages set forth in Section 9 hereof, agree to purchase from the Company, and by its
acceptance hereof, the Company agrees to sell to the Underwriters, all but not less than all of the
Firm Units on the Closing Date for a purchase price of US$1.40 (the “Offering Price”) per Firm
Unit, being an aggregate purchase price of US$15,050,000 against delivery of such Firm Units.
In addition, the Company proposes to grant to the Underwriters, in respect of their percentages
set forth in Section 9 hereof, an option (the “Over-Allotment Option”), exercisable in whole or in
part at any time prior to one business day before the Closing Date, to purchase up to an
additional 1,612,500 units (the “Additional Units”) each comprised of one common share (an
“Additional Unit Share”) and one half of a warrant (each full additional warrant, an “Additional
Warrant”) representing up to 15% of the aggregate number of Firm Units, at the Offering Price
and upon the terms and conditions set forth herein for the purposes of covering over-allotments
and for market stabilization purposes. The additional common shares of the Company issuable
upon the exercise of Additional Warrants are hereinafter referred to as the “Additional Warrant
Shares”. The Over-Allotment Option may be exercised by the Underwriters in respect of: (i)
Additional Units at the Offering Price; or (ii) Additional Unit Shares at a price of US$1.2676 per
Additional Unit Share; or (iii) Additional Warrants at a price of US$0.2649 per Additional Warrant;
or (iv) any combination of Additional Unit Shares and/or Additional Warrants so long as the
aggregate number of Additional Unit Shares and Additional Warrants that may be issued under
the Over-Allotment Option does not exceed 1,612,500 Additional Unit Shares and 806,250
Additional Warrants. The Firm Units, including the Unit Shares, the Warrant Shares, the
Additional Unit Shares, the Additional Warrant Shares, the Warrants, and the Additional Warrants
shall have the attributes described in and contemplated by the Prospectuses which are referred
to below.
-2-
The Underwriters understand that the Company intends to allocate US$1.2676 of the Offering
Price as consideration for the issue of each Unit Share (including any Additional Unit Shares)
and US$0.1324 of the Offering Price as consideration for the issue of each one-half Warrant
(including any Additional Warrants).
The Firm Units (and as the context requires, the securities underlying the Firm Units) and the
Additional Units are collectively referred to herein as the “Units”. Any references to “Additional
Units” herein shall be construed as references to Additional Unit Shares and/or Additional
Warrants, as the context requires, based on whether or not the Over-Allotment Option is
exercised and the allocation of Additional Unit Shares and/or Additional Warrants thereunder.
Section 1Background and Interpretation.
(1)               The Company has filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission
(the “SEC”) the Registration Statement (as defined in Section 1(3)) under the United States
Securities Act of 1933, as amended (together with the rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder, the “Securities Act”), which became effective pursuant to Rule 461 under the
Securities Act on August 15, 2014 (the “Effective Date”), for the registration under the Securities
Act of up to US$50,000,000 of common shares, warrants, subscription receipts and units of the
Company, including the Units. At the time of the filing of the Registration Statement and at the
time of the filing of each Annual Report on Form 10-K filed thereafter, the Company met the
requirements of Form S-3 under the Securities Act. Any reference in this Agreement to the
Registration Statement, the U.S. Base Prospectus (as defined in Section 1(3)) or the U.S.
Prospectus Supplement (as defined in Section 1(3)) shall be deemed to refer to and include the
documents incorporated by reference therein pursuant to Item 12 of Form S-3 which were filed
under the United States Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), on
or before the date of this Agreement, or the issue date of the U.S. Base Prospectus or the U.S.
Prospectus Supplement, as the case may be; and any reference in this Agreement to the terms
“amend,” “amendment” or “supplement” with respect to the Registration Statement, the Time of
Sale Prospectus (as defined in Section 1(3)) or the U.S. Prospectus shall be deemed to refer to
and include the filing of any document under the Exchange Act after the date of this Agreement,
or the issue date of the Time of Sale Prospectus or the U.S. Prospectus, as the case may be,
deemed to be incorporated therein by reference or is otherwise deemed to be a part of or
included therein, as the case may be, by the Securities Act. All references in this Agreement to
financial statements and schedules and other information which is “contained,” “included,”
“described,” “referenced,” “set forth” or “stated” in the Registration Statement, the Time of Sale
Prospectus (as hereinafter defined) or the U.S. Prospectus (and all other references of like
import) shall be deemed to mean and include all such financial statements and schedules and
other information which is or is deemed to be incorporated by reference or is otherwise deemed
to be a part of or included in the Registration Statement, the Time of Sale Prospectus or the U.S.
Prospectus , as the case may be, by the Securities Act. No stop order suspending the
effectiveness of the Registration Statement or the use of the U.S. Prospectus has been issued,
and no proceeding for any such purpose is pending or has been initiated or, to the Company's
knowledge, is threatened by the SEC. The Company will not, without the prior consent of the Co-
Lead Underwriters, prepare, use or refer to, any free writing prospectus.
-3-
(2)               The Company has prepared and filed with the securities regulatory authorities (the
“Canadian Commissions”) in each of the provinces and territories of Canada, other than
Quebec (the “Qualifying Jurisdictions”), pursuant to the Shelf Procedures (as defined below), a
preliminary short form base shelf prospectus dated June 4, 2014 (the “Canadian Preliminary
Base Prospectus”), and a final short form base shelf prospectus, dated July 10, 2014 in respect
of up to $50,000,000 aggregate principal amount of common shares, warrants, subscription
receipts and units of the Company (collectively, the “Shelf Securities”) pursuant to applicable
securities laws of the Qualifying Jurisdictions and the respective rules, regulations, blanket
rulings, orders and notices made thereunder and the local, uniform, national and multilateral
instruments and policies adopted by the Canadian Commissions in the Qualifying Jurisdictions
(collectively, as applied and interpreted, the “Canadian Securities Laws”). The Company
selected the British Columbia Securities Commission (the “Reviewing Authority”) as its
principal regulator in respect of the offering of the Shelf Securities, and the Reviewing Authority
has issued a decision document (a “Decision Document”) under National Policy 11-202 –
Process for Prospectus Reviews in Multiple Jurisdictions on behalf of itself and the other
Canadian Commissions for each of the Canadian Preliminary Base Prospectus and the
Canadian Base Prospectus. The term “Canadian Base Prospectus” means the final short form
base shelf prospectus relating to the Shelf Securities, including any documents incorporated
therein by reference and the documents otherwise deemed to be a part thereof or included
therein pursuant to Canadian Securities Laws, at the time the Reviewing Authority issued a
Decision Document with respect thereto in accordance with Canadian Securities Laws, including
National Instrument 44-101 – Short Form Prospectus Distributions (“NI 44-101”) and National
Instrument 44-102 – Shelf Distributions (together, the “Shelf Procedures”). The term “Canadian
Prospectus” means the final prospectus supplement relating to the offering to be dated the
pricing date and then filed with the Canadian Commissions in the Qualifying Jurisdictions in
accordance with the Shelf Procedures (the “Canadian Prospectus Supplement”), together with
the Canadian Base Prospectus, including all documents incorporated therein by reference and
the documents otherwise deemed to be a part thereof or included therein pursuant to Canadian
Securities Laws. All references in this Agreement to financial statements and schedules or other
information which is “contained”, “included”, “described”, “referenced”, “set forth” or “stated” (or
other references of like import) shall be deemed to mean and include all such financial
statements and other information which is incorporated by reference in or otherwise deemed by
Canadian Securities Laws to be a part of or included in the Canadian Preliminary Base
Prospectus, the Canadian Base Prospectus or the Canadian Prospectus, as the case may be. All
references in this Agreement to the Canadian Preliminary Base Prospectus, the Canadian Base
Prospectus and the Canadian Prospectus or any amendments or supplements to any of the
foregoing (including any Supplementary Material) shall be deemed to include any copy thereof
filed with the Canadian Commissions pursuant to the System for Electronic Document Analysis
and Retrieval (SEDAR).
-4-
(3)               For the purpose of this Agreement, “Registration Statement” means, collectively, the
various parts of the registration statement prepared and filed by the Company on Form S-3 (File
No. 333-196527) with respect to the registration of up to US$50,000,000 of common shares,
warrants, subscription receipts and units of the Company, including the Units, at any given time
each part as amended or supplemented as of such time, including the U.S. base prospectus filed
by the Company with the SEC dated August 15, 2014 and contained in the Registration
Statement and filed pursuant to Rule 424(b) of the Securities Act on July 25, 2014 (the “U.S.
Base Prospectus”) and U.S. Prospectus Supplement (defined in this Section) and all exhibits
filed with or incorporated by reference into such registration statement and the documents
otherwise deemed to be a part thereof or included therein by the Securities Act. The prospectus
supplement relating to the Units, to be filed with the SEC on or about August 2, 2016 pursuant to
Rule 424(b) of the Securities Act (the “U.S. Prospectus Supplement”) together with the U.S.
Base Prospectus is hereafter referred to as the “U.S. Prospectus”. The U.S. Prospectus relating
to the Units, as amended or supplemented immediately prior to the Applicable Time (as defined
below), is hereafter referred to as the “Time of Sale Prospectus”.
(4)               The U.S. Base Prospectus and the Canadian Base Prospectus are hereinafter
collectively sometimes referred to as the “Prospectuses.” The U.S. Prospectus Supplement and
the Canadian Prospectus Supplement are hereinafter collectively sometimes referred to as the
“Prospectus Supplements.”
(5)               Any amendment or supplement to the U.S. Prospectus or the Canadian Prospectus
(including any document incorporated by reference therein), that may be filed by or on behalf of
the Company with the Canadian Commissions in the Qualifying Jurisdictions or with the SEC
after the Canadian Prospectus Supplement and the U.S. Prospectus Supplement have been filed
and prior to the expiry of the period of distribution of the Units, is referred to herein collectively as
the “Supplementary Material.”
(6)               As used herein, the “Applicable Time” is 8:30 a.m. (Toronto time) on the date of this
Agreement. As used herein, a “free writing prospectus” has the meaning set forth in Rule 405
under the Securities Act, and a “Time of Sale Disclosure Package” means the Time of Sale
Prospectus and the information set forth on Schedule 1(6) and any issuer free writing
prospectuses and each “road show” (as defined in Rule 433 under the Securities Act), if any,
related to the offering of the Units contemplated hereby that is a “written communication” (as
defined in Rule 405 under the Securities Act) (each such road show, a “Road Show”).
-5-
(7)               As used herein, the terms “Registration Statement”, “Time of Sale Prospectus” and
“U.S. Prospectus” shall include the documents incorporated and deemed to be incorporated by
reference therein pursuant to Form S-3 that were filed with the SEC on or before the date of such
Registration Statement and Time of Sale Prospectus, as the case may be, and the documents
otherwise deemed to be a part thereof or included therein by the Securities Act (the
“Incorporated Documents”), including, unless the context otherwise requires, the documents, if
any, filed as exhibits to such Incorporated Documents.
(8)               All references in this Agreement to the Registration Statement, the Time of Sale
Prospectus and the U.S. Prospectus shall include any copy thereof filed with the SEC pursuant
to its Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis and Retrieval system (“EDGAR”).
(9)               All references in this Agreement to “issuer free writing prospectus” means any
“issuer free writing prospectus,” as defined in Rule 433 of the Securities Act, relating to the Units
that (i) is required to be filed with the SEC by the Company, (ii) is a “road show” that is a “written
communication” within the meaning of Rule 433(d)(8)(i) of the Securities Act whether or not
required to be filed with the SEC, or (iii) is exempt from filing pursuant to Rule 433(d)(5)(i) of the
Securities Act because it contains a description of the Units or of the offering that does not reflect
the final terms, in each case in the form filed or required to be filed with the SEC or, if not required
to be filed, in the form retained in the Company’s records pursuant to Rule 433(g) of the
Securities Act under the rules and regulations of the SEC.
(10)           As used herein, “business day” shall mean a day on which each of the Toronto Stock
Exchange (“TSX”) and NYSE MKT LLC (“NYSE MKT”, and together with the TSX, the
“Exchanges”) are open for trading.
(11)           The terms “herein,” “hereof,” “hereto,” “hereinafter” and similar terms, as used in this
Agreement, shall in each case refer to this Agreement as a whole and not to any particular
section, paragraph, sentence or other subdivision of this Agreement. The term “or”, as used
herein, is not exclusive.
(12)           As used herein, “Governmental Authority” means (i) any federal, provincial, state,
local, municipal, national or international government or governmental authority, regulatory or
administrative agency, governmental commission, department, board, bureau, agency or
instrumentality, court, tribunal, arbitrator or arbitral body (public or private); (ii) any self-regulatory
organization; or (iii) any political subdivision of any of the foregoing.
(13)           As used herein, “Applicable Law” means any and all laws, including all federal,
provincial, state and local statutes, codes, ordinances, guidelines, decrees, rules, regulations
and municipal by- laws and all judicial, arbitral, administrative, ministerial, departmental or
regulatory judgments, orders, directives, decisions, rulings or awards or other requirements of
any Governmental Authority, binding on or affecting the person referred to in the context in which
the term is used and rules, regulations and policies of any stock exchange on which securities of
the Company are listed for trading. “U.S. Securities Laws” means all applicable securities laws
in the United States, including without limitation, the Securities Act, the Exchange Act and the
rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, and any applicable state securities laws.
-6-
(14)           As used herein, “associate”, “material change”, “material fact”, and “misrepresentation”
shall have the meanings given to such terms under applicable Canadian Securities Laws, and
the terms “affiliate” and “subsidiary” shall have the meanings given to such terms in National
Instrument 45-106 - Prospectus Exemptions.
(15)           The Underwriters shall offer the Units for sale to the public directly and through other
duly registered investment dealers and brokers in the Qualifying Jurisdictions and the United
States only as permitted by Applicable Law and upon the terms and conditions set forth in the
Prospectuses and this Agreement. The Underwriters agree that they will not, directly or indirectly,
distribute the Registration Statement or the Prospectuses or publish any prospectus, circular,
advertisement or other offering material in any jurisdiction other than the Qualifying Jurisdictions
in accordance with Canadian Securities Laws or such states of the United States in which the
Units are duly qualified under U.S. Securities Laws, in such manner as to require registration of
the Units or the filing of a prospectus or any similar document with respect to the Units by the
Company therein or subject the Company to ongoing periodic reporting obligations in such
jurisdiction pursuant to the securities laws of such jurisdiction. The Underwriters agree that each
of the Underwriters that is not registered as a broker-dealer under Section 15 of the Exchange
Act, will not offer or sell any Units in, or to persons who are nationals or residents of, the United
States other than through one of its United States registered broker-dealer affiliates or otherwise
in compliance with Rule 15a-6 under the Exchange Act. Sales of Units in the Qualifying
Jurisdictions may be made only by or through a dealer appropriately registered under applicable
Canadian Securities Laws or in circumstances where an exemption from the Canadian
registered dealer requirements is available. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
paragraph, an Underwriter will not be liable to the Company under this Agreement with respect to
a default by another Underwriter under this paragraph.
Section 2Purchase, Sale, Payment and Delivery of the Units.
The Company and the Underwriters hereby confirm their agreement concerning the purchase
and sale of the Units as follows:
(1)               Public Offering of the Units. The Co-Lead Underwriters hereby advise the Company
that the Underwriters intend to offer for sale to the public, on the terms set forth in the Time of
Sale Prospectus and each Prospectus, their respective portions of the Units as soon after this
Agreement has been executed as the Co-Lead Underwriters, in their sole judgment, have
determined is advisable and practicable. After the Underwriters have made a reasonable effort to
sell all of the Units at the Offering Price, the purchase price of the Units may be decreased by the
Underwriters and may be further changed from time to time to an amount not greater than the
Offering Price, and the compensation realized by the Underwriters will be decreased by the
amount that the aggregate price paid by purchasers for the Units is less than the gross proceeds
paid by the Underwriters to the Company. Any such decrease will not affect the proceeds to be
received by the Company.
-7-
(2)               Underwriters’ Commission. In consideration of this Agreement, the Company
agrees to pay to the Underwriters at the Closing Date an underwriting fee equal to (a) 6.0% of the
gross proceeds from the sale of the Firm Units (other than certain Firm Units that are subject to an
agreed upon president’s list for which the fee will be 3.0%) and, if applicable, (b) 6.0% of the
gross proceeds from the sale of any Additional Units (the “Underwriters’ Commission”). The
Underwriters’ Commission may be deducted by the Underwriters from the proceeds of sale of the
Firm Units, and, if applicable, the Additional Units, on the Closing Date. In addition, the Company
agrees to pay to the Underwriters, and in the manner specified by the Co-Lead Underwriters, all
fees, disbursements and expenses incurred by the Underwriters in accordance with the
provisions in Section 5 hereof. Each of the Co-Lead Underwriters shall be allocated a customary
book-runner fee equal to 5.0% of the Underwriters’ Commission (net of any selling concessions
to the syndicate of Underwriters). For greater certainty, the book-runner fee shall be allocated out
of the Underwriters’ Commission and shall not increase the compensation payable to the
Underwriters. As additional consideration, the Underwriters will also receive that number of
warrants (the “Underwriter Warrants”) equal to 3.0% of the number of Unit Shares issued
pursuant to the offering, including any Additional Unit Shares (other than with respect to the
agreed upon president’s list for which the number of Underwriter Warrants will be 1.5% of the
number of Unit Shares issued in connection therewith). Each Underwriter Warrant will be on the
same terms as the Warrants and accordingly, will entitle the holder thereof to acquire, from the
Company, one common share in the capital of the Company (each an “Underwriter Warrant
Share”) at any time prior to 4:30 p.m. (Toronto time) on the date that is thirty-six months following
the Closing Date upon payment of the exercise price of US$1.92.
(3)               The Closing Date in respect of the Units. Payment of the Offering Price for the Firm
Units, and if applicable, any Additional Units, shall be made to the Company by wire transfer
against delivery of the Unit Shares and, if applicable, Additional Unit Shares, to the Co-Lead
Underwriters on behalf of the Underwriters, through the facilities of CDS Clearing and Depository
Services Inc. (“CDS”), and delivery to the Underwriters of Warrants, and if applicable, Additional
Warrant certificates, in such names and denominations as the Underwriters may request, and
such payment and delivery shall be made at 8:30 a.m. (Toronto time), on August 8, 2016 (the
“Closing Date”) (unless another time shall be agreed to by the Co-Lead Underwriters and the
Company or unless postponed in accordance with the provisions of Section 9 hereof). The Unit
Shares, Additional Shares, Warrants and Additional Warrants shall be registered in such names
and in such denominations as specified by the Co-Lead Underwriters on behalf of the
Underwriters. It is understood that the Co-Lead Underwriters have been authorized, for their own
accounts and the accounts of the non-defaulting Underwriters, to accept delivery of and receipt
for, and make payment of the Offering Price for, the Units the Underwriters have agreed to
purchase (subject to such adjustment as the Co-Lead Underwriters may determine to eliminate
fractional shares and subject to adjustment in accordance with Section 9 hereof). The Co-Lead
Underwriters, individually and not as the Co-Lead Underwriters of the Underwriters, may (but
shall not be obligated to) make payment for any Units to be purchased by any Underwriter whose
funds shall not have been received by the Co-Lead Underwriters by the Closing Date for the
account of such Underwriter, but any such payment shall not relieve such Underwriter from any of
its obligations under this Agreement.
-8-
(4)               The Additional Units. In addition, the Company hereby grants to the Underwriters the
Over-Allotment Option to purchase, and upon the basis of the representations and warranties and
subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein, the Underwriters shall have the right to
purchase, severally and not jointly, from the Company, all or a portion of the Additional Units as
may be necessary to cover over-allotments made in connection with the offering of the Firm
Units. The Over-Allotment Option may be exercised by the Underwriters in respect of: (i)
Additional Units at the Offering Price; or (ii) Additional Unit Shares at a price of US$1.2676 per
Additional Unit Share; or (iii) Additional Warrants at a price of US$0.2649 per Additional Warrant;
or (iv) any combination of Additional Unit Shares and/or Additional Warrants so long as the
aggregate number of Additional Unit Shares and Additional Warrants that may be issued under
the Over-Allotment Option does not exceed 1,612,500 Additional Unit Shares and 806,250
Additional Warrants. The Over-Allotment Option granted hereunder may be exercised in whole or
in part at any time prior to one business day before the Closing Date upon notice by the Co-Lead
Underwriters to the Company (the “Notice of Exercise”), which notice may be given at any time
prior to 10:00 a.m. (Toronto time) on the day that is one (1) business day prior to the Closing
Date. The Notice of Exercise shall set forth (i) the aggregate number of Additional Units,
Additional Unit Shares and/or Additional Warrants as to which the Underwriters are exercising
the Over-Allotment Option, (ii) the names and denominations in which the Additional Unit Shares
are to be registered through the facilities of CDS, or otherwise, as applicable, and (iii) the names
and denominations that any Additional Warrant certificates shall be registered in.
(5)               Delivery of the Units and Closing Mechanics. The Company shall deliver, or cause
to be delivered, to the Co-Lead Underwriters for the accounts of the Underwriters, the Firm Units,
and if applicable, the Additional Units, at the Closing Date, against the irrevocable release of a
wire transfer of immediately available funds for the amount of the Offering Price therefor. The
Units shall be registered in such names and denominations as the Co-Lead Underwriters shall
have requested at least one full business day prior to the Closing Date. Deliveries of the
documents described in Section 6 hereof with respect to the purchase of the Units shall be made
at the offices of Borden Ladner Gervais LLP in Vancouver, British Columbia at 8:30 a.m. (Toronto
time), or at such other place as the Co-Lead Underwriters and the Company may agree, on the
Closing Date. Time shall be of the essence, and delivery at the time and place specified in this
Agreement is a further condition to the obligations of the Underwriters and the Company.
Section 3Representations and Warranties of the Company.
The Company hereby represents and warrants to each Underwriter and Cantor Fitzgerald & Co.
(“CF US”), as of the date of this Agreement, as of the Closing Date, and covenants with each
Underwriter, as follows:
-9-
Registration Statement. The Registration Statement meets the requirements set forth in Rule
415(a)(1)(x) under the Securities Act and complies with said Rule and the U.S. Prospectus
Supplement will meet the requirements set forth in Rule 424(b). The Company has advised
the Co-Lead Underwriters of all further information (financial and other) with respect to the
Company required to be set forth therein in the Registration Statement and U.S. Prospectus
Supplement. The Registration Statement has become effective under the Securities Act. No
stop order suspending the effectiveness of the Registration Statement is in effect and no
proceedings for such purpose have been instituted or are pending or, to the knowledge of the
Company, are contemplated or threatened by the SEC. The U.S. Prospectus when filed
complied in all material respects with the Securities Act and is identical in all material respects
to the copies thereof delivered to the Underwriters for use in connection with the offer and sale
of the Units. Each of the Registration Statement and any post-effective amendment thereto, at
the time each part thereof became effective pursuant to the Securities Act and at the Closing
Date, complied and will comply in all material respects with the Securities Act and did not and,
any amendment or supplement thereto, will not contain any untrue statement of a material fact
or omit to state a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary to make the
statements therein not misleading. As of the Applicable Time, the Time of Sale Disclosure
Package did not, and at the time of the Closing Date, the Time of Sale Disclosure Package, as
then amended or supplemented by the Company, if applicable, will not, contain any untrue
statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
therein, in the light of the circumstances under which they were made, not misleading. The
U.S. Prospectus, as amended or supplemented, as of its date and at the Closing Date, did not
and will not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact
(a)
necessary in order to make the statements therein, in the light of the circumstances under
which they were made, not misleading. The representations and warranties set forth in the
three immediately preceding sentences shall not apply to statements in, or omissions from,
any such document made in reliance upon, and in conformity with, information furnished to the
Company by the Underwriters specifically for use in the preparation thereof as set forth in
Section 10(2). There are no agreements, contracts, arrangements or understandings (written
or oral) or other documents required to be described in the Time of Sale Prospectus or the
U.S. Prospectus or to be filed as exhibits to the Registration Statement which have not been
described or filed as required.
(b)
Compliance with Canadian Laws and Regulations. The Company is eligible to use the
Shelf Procedures. No cease trade order preventing or suspending the use of the Canadian
Preliminary Base Prospectus or the Canadian Prospectus or preventing the distribution of the
Units has been issued and no proceeding for that purpose has been initiated or, to the
knowledge of the Company, threatened, by any of the Canadian Commissions; as of their
respective dates, the Canadian Preliminary Base Prospectus and the Canadian Prospectus
complied in all material respects with all applicable Canadian Securities Laws; each of the
Canadian Commissions in the Qualifying Jurisdictions has issued or is deemed to have
issued receipts for the Canadian Preliminary Base Prospectus and the Canadian Prospectus.
On the Closing Date (i) the Canadian Prospectus will comply in all material respects with the
Canadian Securities Laws and (ii) the Canadian Prospectus or any amendment or supplement
thereto constituted at the respective dates thereof, and will constitute at the Closing Date full,
true and plain disclosure of all material facts relating to the Units, that is required to be in the
Canadian Prospectus, and did not at the respective dates thereof, and will not at the Closing
Date contain a misrepresentation or an untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a
material fact required to be stated therein or necessary to make the statements therein, in the
light of the circumstances under which they were made, not misleading. To its knowledge, the
Company is not a “related issuer” or “connected issuer” (as those terms are defined in National
Instrument 33-105 - Underwriting Conflicts of the Canadian Securities Administrators) of any of
the Underwriters.
-10-
(c)
Reporting Issuer and TSX and NYSE MKT Status. The Company is a “reporting issuer” in
the Qualifying Jurisdictions. The Company is in compliance in all material respects with the
by-laws, rules and regulations of each of the Exchanges.
(d)Short Form Eligibility. The Company is eligible to file a prospectus in the form of a short form
prospectus under NI 44-101.
(e)
Status under the Securities Act. The Company was not and is not an “ineligible issuer” as
defined in Rule 405 under the Securities Act at the times specified in Rules 164 and 433
under the Securities Act in connection with the offering of the Units.
(f)
Incorporated Documents. The documents incorporated or deemed to be incorporated by
reference in the Prospectuses and the Registration Statement, when they were filed with the
Canadian Commissions in each of the Qualifying Jurisdictions or the SEC under the Securities
Act or the Exchange Act, conformed in all material respects to the requirements of the
Canadian Securities Laws or U.S. Securities Laws, as applicable; and any further documents
to be incorporated by reference in the Prospectuses or the Registration Statement subsequent
to the effectiveness of the Registration Statement and prior to the completion of the distribution
of the Units, when such documents are so filed, will conform in all material respects to the
applicable requirements of Canadian Securities Laws and U.S. Securities Laws, as applicable,
and will not contain a misrepresentation or an untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state
a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary to make the statements therein, in the
light of the circumstances under which they were made, not misleading.
(g)
No Marketing Materials. Other than the term sheet in respect of the offering and sale of Units
dated August 2, 2016, the Company has not provided any “marketing materials” (as such term
is defined in National Instrument 41-101 - General Prospectus Requirements) to any potential
investors of Units.
-11-
(h)
No Conflicts. Neither the execution of this Agreement, nor the issuance, offering or sale of the
Units, nor the consummation of any of the transactions contemplated herein and therein, nor
the compliance by the Company with the terms and provisions hereof and thereof will conflict
with, or will result in a breach of, any of the terms and provisions of, or has constituted or will
constitute a default under, or has resulted in or will result in the creation or imposition of any
lien, charge or encumbrance upon any property or assets of the Company pursuant to the
terms of any agreements, contracts, arrangements or understandings (written or oral) to which
the Company may be bound or to which any of the property or assets of the Company is
subject, except (i) such conflicts, breaches or defaults as may have been waived, and (ii) such
conflicts, breaches and defaults that would not reasonably be expected to have a Material
Adverse Effect (as defined in Section 3(u)); nor will such action result (x) in any violation of the
provisions of the organizational or governing documents of the Company, or (y) in any
violation of the provisions of any statute or any order, rule or regulation applicable to the
Company or of any Governmental Authority having jurisdiction over the Company, except such
violations that would not reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect, either
individually or in the aggregate.
(i)
No Misstatement or Omission in an Issuer Free Writing Prospectus or marketing
materials. Each issuer free writing prospectus and any marketing materials, as of its issue date
and as of each Applicable Time, did not, does not and will not include any information that
conflicted, conflicts or will conflict with the information contained in the Registration Statement
or included or incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses,
including any Incorporated Document deemed to be a part thereof that has not been
superseded or modified. The foregoing sentence does not apply to statements in or omissions
from any issuer free writing prospectus or any marketing materials made in reliance upon, and
in conformity with, written information furnished to the Company by or on behalf of the
Underwriters specifically for inclusion therein as contemplated in Section 10(2).
(j)
Reports and Documents, etc. There are no reports or information of the Company or, to the
knowledge of the Company, of any third party, that in accordance with the requirements of the
Canadian Securities Laws or U.S. Securities Laws must be made publicly available in
connection with the offering of the Units that have not been made publicly available as
required. There are no documents of the Company or, to the knowledge of the Company, of any
third party, required to be filed with the Canadian Commissions in the Qualifying Jurisdictions
or with the SEC in the United States in connection with the Time of Sale Prospectus, the
Canadian Prospectus and the U.S. Prospectus that have not been filed as required pursuant to
the Canadian Securities Laws or U.S. Securities Laws, as applicable. There are no
agreements, contracts, arrangements or understandings (written or oral) or other documents of
the Company or, to the knowledge of the Company, of any third party, required to be described
in the Time of Sale Prospectus, the Canadian Prospectus and the U.S. Prospectus which have
not been described or filed as required pursuant to the Canadian Securities Laws or U.S.
Securities Laws, as applicable.
-12-
(k)
Offering Materials Furnished to Underwriters. The Company has delivered or will deliver on
the Closing Date to the Co-Lead Underwriters (or with respect to the Registration Statement,
the Time of Sale Prospectus, the U.S. Prospectus, as amended or supplemented, and any free
writing prospectus, made available on EDGAR) one complete manually signed copy of the
Registration Statement and each consent and certificate of experts filed as a part thereof, and
conformed copies (to the extent such documents contain signatures) of the Registration
Statement, the Time of Sale Prospectus, the Canadian Prospectus and the U.S. Prospectus,
as amended or supplemented, and any free writing prospectus reviewed and consented to by
the Co-Lead Underwriters, in such quantities and at such places as the Co-Lead Underwriters
have reasonably requested for each of the Underwriters.
(l)
Warrants. The Warrants and Additional Warrants will, as at the Closing Date, have been duly
and validly created and the Warrant Shares and the Additional Warrant Shares have been
authorized and allotted for issuance and upon the full payment therefor and the issue thereof
upon exercise of the Warrants and Additional Warrant Shares in accordance with the
provisions of the Warrant Indenture, the Warrant Shares and the Additional Warrant Shares will
be validly issued as fully paid and non-assessable common shares in the capital of the
Company (the “Common Shares”).
(m)
Corporate Action. All necessary corporate action has been taken by the Company to
authorize the issuance, sale and delivery of the Unit Shares, the Warrants, the Warrant
Shares, the Additional Unit Shares, the Additional Warrants and the Additional Warrant
Shares, on the terms set forth in this Agreement, and, if applicable, each certificate
representing the Warrants and the Additional Warrants (the “Warrant Certificates”) will be, a
valid and binding obligation of the Company enforceable against the Company in accordance
with its terms, subject to bankruptcy, insolvency, moratorium or similar laws affecting creditors’
rights generally and, except as limited by the application of equitable remedies, which may be
granted in the discretion of a court of competent jurisdiction, and that enforcement of the rights
to indemnity and contribution set out in this Agreement may be limited by Applicable Law.
-13-
(n)
Distribution of Offering Material by the Company. The Company has not distributed and
will not distribute, prior to the completion of the Underwriters’ distribution of the Units, any
offering material in connection with the offering and sale of the Units other than the Time of
Sale Prospectus, the Canadian Prospectus, the U.S. Prospectus, any free writing prospectus
reviewed and consented to by the Co-Lead Underwriters on behalf of the Underwriters, or the
Registration Statement.
(o)
Authorization; Enforceability. The Company has full corporate right, power and authority to
enter into this Agreement and perform the transactions contemplated hereby. This Agreement
has been duly authorized, executed and delivered by the Company and is a legal, valid and
binding agreement of the Company enforceable in accordance with its terms, except to the
extent that enforceability may be limited by bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium
or similar laws affecting creditors’ rights generally and by general equitable principles.
No Material Adverse Effect. Subsequent to the respective dates as of which information is
given in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the Time of
Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses, if any (including any document deemed incorporated
by reference therein), there has not been (i) any Material Adverse Effect, (ii) any transaction
(p)
which is material to the Company and the Material Subsidiaries (as defined in Section 3(u))
taken as a whole, (iii) any obligation or liability, direct or contingent (including any off-balance
sheet obligations), incurred by the Company or any Material Subsidiary, which is material to
the Company and the Material Subsidiaries taken as a whole, (iv) any material change in the
capital stock or outstanding long-term indebtedness of the Company or any of the Material
Subsidiaries or (v) any dividend or distribution of any kind declared, paid or made on the
capital stock of the Company or any Material Subsidiary, other than in each case above in the
ordinary course of business or as otherwise disclosed in the Registration Statement or
included or incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses.
(q)
Independent Accountants. EKS&H LLLP, who have delivered their report with respect to the
audited Financial Statements (as defined in Section 3(s)) filed with the SEC as a part of the
Registration Statement and included in the Time of Sale Prospectus, the Canadian
Prospectus and the U.S. Prospectus (each, an “Applicable Prospectus” and collectively, the
“Applicable Prospectuses”), are independent public, certified public or chartered
accountants as required by the Securities Act, the Exchange Act and applicable Canadian
Securities Laws. There has not been any “reportable event” (as that term is defined in National
Instrument 51-102 Continuous Disclosure Obligations of the Canadian Securities
Administrators) with EKS&H LLLP or any other prior auditor of the Company or any of its
Material Subsidiaries. To the Company’s knowledge, after due and careful inquiry, EKS&H
LLLP is not in violation of the auditor independence requirements of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
of 2002.
-14-
(r)
Enforceability of Agreements. All agreements between the Company and third parties
expressly referenced in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by reference in
the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses are to our knowledge legal, valid and
binding obligations of the Company enforceable in accordance with their respective terms,
except to the extent that (i) enforceability may be limited by bankruptcy, insolvency,
reorganization, moratorium or similar laws affecting creditors’ rights generally and by general
equitable principles, and (ii) the indemnification provisions of certain agreements may be
limited by Applicable Law or public policy considerations in respect thereof, and except for any
other potentially unenforceable term that, individually or in the aggregate, would not
reasonably be expected to be material to the Company.
Financial Information. The consolidated financial statements of the Company filed with the
SEC as a part of the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the
Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses, together with the related notes and schedules
(the “Financial Statements”), present fairly, in all material respects, the consolidated financial
(s)
position of the Company and the Material Subsidiaries as of the dates indicated and the
consolidated statements of comprehensive income, shareholders’ equity and cash flows of the
Company for the periods specified. Such Financial Statements conform in all material respects
with United States generally accepted accounting principles as issued by the Financial
Accounting Standards Board (“US GAAP”), applied on a consistent basis during the periods
involved. The other financial and statistical data with respect to the Company and the Material
Subsidiaries contained or incorporated by reference in the Registration Statement or included
or incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses, are
accurately and fairly presented in all material respects and prepared on a basis consistent with
the financial statements and books and records of the Company; there are no financial
statements (historical or pro forma) that are required to be included or incorporated by
reference in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the Time of
Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses that are not included or incorporated by reference as
required; the Company and the Material Subsidiaries do not have any material liabilities or
obligations, direct or contingent (including any off-balance sheet obligations), not described in
the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale
Prospectus and the Prospectuses and all disclosures contained or incorporated by reference
therein; and no other financial statements are required to be set forth or to be incorporated by
reference in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the Time of
Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses.
-15-
(t)
Statistical, Industry-Related and Market-Related Data. The statistical, industry-related and
market-related data included in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by
reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses, are based on or derived from
sources that the Company reasonably believes are reliable and accurate.
Organization. The Company and each of its Material Subsidiaries are, and will be, duly
organized, validly existing as a corporation and in good standing (where such concept is
recognized) under the laws of their respective jurisdictions of organization. The Company and
each of the Material Subsidiaries are, and will be, duly licensed or qualified as a foreign
corporation for transaction of business and in good standing under the laws of each other
jurisdiction in which their respective ownership or lease of property or the conduct of their
respective businesses requires such license or qualification, and have all corporate power
and authority necessary to own or hold their respective properties and to conduct their
respective businesses as described in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated
by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses, except where the failure to
be so qualified or in good standing or have such power or authority would not, individually or
in the aggregate, have a material adverse effect or would reasonably be expected to have a
material adverse effect on or affecting the assets, business, operations, earnings, properties,
condition (financial or otherwise), shareholders’ equity or results of operations of the Company
(u)
and the Material Subsidiaries taken as a whole, or prevent or materially interfere with
consummation of the transactions contemplated hereby (a “Material Adverse Effect”).
(v)
Subsidiaries. The subsidiaries of the Company listed in Schedule “A” (individually a “Material
Subsidiary” and collectively, the “Material Subsidiaries”), include all of the Company’s
significant subsidiaries (as such term is defined in Rule 1-02 of Regulation S-X promulgated
by the SEC). Except as set forth in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by
reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus, the Prospectuses, and the Company owns, directly
or indirectly, all of the equity interests of the Material Subsidiaries free and clear of any lien,
charge, security interest, encumbrance, right of first refusal or other restriction, and all the
equity interests of the Material Subsidiaries are validly issued and are fully paid, non-
assessable and free of preemptive and similar rights.
-16-
(w)
Minute Books. Since January 1, 2014, all existing minute books of the Company and each of
the Material Subsidiaries, including all existing records of all meetings and actions of the
board of directors (including, the Audit, Compensation and Governance and Nominating
Committees and other board committees) and securityholders of the Company (collectively,
the “Corporate Records”) have been made available to the Underwriters and their counsel,
and all such Corporate Records are complete in all material respects (except in respect of
minutes for Board and Committee meetings since July 31, 2016 that are not yet available in
draft form or otherwise, in which case agendas setting out the business conducted at such
meetings have been made available for review by the Underwriters). There are no material
transactions, agreements or other actions of the Company or any of the Material Subsidiaries
that are required to be recorded in the Corporate Records that are not properly approved
and/or recorded in the Corporate Records. All required filings have been made with the
appropriate Governmental Authorities in the Province of British Columbia in a timely fashion
under the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia), except for such filings where the
failure to file would not have a Material Adverse Effect, either individually or in the aggregate.
No Violation or Default. Neither the Company nor any of the Material Subsidiaries is (i) in
violation of its articles or by-laws or similar organizational documents; (ii) except as are
disclosed in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the Time of
Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses, in violation or default, and no event has occurred that,
with notice or lapse of time or both, would constitute such a violation or default, in the due
performance or observance of any term, covenant or condition contained in any indenture,
mortgage, deed of trust, loan agreement or other agreement or instrument to which the
Company or any of the Material Subsidiaries is a party or by which the Company or any of the
Material Subsidiaries is bound or to which any of the property or assets of the Company or any
(x)
of the Material Subsidiaries are subject; or (iii) except as disclosed in the Registration
Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the
Prospectuses, in violation of any Applicable Law, except in the case of each of clauses (ii) and
(iii) above, for any such violation or default that would not, individually or in the aggregate,
have a Material Adverse Effect. To the Company’s knowledge, no other party under any
material agreements, contracts, arrangements or understandings (written or oral) to which it or
any of the Material Subsidiaries is a party is in violation or default in any respect thereunder
where such violation or default would have a Material Adverse Effect.
-17-
Disclosure Controls. The Company and each of the Material Subsidiaries (other than
Material Subsidiaries acquired not more than 365 days prior to the Evaluation Date, as defined
below) maintain systems of internal accounting controls applicable under US GAAP in
applicable periods, or sufficient to provide reasonable assurance that (i) transactions are
executed in accordance with management’s general or specific authorizations; (ii) transactions
are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in conformity with US
GAAP and to maintain asset accountability; (iii) access to assets is permitted only in
accordance with management’s general or specific authorization; and (iv) the recorded
accountability for assets is compared with the existing assets at reasonable intervals and
appropriate action is taken with respect to any differences. The Company’s internal control
over financial reporting is effective and the Company is not aware of any material weaknesses
in its internal control over financial reporting. Since the date of the latest audited financial
statements of the Company included or incorporated by reference in the Registration
Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the
Prospectuses, there has been no change in the Company’s internal control over financial
reporting that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the Company’s
internal control over financial reporting. The Company has established disclosure controls and
procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15 and 15d-15) for the Company and
designed such disclosure controls and procedures to ensure that material information relating
to the Company and each of the Material Subsidiaries is made known to the certifying officers
by others within those entities, particularly during the period in which the Company’s Annual
Report on Form 10-K is being prepared or during the period in which financial statements will
be filed or furnished with the SEC on Form 10-Q. The Company’s certifying officers have
evaluated the effectiveness of the Company’s controls and procedures as of December 31,
2015 (such date, the “Evaluation Date”). The Company presented in its Annual Report on
Form 10-K for the fiscal year recently ended the conclusions of the certifying officers about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures based on their evaluations as of the
Evaluation Date and the disclosure controls and procedures are effective. Since the
Evaluation Date, there have been no significant changes in the Company’s internal controls
(as such term is defined in Item 307(b) of Regulation S-K under the Securities Act) or, to the
Company’s knowledge, in other factors that could significantly affect the Company’s internal
controls, except that the Company has limited the scope of its disclosure controls and
(y)
procedures and internal control over financial reporting for its quarter ended June 30, 2016 to
exclude controls, policies and procedures of a business that the Company acquired not more
than 365 days before the last day of the period covered by the interim filing.
(z)
Capitalization. The issued and outstanding Common Shares have been validly issued, are
fully paid and non-assessable and are not subject to any preemptive rights, rights of first
refusal or similar rights. The Company has an authorized, issued and outstanding
capitalization as set forth in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by
reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses as of the dates referred to
therein (other than the grant of additional options under the Company’s existing stock option
plans, or changes in the number of outstanding Common Shares of the Company due to the
issuance of shares upon the exercise or conversion of securities exercisable for, or convertible
into, Common Shares outstanding on the date hereof, including due to vesting of outstanding
restricted share units) and such authorized capital stock conforms in all material respects to
the description thereof set forth in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by
reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses. The description of the
securities of the Company in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by
reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses is complete and accurate in all
material respects. Except as disclosed in or contemplated by the Registration Statement or
included or incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses,
as of the date referred to therein, the Company does not have outstanding any options to
purchase, or any rights or warrants to subscribe for, or any securities or obligations convertible
into, or exchangeable for, or any contracts or commitments to issue or sell, any Common
Shares or other securities.
-18-
(aa)
No Applicable Registration or Other Similar Rights. There are no persons with registration
or other similar rights to have any equity or debt securities registered or qualified for sale
under the Registration Statement or the Canadian Prospectus or included in the offering
contemplated by this Agreement who have not waived such rights in writing (including
electronically) prior to the execution of this Agreement.
(bb)
No Consents Required. No consent, approval, authorization, order, registration or
qualification of or with Governmental Authority is required for the execution, delivery and
performance by the Company of this Agreement, the issuance and sale by the Company of
the Units, except for (i) the qualification of the Units for distribution in the United States and in
Canada; and (ii) such consents, approvals, authorizations, orders and registrations or
qualifications as may be required under applicable U.S. federal and state securities laws or
by the bylaws or the SEC in connection with the sale of the Units by the Underwriters.
(cc)
No Preferential Rights. Except as set forth in the Registration Statement or included or
incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses, (i) and
except pursuant to options to purchase Common Shares pursuant to outstanding options,
restricted share units, warrants or convertible debentures, no person, as such term is defined
in Rule 1-02 of Regulation S-X promulgated under the Securities Act (each, a “Person”), has
the right, contractual or otherwise, to cause the Company to issue or sell to such Person any
Common Shares or other securities of the Company, (ii) the Company has not granted to any
Person any preemptive rights, resale rights, rights of first refusal, or any other rights (whether
pursuant to a “poison pill” provision or otherwise) to purchase any Common Shares or other
securities of the Company, (iii) no Person has the right to act as an underwriter or as a
financial advisor to the Company in connection with the offer and sale of the Units, and (iv) no
Person has the right, contractual or otherwise, to require the Company to register under the
Securities Act or qualify for distribution under Canadian Securities Laws any Common
Shares or other securities of the Company, or to include any such Common Shares or other
securities in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the Time
of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses, whether as a result of the filing or effectiveness of
the Registration Statement, the Prospectuses (or documents incorporated by reference
therein) or the sale of the Units as contemplated thereby or otherwise.
-19-
(dd)
Forward-Looking Information. No forward-looking statement (within the meaning of Section
27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act and no forward-looking
information within the meaning of Section 1(1) of the Securities Act (Ontario)) contained or
incorporated by reference in the Registration Statement, the Prospectuses or the Time of
Sale Prospectuses has been made or reaffirmed without a reasonable basis or has been
disclosed other than in good faith.
(ee)
Certificates. The form of certificates representing the Unit Shares, the Warrants, the Warrant
Shares, the Additional Unit Shares, the Additional Warrants and the Additional Warrant
Shares, to the extent that physical certificates are issued for such securities, will be in due
and proper form and conform to the requirements of the Business Corporations Act (British
Columbia), the articles of incorporation of the Company and applicable requirements of the
Exchanges, The Depository Trust Company (“DTC”) and CDS or will have been otherwise
approved by the Exchanges, if required, and will have been made eligible by DTC and CDS,
except in the case of Warrants and the Additional Warrants which will not be DTC eligible.
(ff)Transfer Agent. Computershare Investor Services Inc. has been duly appointed as registrar
and transfer agent for the Common Shares.
(gg)
Warrant Agent. Computershare Trust Company of Canada will, as at the Closing Date, be
duly appointed as warrant agent for the Warrants, Additional Warrants and Underwriter
Warrants.
(hh)
No Litigation. Except as disclosed in writing to the Underwriters, there are no legal,
governmental or regulatory actions, suits or proceedings pending, nor, to the Company’s
knowledge, any legal, governmental or regulatory audits or investigations, to which the
Company or a Subsidiary is a party or to which any property of the Company or any of the
Material Subsidiaries is the subject that, individually or in the aggregate, if determined
adversely to the Company or any of the Material Subsidiaries, could reasonably be expected
to have a Material Adverse Effect or materially and adversely affect the ability of the
Company to perform its obligations under this Agreement; except as disclosed in the
Registration Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale
Prospectus and the Prospectuses, to the Company’s knowledge, no such actions, suits or
proceedings are threatened or contemplated by any Governmental Authority or threatened by
others; and (i) there are no current or pending audits or investigations, actions, suits or
proceedings by or before any Governmental Authority that are required under the Securities
Act or Canadian Securities Laws to be described in the Registration Statement or included or
incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses that are not
so described; and (ii) there are no agreements, contracts, arrangements or understandings
(written or oral) or other documents that are required under the Securities Act to be filed as
exhibits to the Registration Statement that are not so filed.
-20-
(ii)
Labor Disputes. No labor disturbance by or dispute with employees of the Company or any of
the Material Subsidiaries exists or, to the knowledge of the Company, is threatened that could
reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect.
(jj)
Local Disputes. Except as set forth in the Registration Statement and the Prospectuses, no
dispute between the Company and any local, native or indigenous group exists, or to the
Company’s knowledge, is threatened or imminent with respect to any of the Company’s
properties or exploration activities that could reasonably be expected to have a Material
Adverse Effect.
Proposed Acquisition. Except as described in the Registration Statement or included or
incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses, there are no
(kk)
material agreements, contracts, arrangements or understandings (written or oral) with any
persons relating to the acquisition or proposed acquisition by the Company or its Material
Subsidiaries of any material interest in any business (or part of a business) or corporation, nor
are there any other specific contracts or agreements (written or oral) in respect of any such
matters in contemplation.
(ll)
Intellectual Property Rights. Except as disclosed in the Registration Statement or included or
incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses, the Company
and the Material Subsidiaries own, possess, license or have other rights to use all foreign and
domestic patents, patent applications, trade and service marks, trade and service mark
registrations, trade names, copyrights, licenses, inventions, trade secrets, technology, Internet
domain names, know-how and other intellectual property (collectively, the “Intellectual
Property”), necessary for the conduct of their respective businesses as now conducted except
to the extent that the failure to own, possess, license or otherwise hold adequate rights to use
such Intellectual Property would not, individually or in the aggregate, have a Material Adverse
Effect. Except as disclosed in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by
reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses (a) there are no rights of third
parties to any such Intellectual Property owned by the Company and the Material Subsidiaries;
(b) to the Company’s knowledge, there is no infringement by third parties of any such
Intellectual Property; (c) there is no pending or, to the Company’s knowledge, threatened
action, suit, proceeding or claim by others challenging the Company’s and the Material
Subsidiaries’ rights in or to any such Intellectual Property, and the Company is unaware of any
facts which could form a reasonable basis for any such action, suit, proceeding or claim; (d)
there is no pending or, to the Company’s knowledge, threatened action, suit, proceeding or
claim by others challenging the validity or scope of any such Intellectual Property; (e) there is
no pending or, to the Company’s knowledge, threatened action, suit, proceeding or claim by
others that the Company and the Material Subsidiaries infringe or otherwise violate any patent,
trademark, copyright, trade secret or other proprietary rights of others; (f) to the Company’s
knowledge, there is no third-party U.S. patent or published U.S. patent application which
contains claims for which an Interference Proceeding (as defined in 35 U.S.C. § 135) has been
commenced against any patent or patent application described in the Registration Statement
or included or incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses,
as being owned by or licensed to the Company; and (g) the Company and the Material
Subsidiaries have complied with the terms of each agreement pursuant to which Intellectual
Property has been licensed to the Company or such Material Subsidiary, and all such
agreements are in full force and effect, except, in the case of any of clauses (a)-(g) above, for
any such infringement by third parties or any such pending or threatened suit, action,
proceeding or claim as would not, individually or in the aggregate, result in a Material Adverse
Effect.
-21-
(mm)
No Material Defaults. Neither the Company nor any of the Material Subsidiaries has
defaulted on any installment on indebtedness for borrowed money or on any rental on one
or more long-term leases, which defaults, individually or in the aggregate, would have a
Material Adverse Effect. The Company has not filed a report pursuant to Section 13(a) or
15(d) of the Exchange Act since the filing of its last Annual Report on Form 10-K, indicating
that it (i) has failed to pay any dividend or sinking fund installment on preferred stock or (ii)
has defaulted on any installment on indebtedness for borrowed money or on any rental on
one or more long-term leases, which defaults, individually or in the aggregate, would have a
Material Adverse Effect.
(nn)
Market Capitalization. At the time the Registration Statement was originally declared
effective, and at the time the Company's most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K was filed
with the SEC, the Company met the then applicable requirements for the use of Form S-3
under the Securities Act, including, but not limited to, General Instruction I.B.1 of Form S-3.
The Company satisfies the pre-1992 eligibility requirements for the use of a registration
statement on Form S-3 in connection with this offering (the pre-1992 eligibility requirements
for the use of the registration statement on Form S-3 include (i) having a non-affiliate, public
common equity float of at least $150 million or a non-affiliate, public common equity float of at
least $100 million and annual trading volume of at least three million shares and (ii) having
been subject to the Exchange Act reporting requirements for a period of 36 months). The
Company is not a shell company (as defined in Rule 405 under the Securities Act) and has
not been a shell company for at least 12 calendar months previously and if it has been a shell
company at any time previously, has filed current Form 10 information (as defined in
Instruction I.B.6 of Form S-3) with the Commission at least 12 calendar months previously
reflecting its status as an entity that is not a shell company.
-22-
(oo)
Certain Market Activities. Neither the Company, nor any of the Material Subsidiaries, nor to
the knowledge of the Company any of their respective directors or officers has taken, directly
or indirectly, any action designed, or that has constituted or might reasonably be expected to
cause or result in, under the Exchange Act, Canadian Securities Laws or otherwise, the
stabilization, maintenance or manipulation of the price of any security of the Company to
facilitate the sale or resale of the Units.
Title to Real and Personal Property. Except as set forth in the Registration Statement or
included or incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses,
the Company and the Material Subsidiaries have good and marketable title in fee simple to
all items of real property owned by them, good and valid title to all personal property
described in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the Time
(pp)
of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses as being owned by them that are material to the
businesses of the Company or such Material Subsidiary (taken as a whole), in each case
free and clear of all liens, encumbrances and claims, except those that (i) do not materially
interfere with the use made and proposed to be made of such property by the Company and
any of the Material Subsidiaries or (ii) would not, individually or in the aggregate, have a
Material Adverse Effect. Any real or personal property described in the Registration
Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the
Prospectuses as being leased by the Company and any of the Material Subsidiaries is held
by them under valid, existing and enforceable leases, except those that (A) do not materially
interfere with the use made or proposed to be made of such property by the Company or any
of the Material Subsidiaries or (B) would not, individually or in the aggregate, have a Material
Adverse Effect. Each of the properties of the Company and the Material Subsidiaries
complies with all applicable codes and Applicable Laws (including, without limitation,
building and zoning codes, laws and regulations and laws relating to access to such
properties), except if and to the extent disclosed in the Registration Statement or included or
incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses or except for
such failures to comply that would not, individually or in the aggregate, interfere in any
material respect with the use made and proposed to be made of such property by the
Company and the Material Subsidiaries or otherwise have a Material Adverse Effect. None of
the Company or the Material Subsidiaries has received from any Governmental Authorities
any notice of any condemnation of, or zoning change affecting, the properties of the
Company and the Material Subsidiaries, and the Company knows of no such condemnation
or zoning change which is threatened, except for such that would not interfere in any material
respect with the use made and proposed to be made of such property by the Company and
the Material Subsidiaries or otherwise have a Material Adverse Effect, in the aggregate.
-23-
Mining Rights. The Mt Todd Gold Project, Northern Territory, Australia, as described in the
Registration Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale
Prospectus and the Prospectuses (collectively, the “Material Property”) is the only mining
property currently material to the Company in which the Company or the Material
Subsidiaries have an interest; the Company or through the Material Subsidiaries, hold either
freehold title, mining leases, mining concessions, mining claims, exploration permits,
prospecting permits or participant interests or other conventional property or proprietary
interests or rights, recognized in the jurisdiction in which the Material Property is located, in
respect of the ore bodies and minerals located on the Material Property in which the
Company (through the applicable Material Subsidiary) has an interest under valid, subsisting
and enforceable title documents or other recognized and enforceable agreements, contracts,
arrangements or understandings, sufficient to permit the Company (through the applicable
Material Subsidiary) to explore for and exploit the minerals relating thereto; all leases or
claims and permits relating to the Material Property in which the Company (through the
applicable Material Subsidiary) has an interest or right have been validly located and
(qq)
recorded in accordance with all Applicable Laws and are valid and subsisting; except as
disclosed in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the Time
of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses, the Company (through the applicable Material
Subsidiary) has all necessary surface rights, access rights and other necessary rights and
interests relating to the Material Property in which the Company (through the applicable
Material Subsidiary) has an interest granting the Company (through the applicable Material
Subsidiary) the right and ability to explore for and exploit minerals, ore and metals for
development and production purposes as are appropriate in view of the rights and interest
therein of the Company or the applicable Material Subsidiary, with only such exceptions as
do not materially interfere with the current use made by the Company or the applicable
Material Subsidiary of the rights or interest so held, and each of the proprietary interests or
rights and each of the agreements, contracts, arrangements or understandings and
obligations relating thereto referred to above is currently in good standing in all respects in
the name of the Company or the applicable Material Subsidiary; except as disclosed in the
Prospectuses, the Company and the Material Subsidiaries do not have any responsibility or
obligation to pay any commission, royalty, license, fee or similar payment to any person with
respect to the property rights thereof, except where such fee or payment would not have a
Material Adverse Effect, either individually or in the aggregate;
-24-
(i)
the Company or the applicable Material Subsidiary holds direct interests in the Material
Property, as described in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by reference
in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses (the “Project Rights”), under valid,
subsisting and enforceable agreements or instruments, and all such agreements and
instruments in connection with the Project Rights are valid and subsisting and enforceable in
accordance with their terms;
(ii)
the Company and the Material Subsidiaries have identified all the material permits, certificates,
and approvals (collectively, the “Permits”) which are or which we understand will be required
for the exploration, development and eventual or actual operation of the Material Property,
which Permits include but are not limited to environmental assessment certificates, water
licenses, land tenures, rezoning or zoning variances and other necessary local, provincial,
state and federal approvals; and, except as disclosed in the Registration Statement or
included or incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses,
the appropriate Permits have either been received, applied for, or the processes to obtain such
Permits have been or will in due course be initiated by the Company or the applicable Material
Subsidiaries; and, except as disclosed in the Registration Statement or included or
incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses, neither the
Company nor the applicable Material Subsidiaries know of any issue or reason why the
Permits should not be approved and obtained in the ordinary course;
(iii)
all assessments or other work required to be performed in relation to the material mining
claims and the mining rights of the Company and the applicable Material Subsidiary in order
to maintain their respective interests therein, if any, have been performed to date and, except
as disclosed in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the
Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses, the Company and the applicable Material
Subsidiary have complied in all material respects with all Applicable Laws in this regard as
well as with regard to legal and contractual obligations to third parties in this regard except in
respect of mining claims and mining rights that the Company and the applicable Material
Subsidiary intend to abandon or relinquish and except for any non-compliance which would
not either individually or in the aggregate have a Material Adverse Effect; all such mining
claims and mining rights are in good standing in all respects as of the date of this Agreement;
-25-
(iv)
except as disclosed in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by reference in
the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses, there are no environmental audits,
evaluations, assessments, studies or tests relating to the Company or the Material
Subsidiaries except for ongoing assessments conducted by or on behalf of the Company and
the Material Subsidiaries in the ordinary course;
(v)
the Company made available to the respective authors thereof prior to the issuance of the
current technical report filed by the Company on SEDAR relating to the Material Property (the
“Report”), for the purpose of preparing the Report, as applicable, all information requested,
and no such information contained any material misrepresentation as at the relevant time the
relevant information was made available;
(vi)
the Report complied in all material respects with the requirements of National Instrument 43-
101 – Standards of Disclosure for Mineral Projects (“NI 43-101”) as at the amended and
restated date of such Report; and
the Company is in compliance, in all material respects, with the provisions of NI 43-101 and
has filed all technical reports required thereby; except as noted in the Prospectuses, all
scientific and technical information disclosed in the Registration Statement or included or
incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses: (i) is based
upon information prepared, reviewed and/or verified by or under the supervision of a
“qualified person” (as such term is defined in NI 43-101), (ii) has been prepared and
disclosed in accordance with Canadian industry standards set forth in NI 43- 101, and (iii)
(vii)
was true, complete and accurate in all material respects at the time of filing.
(rr)
Taxes. The Company and each of the Material Subsidiaries have filed all federal, state,
provincial, local and foreign tax returns which have been required to be filed and paid all taxes
shown thereon through the date hereof, to the extent that such taxes have become due and
are not being contested in good faith, except where the failure to so file or pay would not have
a Material Adverse Effect. Except as otherwise disclosed in or contemplated by the
Registration Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale
Prospectus and the Prospectuses, no tax deficiency has been determined adversely to the
Company or any of the Material Subsidiaries which has had, individually or in the aggregate, a
Material Adverse Effect. The Company has no knowledge of any federal, state, provincial or
other governmental tax deficiency, penalty or assessment which has been or might be
asserted or threatened against it which would have a Material Adverse Effect.
-26-
(ss)
No Reliance. The Company has not relied upon the Underwriters or legal counsel for the
Underwriters for any legal, tax or accounting advice in connection with the offering and sale
of the Units.
(tt)
Investment Company Act. Neither the Company nor any of the Material Subsidiaries is or,
after giving effect to the offering and sale of the Units and the application of the proceeds
thereof as described in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by reference in
the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses, will be an “investment company” or an
entity “controlled” by an “investment company,” as such terms are defined in the Investment
Company Act of 1940, as amended.
(uu)ERISA. The Company does not have a material employee benefit plan, within the meaning
of Section 3(3) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended.
(vv)
Company is not a “Controlled Foreign Corporation”. As of the date hereof, the Company
is not a “controlled foreign corporation,” as such term is defined in the Internal Revenue Code
of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), and does not expect to become a controlled foreign
corporation in the foreseeable future.
Insurance. The Company and each of the Material Subsidiaries carry, or are covered by,
(ww)insurance in such amounts and covering such risks as the Company and each of the
Material Subsidiaries reasonably believe are adequate for the conduct of their properties
and as is customary for companies engaged in similar businesses in similar industries.
(xx)
No Price Stabilization or Manipulation; Compliance with Regulation M. The Company
has not taken, nor will the Company take, directly or indirectly, any action designed to or that
might be reasonably expected to cause or result in stabilization or manipulation of the price of
the Common Shares, as applicable, or any other “reference security” (as defined in Rule 100
of Regulation M under the Exchange Act (“Regulation M”)) whether to facilitate the sale or
resale of the Units, as applicable, or otherwise, and has taken no action which would directly
or indirectly violate Regulation M.
(yy)
Working Capital. To the Company’s knowledge and taking into account the available
working capital and the net proceeds receivable by the Company following the sale of the
Units, the Company has sufficient working capital for its present requirements that is for a
period of at least 12 months from the date of the Prospectuses.
(zz)Environmental Laws. Except as set forth in the Registration Statement or included or
incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses:
-27-
(i)
each of the Company and the Material Subsidiaries is in compliance in all material respects
with all applicable federal, provincial, state, municipal and local laws, statutes, ordinances,
bylaws and regulations and orders, directives and decisions rendered by any ministry,
department or administrative or regulatory agency, domestic or foreign (the “Environmental
Laws”) relating to the protection of the environment, occupational health and safety or the
processing, use, treatment, storage, disposal, discharge, transport or handling of any
pollutants, contaminants, chemicals or industrial, toxic or hazardous wastes or substance,
including any uranium or derivatives thereof (the “Hazardous Substances”), except where
such non-compliance would not have a Material Adverse Effect, either individually or in the
aggregate;
each of the Company and the Material Subsidiaries has obtained all licenses, permits,
approvals, consents, certificates, registrations and other authorizations under all applicable
Environmental Laws (the “Environmental Permits”) necessary as at the date hereof for the
operation of the businesses currently carried on by the Company and the Material Subsidiaries
(ii)and each Environmental Permit is valid, subsisting and in good standing and to the knowledge
of the Company neither the Company nor the Material Subsidiaries is in default or breach of
any Environmental Permit which would have a Material Adverse Effect, and no proceeding is
pending or, to the knowledge of the Company or the Material Subsidiaries, threatened, to
revoke or limit any Environmental Permit;
(iii)
neither the Company nor the Material Subsidiaries has used, except in compliance with all
Environmental Laws and Environmental Permits, and other than as may be incidental to
mineral resource exploration, development, mining, recovery, processing or milling, any
property or facility which it owns or leases or previously owned or leased, to generate,
manufacture, process, distribute, use, treat, store, dispose of, transport or handle any
Hazardous Substance; and
(iv)
neither the Company nor the Material Subsidiaries (including, if applicable, any predecessor
companies) has received any notice of, or been prosecuted for an offence alleging, non-
compliance with any Environmental Law that would have a Material Adverse Effect, and
neither the Company nor the Material Subsidiaries (including, if applicable, any predecessor
companies) has settled any allegation of non-compliance that would have a Material Adverse
Effect short of prosecution. There are no orders or directions relating to environmental matters
requiring any material work, repairs, construction or capital expenditures to be made with
respect to any of the assets of the Company or the Material Subsidiaries, nor has the
Company or the Material Subsidiaries received notice of any of the same; and (v) neither the
Company nor the Material Subsidiaries has received any notice wherein it is alleged or stated
that the Company or the Material Subsidiaries is potentially responsible for a federal,
provincial, state, municipal or local clean-up site or corrective action under any Environmental
Laws. Neither the Company nor the Material Subsidiaries has received any request for
information in connection with any federal, state, municipal or local inquiries as to disposal
sites.
-28-
(aaa)
Finder’s Fee’s. Neither the Company nor any of the Material Subsidiaries has incurred any
liability for any finder’s fees, brokerage commissions or similar payments in connection with
the transactions herein contemplated, except as may otherwise exist with respect to the
Underwriters pursuant to this Agreement.
Broker/Dealer Relationships. Neither the Company nor any of the Material Subsidiaries or
any related entities (i) is required to register as a “broker” or “dealer” in accordance with the
provisions of the Exchange Act or (ii) directly or indirectly through one or more
(bbb)
intermediaries, controls or is a “person associated with a member” or “associated person of
a member” (within the meaning set forth in the FINRA Manual).
(ccc)
Dividend Restrictions. Except as may be restricted by Applicable Law, no Material
Subsidiary is prohibited or restricted, directly or indirectly, from paying dividends to the
Company, or from making any other distribution with respect to such Material Subsidiaries’
equity securities or from repaying to the Company or any other Material Subsidiaries any
amounts that may from time to time become due under any loans or advances to such
Material Subsidiaries from the Company or from transferring any property or assets to the
Company or to any other Material Subsidiaries.
No Improper Practices. (i) Neither the Company nor, to the Company’s knowledge, the
Material Subsidiaries, nor to the Company’s knowledge, any of their respective directors or
officers has, in the past five years, made any unlawful contributions to any candidate for any
political office (or failed fully to disclose any contribution in violation of Applicable Law) or
made any contribution or other payment to any official of, or candidate for, any federal, state,
provincial, municipal, or foreign office or other person charged with similar public or quasi-
public duty in violation of any Applicable Law or of the character required to be disclosed in
the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale
Prospectus and the Prospectuses; (ii) no relationship, direct or indirect, exists between or
among the Company or, to the Company’s knowledge, any Material Subsidiary or any
affiliate of any of them, on the one hand, and the directors, officers and shareholders of the
Company or, to the Company’s knowledge, any Material Subsidiary, on the other hand, that
is required by the Securities Act or Canadian Securities Laws to be described in the
Registration Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale
Prospectus and the Prospectuses that is not so described; (iii) no relationship, direct or
indirect, exists between or among the Company or any Material Subsidiary or any affiliate of
them, on the one hand, and the directors, officers, or shareholders of the Company or, to the
Company’s knowledge, any Material Subsidiary, on the other hand, that is required by the
rules of the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, Inc. (“FINRA”) (or Canadian equivalent
thereof) to be described in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by
reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses that is not so described; (iv)
except as described in the Prospectuses, there are no material outstanding loans or
advances or material guarantees of indebtedness by the Company or, to the Company’s
knowledge, any Material Subsidiary to or for the benefit of any of their respective officers or
directors or any of the members of the families of any of them; and (v) the Company has not
offered, or caused any placement agent to offer, Common Shares or to make any payment
of funds to any person with the intent to influence unlawfully (A) a customer or supplier of
the Company or any Material Subsidiary to alter the customer’s or supplier’s level or type of
business with the Company or any Material Subsidiary or (B) a trade journalist or
publication to write or publish favorable information about the Company or any Material
Subsidiary or any of their respective products or services, and, (vi) neither the Company nor
any Material Subsidiary nor, to the Company’s knowledge, any director, officer, employee or
agent of the Company or any Material Subsidiary has made any payment of funds of the
Company or any Material Subsidiary or received or retained any funds in violation of any
(ddd)
Applicable Law (including, without limitation, the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977 and
the Corruption of Foreign Public Officials Act (Canada)).
-29-
(eee)
Operations. The operations of the Company and the Material Subsidiaries are and have
been conducted at all times in compliance with applicable financial record keeping and
reporting requirements of the Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist
Financing Act (Canada), the Corruption of Foreign Public Officials Act (Canada) and
applicable rules and regulations thereunder, and the money laundering statutes of all
applicable jurisdictions, the rules and regulations thereunder and any related or similar
applicable rules, regulations or guidelines, issued, administered or enforced by any
Governmental Authority (collectively, the “Money Laundering Laws”); and no action, suit or
proceeding by or before any court or Governmental Authority involving the Company or any
of the Material Subsidiaries with respect to the Money Laundering Laws is pending or, to the
knowledge of the Company, threatened.
(fff)
Sanctions. (i) The Company represents that, neither the Company nor any of the Material
Subsidiaries (collectively, the “Entity”) nor, to the Company’s knowledge, any director, officer,
employee, agent, affiliate or representative of the Company, is a government, individual, or
entity (in this paragraph (nnn), “Member”) that is, or is owned or controlled by a Member that
is:
(A)
the subject of any sanctions administered or enforced by the U.S. Department of Treasury’s
Office of Foreign Assets Control, the United Nations Security Council, the European Union,
Her Majesty’s Treasury, the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions (Canada), or
pursuant to the Special Economic Measures Act (Canada) or other relevant sanctions
authority or Applicable Law (collectively, “Sanctions”), nor
(B)
located, organized or resident in a country or territory that is the subject of Sanctions
(including, without limitation, Burma/Myanmar, Cuba, Iran, Libya, North Korea, Russia, Sudan,
Syria, Ukraine and Zimbabwe).
-30-
(ii)
The Company represents and covenants that it will not, directly or indirectly, use the proceeds
of the offering, or lend, contribute or otherwise make available such proceeds to any
subsidiary, joint venture partner or other Member:
(A)
to fund or facilitate any activities or business of or with any Member or in any country or
territory that, at the time of such funding or facilitation, is the subject of Sanctions; or
(B)
in any other manner that will result in a violation of Sanctions by any Member (including any
Member participating in the offering, whether as underwriter, advisor, investor or otherwise).
(iii)
The Company represents and covenants that, except as detailed in the Registration
Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the
Prospectuses, for the past 5 years, it has not knowingly engaged in, is not now knowingly
engaged in, and will not engage in, any dealings or transactions with any Member, or in any
country or territory, that at the time of the dealing or transaction is or was the subject of
Sanctions.
(ggg)
Certification of Disclosure. There has been no failure on the part of the Company or any of
the Company’s directors or officers, in their capacities as such, to comply in all material
respects with any applicable provisions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, National Instrument 52-
109 - Certification of Disclosure in Issuers’ Annual and Interim Filings (“NI 52-109”) and the
rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. Each of the principal executive officer and
the principal financial officer of the Company (or each former principal executive officer of
the Company and each former principal financial officer of the Company as applicable) and
each certifying officer of the Company (or each former certifying officer of the Company and
each former certifying officer of the Company as applicable) has made all certifications
required by Sections 302 and 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act with respect to all reports,
schedules, forms, statements and other documents required to be filed by it or furnished by
it to the SEC and as required to be made and filed by NI 52-109. For purposes of the
preceding sentence, “principal executive officer” and “principal financial officer” shall have
the meanings given to such terms in the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and “certifying officer” shall
have the meanings given to such term in NI 52-109.
-31-
Filings. Since January 1, 2014, the Company has filed all documents or information
(hhh)
required to be filed by it under Canadian Securities Laws, U.S. Securities Laws, and the
rules, regulations and policies of the Exchanges, except where the failure to file such
documents or information will not have a Material Adverse Effect, either individually or in the
aggregate; all material change reports, annual information forms, financial statements,
management proxy circulars and other documents filed by or on behalf of the Company with
the Exchanges, the SEC and the Canadian Commissions, as of its date, did not contain any
untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact required to be stated
therein or necessary to make the statements therein, in light of the circumstances under
which they were made, not misleading and did not contain a misrepresentation at the time
at which it was filed; the Company has not filed any confidential material change report or
any document requesting confidential treatment with any Governmental Authority that at the
date hereof remains confidential.
(iii)
Exchange Registration. The Common Shares are registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the
Exchange Act and are accepted for trading on the NYSE MKT under the symbol “VGZ” and
the TSX under the symbol “VGZ,” and the Company has taken no action designed to
terminate the registration of the Common Shares under the Exchange Act or delisting the
Common Shares from either of the Exchanges, nor, except as disclosed in the Registration
Statement or included or incorporated by reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the
Prospectuses, has the Company received any notification that the SEC, the Canadian
Commissions or either of the Exchanges is contemplating terminating such registration or
listing. Except as disclosed in the Registration Statement or included or incorporated by
reference in the Time of Sale Prospectus and the Prospectuses, the Company has complied
in all material respects with the applicable requirements of the Exchanges for maintenance of
inclusion of the Common Shares thereon. The Company has applied for all necessary
consents, approvals, authorizations or orders of, or filing, notification or registration with, the
Exchanges, the SEC and the Canadian Commissions, where applicable, required for the
listing and trading of the Unit Shares, the Warrant Shares, the Additional Shares and the
Additional Warrant Shares. Upon receipt by the Company of conditional listing approval of the
TSX, the Company will have the necessary exchange approval, subject only to satisfying their
standard listing and maintenance requirements. The Company has no reason to believe that it
will not in the foreseeable future continue to be in compliance with all such listing and
maintenance requirements of each Exchange.
-32-
In this Agreement, a reference to “knowledge” of the Company means the knowledge of the
directors or officers of the Company or any officer who may be responsible for the subject matter
at issue, in each case, after reasonable inquiry.
Any certificate signed by any officer on behalf of the Company or any of the Material Subsidiaries
and delivered to the Underwriters or counsel for the Underwriters in connection with the offering
of the Units shall be deemed to be a representation and warranty by the Company or Material
Subsidiaries, as the case may be, as to matters covered thereby, to each Underwriter.
The Company acknowledges that the Underwriters and, for purposes of the opinions to be
delivered pursuant to Section 6 hereof, counsel to the Company and counsel to the Underwriters
will rely upon the accuracy and truthfulness of the foregoing representations and hereby
consents to such reliance.
Section 4Certain Covenants of the Company.
The Company further covenants and agrees with each Underwriter and CF US as follows:
(a)
Delivery of Registration Statement, Time of Sale Prospectus and Prospectuses. To the
extent not available on EDGAR as it relates to the Registration Statement, the Time of Sale
Prospectus, the U.S. Prospectus and any supplements and amendments thereto, the
Company shall furnish and deliver to the Underwriters, in such cities as the Underwriters may
reasonably and lawfully request without charge, as soon as practicable after the Registration
Statement becomes effective (as to the U.S. Prospectus) or after the filing thereof (as to the
Canadian Prospectus), and during the period mentioned in Section 4(e) or Section 4(f) below,
as many commercial copies, or originally signed versions, of the Time of Sale Prospectus, the
Canadian Prospectus, the U.S. Prospectus and any supplements and amendments thereto or
to the Registration Statement as the Co-Lead Underwriters on behalf of the Underwriters may
reasonably request for the purposes contemplated by the Securities Act and the Canadian
Securities Laws. As used herein, the term “Prospectus Delivery Period” means such period
of time after the first date of the public offering of the Units and ending on the completion of the
distribution of the offering of the Units, during which time a preliminary prospectus, preliminary
prospectus supplement or a prospectus relating to the Units is required by applicable
Canadian Securities Laws or U.S. Securities Laws to be delivered (or required to be delivered
but for Rule 172 under the Securities Act) in connection with sales of the Units by any
Underwriter or dealer.
-33-
Co-Lead Underwriters’ Review of Proposed Amendments and Supplements. Prior to
amending or supplementing the Registration Statement, the Time of Sale Prospectus, the
(b)
Canadian Prospectus or the U.S. Prospectus (including any amendment or supplement
through incorporation by reference of any document), the Company shall furnish to the Co-
Lead Underwriters for review, a reasonable amount of time prior to the proposed time of filing
or use thereof, a copy of each such proposed amendment or supplement, and the Company
shall not file or use any such proposed amendment or supplement without the Co-Lead
Underwriters’ consent which shall not be unreasonably delayed, conditioned or withheld.
(c)
Free Writing Prospectuses. The Company shall furnish to the Co-Lead Underwriters for
review, a reasonable amount of time prior to the proposed time of filing or use thereof, a copy
of each proposed free writing prospectus or any amendment or supplement thereto to be
prepared by or on behalf of, used by, or referred to by the Company and the Company shall not
file, use or refer to any proposed free writing prospectus or any amendment or supplement
thereto without the Co-Lead Underwriters’ consent which shall not be unreasonably delayed,
conditioned or withheld. The Company shall furnish to each Underwriter, without charge, as
many copies of any free writing prospectus prepared by or on behalf of, or used by, the
Company as such Underwriter may reasonably request. If during the Prospectus Delivery
Period there occurred or occurs an event or development as a result of which any free writing
prospectus prepared by or on behalf of, used by, or referred to by the Company conflicted or
would conflict with the information contained in the Registration Statement or included or
would include an untrue statement of a material fact or, omitted or would omit to state a
material fact necessary in order to make the statements therein, in the light of the
circumstances prevailing at that subsequent time, not misleading, the Company shall promptly
amend or supplement such free writing prospectus to eliminate or correct such conflict or so
that the statements in such free writing prospectus as so amended or supplemented will not
include an untrue statement of a material fact or, omit to state a material fact necessary in order
to make the statements therein, in the light of the circumstances prevailing at such subsequent
time, not misleading, as the case may be; provided, however, that prior to amending or
supplementing any such free writing prospectus, the Company shall furnish to the Co-Lead
Underwriters for review, a reasonable amount of time prior to the proposed time of filing or use
thereof, a copy of such proposed amended or supplemented free writing prospectus and the
Company shall not file, use or refer to any such amended or supplemented free writing
prospectus without the Co-Lead Underwriters’ consent which shall not be unreasonably
delayed conditioned or withheld.
-34-
(d)
Filing of Underwriter Free Writing Prospectuses. The Company shall not take any action
that would result in an Underwriter or the Company being required to file with the SEC
pursuant to Rule 433(d) under the Securities Act a free writing prospectus prepared by or on
behalf of the Underwriter that the Underwriter otherwise would not have been required to file
thereunder.
(e)
Amendments and Supplements to Time of Sale Prospectus. If any time prior to the
Closing Date any event shall occur or condition shall exist as a result of which the Time of
Sale Prospectus, as amended or supplemented, would include an untrue statement of a
material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the statements therein,
in the light of the circumstances when delivered to a prospective purchaser, not misleading, or
if, in the reasonable opinion of counsel for the Company or Underwriters, it is necessary to
amend or supplement the Time of Sale Prospectus to comply with Applicable Law, including
the Securities Act, the Company shall (subject to Section 4(b) and Section 4(c)) forthwith
prepare, file with the SEC and furnish, at its own expense, to the Underwriters and to any
dealer upon request, either amendments or supplements to the Time of Sale Prospectus so
that the statements in the Time of Sale Prospectus as so amended or supplemented will not
include an untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary in order
to make the statements therein, in the light of the circumstances when delivered to a
prospective purchaser, not misleading, or so that the Time of Sale Prospectus, as amended or
supplemented, will comply with Applicable Law including the Securities Act and the Canadian
Securities Laws.
Securities Act Compliance. The Company will prepare the Canadian Prospectus
Supplement and the U.S. Prospectus Supplement in a form approved by the Co-Lead
Underwriters (acting reasonably) and (i) will file the Canadian Prospectus Supplement with the
Principal Regulator in accordance with the Shelf Procedures as soon as practicably possible,
and in any event, not later than 5:00 p.m. (Toronto time) on August 3, 2016 and (ii) will file the
U.S. Prospectus Supplement with the SEC not later than the SEC’s close of business on the
first business day following the day on which the filing of the Canadian Prospectus Supplement
is made with the Principal Regulator. After the date of this Agreement, the Company shall
promptly advise the Co-Lead Underwriters in writing (i) of the receipt of any comments of, or
requests for additional or supplemental information or other communication from, any
Canadian Commission or the SEC with respect to the Canadian Prospectus or the Registration
Statement, (ii) of any request by any Canadian Commission to amend or supplement the
Canadian Prospectus or for additional information or of any request by the SEC to amend the
Registration Statement or to amend or supplement the U.S. Prospectus or for additional
information, (iii) of the time and date of any filing of any post-effective amendment to the
Registration Statement or any amendment or supplement to the Time of Sale Prospectus, any
free writing prospectus or the Prospectuses, (iv) of the time and date that any post-effective
amendment to the Registration Statement becomes effective, (v) of the issuance by the SEC or
any Canadian Commission, as applicable, of any stop order suspending the effectiveness of
the Registration Statement, the U.S. Prospectus or the Canadian Prospectus or any post-
effective amendment thereto or any order directed at any document incorporated by reference
in the Registration Statement, the U.S. Prospectus or the Canadian Prospectus or any
amendment or supplement thereto or any order preventing or suspending the use of the Time
of Sale Prospectus, any free writing prospectus, any marketing materials, the U.S. Prospectus
or the Canadian Prospectus or any amendment or supplement thereto or any post-effective
amendment to the Registration Statement, or the suspension of the qualification of the Units for
sale in any jurisdiction, or of any proceedings to remove, suspend or terminate from listing or
quotation the Common Shares and the Units from the Exchanges, or of the threatening or
(f)
initiation of any proceedings for any of such purposes, and (vi) of the issuance by any
Governmental Authority of any order having the effect of ceasing or suspending the distribution
of the Units, or of the institution or, to the knowledge of the Company, threatening of any
proceedings for any such purpose. If the SEC or any Canadian Commission shall enter any
such stop order at any time, the Company will use best efforts to obtain the lifting of such order
at the earliest possible moment.
-35-
(g)
Amendments and Supplements to the Prospectuses and Other Securities Act Matters.
The Company will comply with the U.S. Securities Laws and the Canadian Securities Laws so
as to permit the completion of the distribution of the Units during the Prospectus Delivery
Period as contemplated in this Agreement and the Prospectuses. If any event shall occur or
condition exist as a result of which it is necessary to amend or supplement the Prospectuses
so that the Prospectuses do not include a misrepresentation or an untrue statement of a
material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the statements therein,
in the light of the circumstances when the U.S. Prospectus or the Canadian Prospectus is
delivered to a purchaser, not misleading, or if during the Prospectus Delivery Period in the
reasonable opinion of the Company, Co-Lead Underwriters or counsel for the Company or
Underwriters it is otherwise necessary to amend or supplement the Prospectuses to comply
with U.S. Securities Laws or Canadian Securities Laws, the Company agrees (subject to
Section 4(b) and Section 4(c)) to promptly prepare, file with the SEC and the Canadian
Commissions and furnish at its own expense to the Underwriters and to dealers, amendments
or supplements to the Prospectuses so that the statements in the Prospectuses as so
amended or supplemented will not include a misrepresentation or an untrue statement of a
material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the statements therein,
in the light of the circumstances when the U.S. Prospectus or the Canadian Prospectus is
delivered to a purchaser, not be misleading or so that the Prospectuses, as amended or
supplemented, will comply with the U.S. Securities Laws and the Canadian Securities Laws,
as applicable. Neither the Co-Lead Underwriters’ consent to, nor delivery of, any such
amendment or supplement shall constitute a waiver of any of the Company’s obligations under
Section 4(b) or Section 4(c).
-36-
(h)
Lock-Up Agreements. The Company shall use its commercially reasonable efforts to cause
each of the Company’s directors and senior officers and each of the other persons listed on
Exhibit “A” to execute and deliver to the Co-Lead Underwriters a lock-up agreement in the form
of Exhibit “B” hereto on or before the Closing Date.
(i)
Stock Exchange Listing. The Company shall use its commercially reasonable best efforts to
ensure that the Unit Shares, Warrant Shares, Additional Unit Shares, Additional Warrant
Shares and Underwriter Warrant Shares are conditionally approved for listing and for trading
on the TSX and approved for listing on NYSE MKT subject in the case of the TSX to
satisfaction by the Company of the conditions imposed by the TSX.
(j)
Blue Sky Compliance. The Company shall cooperate with the Co-Lead Underwriters and
counsel for the Underwriters to qualify or register the Units for sale under (or obtain exemptions
from the application of) U.S. Securities Laws, Canadian Securities Laws, or other foreign laws
of jurisdictions designated by the Co-Lead Underwriters, shall comply with such laws and shall
continue such qualifications, registrations and exemptions in effect so long as required for the
distribution of the Units. The Company shall not be required to qualify as a foreign corporation
or to take any action that would subject it to general service of process in any jurisdiction in
which it is not presently qualified or where it would be subject to taxation as a foreign
corporation (except service of process with respect to the offering and sale of the Units). The
Company will advise the Co-Lead Underwriters promptly of the suspension of the qualification
or registration of (or any exemption relating to) the Units for offering, sale or trading in any
jurisdiction or any initiation or threat of any proceeding for any such purpose, and in the event
of the issuance of any order suspending such qualification, registration or exemption, the
Company shall use its best efforts to obtain the withdrawal thereof at the earliest possible
moment.
(k)
Use of Proceeds. The Company shall apply the net proceeds from the sale of the Units and
the Additional Units sold by it in the manner described under the caption “Use of Proceeds” in
the Time of Sale Prospectus.
(l)
Transfer/Warrant Agent. The Company shall maintain, at its expense, a registrar and transfer
agent for the Unit Shares and the Additional Unit Shares and engage and maintain, at its
expense, a warrant agent for the Warrants and Additional Warrants.
-37-
Earnings Statement. As soon as practicable, but in any event no later than 18 months after
the date of this Agreement, the Company will make generally available to its security holders
and to the Co-Lead Underwriters an earnings statement (which need not be audited) covering
a period of at least 12 months beginning with the first fiscal quarter of the Company
commencing after the date of this Agreement which shall satisfy the provisions of Section
(m)
11(a) of the Securities Act and the rules and regulations of the SEC thereunder.
(n)
Periodic Reporting Obligations. During the period when the U.S. Prospectus is required to
be delivered under the Securities Act, the Company shall file, on a timely basis, with the SEC
and NYSE MKT all reports and documents required to be filed under the Exchange Act.
(o)
Agreement Not to Issue, Offer or Sell Additional Shares. During the period commencing on
and including the date hereof and ending on and including the 90th day following the Closing
Date (as the same may be extended as described below, the “Lock-up Period”), the
Company will not, without the prior written consent of the Co-Lead Underwriters (which
consent will not be unreasonably withheld), (i) issue, offer, sell (including, without limitation,
any short sale), contract or agree to sell, hypothecate, pledge, grant any option to purchase or
otherwise dispose of or agree to dispose of or transfer, directly or indirectly, or establish or
increase a “put equivalent position” or liquidate or decrease a “call equivalent position” within
the meaning of Section 16 of the Exchange Act and the rules and regulations of the SEC
promulgated thereunder, with respect to, any Common Shares, or any securities convertible
into or exchangeable or exercisable for, or warrants or other rights to purchase, the foregoing,
(ii) other than a registration Form on S-8 subject to the restrictions set forth below, file or cause
to become effective a registration statement under the Securities Act, or to file a prospectus
under the Canadian Securities Laws, relating to the offer and sale of any Common Shares or
securities convertible into or exercisable or exchangeable for Common Shares or other rights
to purchase Common Shares or any other securities of the Company that are substantially
similar to Common Shares, or any securities convertible into or exchangeable or exercisable
for, or any warrants or other rights to purchase, the foregoing, (iii) enter into any swap or other
arrangement that transfers to another, in whole or in part, any of the economic consequences
of ownership of Common Shares or any other securities of the Company that are substantially
similar to Common Shares, or any securities convertible into or exchangeable or exercisable
for, or any warrants or other rights to purchase, the foregoing, whether any such transaction is
to be settled by delivery of Common Shares or such other securities, in cash or otherwise or
(iv) publicly announce an intention to effect any transaction specified in clause (i), (ii) or (iii),
except, in each case, for (A) the registration of the offer and sale of the Units under the
Securities Act, the filing of each Applicable Prospectus under the Canadian Securities Laws
relating to the sale of the Units and the sales of the Units to the Underwriters pursuant to this
Agreement, (B) issuances of Common Shares upon the exercise of options or restricted share
units issued under the Company’s equity compensation plans, (C) the issuance of stock
options or restricted share units in the ordinary course and the issuance of Common Shares
pursuant to the Company’s equity compensation plans, (D) the issuance of Common Shares
pursuant to the exercise of warrants outstanding as of the date hereof and pursuant to the
Warrants and the Underwriter Warrants, or (E) the issuance of options or securities of the
Company in connection with bona fide arm’s length acquisitions, mergers, consolidations or
amalgamations with any company or companies (other than a direct or indirect acquisition,
merger, consolidation or amalgamation, whether by way of one or more transactions, of an
entity all or substantially all of the assets of which are cash, marketable securities or financial
in nature or an acquisition that is structured primarily to defeat the intent of this provision).
-38-
(p)
Investment Limitation. The Company shall not invest or otherwise use the proceeds received
by the Company from its sale of the Units and Additional Units in such a manner as would
require the Company or any of its Material Subsidiaries to register as an investment company
under the Investment Company Act.
(q)
No Stabilization or Manipulation; Compliance with Regulation M. The Company will not
take, directly or indirectly, any action designed to or that might be reasonably expected to
cause or result in stabilization or manipulation of the price of the Common Shares or any other
reference security, whether to facilitate the sale or resale of the Units or otherwise, and the
Company will, and shall cause each of its affiliates to, comply with all applicable provisions of
Regulation M. If the limitations of Rule 102 of Regulation M (“Rule 102”) do not apply with
respect to the Units or any other reference security pursuant to any exception set forth in
Section (d) of Rule 102, then promptly upon notice from the Co-Lead Underwriters (or, if later,
at the time stated in the notice), the Company will, and shall cause each of its affiliates to,
comply with Rule 102 as though such exception were not available but the other provisions of
Rule 102 (as interpreted by the SEC) did apply.
(r)
Press Releases/Announcements. Prior to the Closing Date, the Company shall not, without
the Co-Lead Underwriters prior written consent, which shall not be unreasonably delayed,
conditioned or withheld, issue any press releases or other communications directly or indirectly
and shall not hold any press conferences with respect to the Company or any Material
Subsidiaries, the financial condition, results of operations, business, properties, assets, or
liabilities of the Company or any Material Subsidiaries, or with respect to the offering of the
Units, except the quarterly management conference call scheduled for August 9, 2016.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing contained in this subsection shall prevent the Company
from issuing a press release forthwith in the event that the Company’s counsel advises that it is
necessary in order to comply with Applicable Law or the rules or requirements of the
Exchanges, or from issuing a press release or holding an analyst call in the normal course in
connection with the release of financial results.
-39-
Right of First Refusal. If within the 12 month period following the Closing Date the Company
(s)
or any of its subsidiaries: (a) decides to finance or refinance any indebtedness using a
manager or agent, the Co-Lead Underwriters (or any affiliate designated by either of the Co-
Lead Underwriters) shall have the right to act as co-lead book runner, co-lead manager, co-
lead placement agent or co-lead agent with respect to such financing or refinancing; or (b)
decides to raise funds by means of a public offering or a private placement of equity or debt
securities using an underwriter or placement agent, the Co-Lead Underwriters (or any affiliate
designated by either of the Co-Lead Underwriters) shall have the right to act as co-lead book
runners, co-lead underwriters or co-lead placement agents for such financing; provided, that in
the event that either of the Co-Lead Underwriters, as the case may be, declines an
engagement in respect of any of the matters described in (a) or (b) above, then the non-
declining Co-Lead Underwriter shall have the right, at its election, to act as lead book runner,
lead manager, lead placement agent, lead underwriter or lead placement agent for such
financing, as the case may be. If both or either of the Co-Lead Underwriters and/or one of their
respective affiliates decide to accept any such engagement, the agreement governing such
engagement will contain, among other things, provisions for customary fees for transactions of
similar size and nature and the provisions of this Agreement, including indemnification, which
are appropriate to such a transaction. Each of the Co-Lead Underwriters would be entitled to
the same economics in respect of any engagement contemplated in this Section 4(s).
The Co-Lead Underwriters, on behalf of the Underwriters, may, in their sole discretion, waive in
writing the performance by the Company of any one or more of the foregoing covenants or extend
the time for their performance.
Section 5Payment of Expenses.
Whether or not the purchase and sale of the Units pursuant to this Agreement is completed, the
Company will pay all costs, expenses, fees and taxes incurred in connection with the purchase,
sale and delivery of the Units and the performance of its obligations hereunder and in connection
with the transactions contemplated hereby, including without limitation, the following:
(a)
the preparation and filing of the Registration Statement (including the Financial Statements,
exhibits, schedules, consents and certificates of experts), the Time of Sale Prospectus, the
Prospectuses, each free writing prospectus prepared by or on behalf of, used by, or referred to
by the Company and any amendments or supplements thereto, including the printing and
furnishing of copies of each thereof to the Underwriters and to dealers (including costs of
mailing and shipment);
-40-
(b)
the registration, issue, sale and delivery of the Units, including any stock or transfer taxes and
stamp or similar duties payable upon the sale, issuance or delivery of the Units to the
Underwriters;
(c)
the producing, word processing and/or printing of this Agreement, any agreement among
Underwriters, any dealer agreements, any powers of attorney and any closing documents
(including compilations thereof) and the reproduction and/or printing and furnishing of copies
of each thereof to the Underwriters and to dealers (including costs of mailing and shipment);
(d)
all filing fees, attorneys’ fees and expenses incurred by the Company in connection with
qualifying or registering (or obtaining exemptions from the qualification or registration of) all or
any part of the Units for offer and sale under the U.S. Securities Laws or Canadian Securities
Laws, and, if reasonably requested by the Co-Lead Underwriters, preparing, printing and
furnishing copies of any blue sky surveys or legal investment surveys to the Underwriters and
to dealers, or other memorandum and any supplements thereto, advising the Underwriters of
such qualifications, registrations and exemptions;
(e)
all fees and expenses of the Company’s counsel, independent public or certified public
accountants and other advisors of the Company;
(f)
the reasonable legal fees and filing fees and other disbursements of Canadian and U.S.
counsel for the Underwriters;
(g)
the fees and expenses associated with the listing of the Unit Shares, Warrant Shares,
Additional Unit Shares and Additional Warrant Shares;
(h)any filing for review of the public offering of the Units by FINRA;
(i)the fees and disbursements of any transfer agent or registrar for the Units;
(j)
the reasonable costs and expenses of the Underwriters relating to presentations or meetings
undertaken in connection with the marketing of the offering and sale of the Units to prospective
investors and the Underwriters’ sales forces (including reasonable travel and related
expenses);
(k)
the costs and expenses of qualifying the Unit Shares, the Warrant Shares, the Additional Unit
Shares and the Additional Warrant Shares for inclusion in the book-entry settlement systems
of DTC and CDS; and
-41-
(l)the performance of the Company’s other obligations hereunder,
including Canadian federal goods and services tax and provincial sales tax eligible in respect of
any of the foregoing. All such expenses incurred by or on behalf of the Underwriters shall be
payable by the Company within 30 days of the receipt of an invoice in respect thereof.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the fees and expenses payable by the Company to the
Underwriters pursuant to subparagraph (f) and (j) above shall not exceed US$150,000. Except as
provided in this Section 5, the Underwriters shall pay their own expenses, including the fees and
disbursements of their counsel, transfer taxes on resale of any Units by them, and any advertising
expenses in connection with any offers of Units that they may make following the Closing Date.
Section 6Conditions to the Obligations of the Underwriters.
The obligations of the Underwriters to purchase and pay for the Firm Units, and if applicable, the
Additional Units, as provided herein on the Closing Date shall be subject to the accuracy of the
representations and warranties on the part of the Company set forth in Section 3 as of the date
hereof and as of the Closing Date, to the timely performance by the Company of its covenants
and other obligations of the Company hereunder, and to each of the following additional
conditions precedent:
(a)
Opinion and 10b-5 Statement of United States Counsel for the Company. On the Closing
Date, the Underwriters and CF US shall have received an opinion and Rule 10b-5 negative
assurance statement of Dorsey & Whitney LLP, and with regard to any United States
subsidiary opinions from such counsel as the Company may designate, addressed to the
Underwriters and CF US, and dated the Closing Date, in the form and substance as may be
reasonably satisfactory to counsel for the Underwriters.
Canadian Securities Law Opinion. The Underwriters and CF US receiving a favourable
(b)
legal opinion of Borden Ladner Gervais LLP, Canadian counsel to the Company, addressed to
the Underwriters, CF US and counsel to the Underwriters, dated as of the Closing Date, as to
the qualification of the Units for sale to the public and as to other matters governed by the laws
of the Qualifying Jurisdictions, provided that Borden Ladner Gervais LLP shall be entitled to
rely exclusively upon the opinions of local counsel as to matters governed by the laws of any
Qualifying Jurisdictions in which it is not qualified to practice, in each case in a form
acceptable in all reasonable respects to counsel to the Underwriters.
(c)
Title Opinion. The Underwriters and CF US receiving a favourable legal opinion (in
customary form and dated within three business days of the Closing Date) from Australian
counsel to the Corporation as to title matters in respect of the Material Property, in a form
acceptable in all reasonable respects to counsel to the Underwriters.
-42-
(d)
Accountants’ Comfort Letters. The Co-Lead Underwriters and CF US shall have received
from EKS&H LLLP, independent public or certified public accountants for the Company, (i)
letters dated, respectively, the date of the Prospectus Supplements, and addressed to the
Underwriters and CF US and the board of directors of the Company, in form and substance
reasonably satisfactory to the Co-Lead Underwriters, containing statements and information of
the type ordinarily included in accountant’s “comfort letters” to underwriters which letters shall
cover with respect to the Financial Statements, including without limitation, certain financial
and accounting disclosures contained or incorporated by reference in the Registration
Statement, the Prospectuses and the Prospectus Supplements, and (ii) confirming that they
are independent public, certified public or chartered accountants as required by the Securities
Act.
(e)
Bring-down Comfort Letters. On the Closing Date, the Co-Lead Underwriters and CF US
shall have received from EKS&H LLLP, independent public or certified public accountants for
the Company, a letter dated such date, and addressed to the Underwriters and the board of
directors of the Company, in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the Co-Lead
Underwriters, to the effect that they reaffirm the statements made in the letters furnished by
them pursuant to Section 6(d), except that the specified date referred to therein for the carrying
out of procedures shall be no more than two (2) business days prior to the Closing Date.
(f)Company Compliance with Prospectus and Registration Requirements; No Stop Order.
For the period from and after effectiveness of this Agreement and prior to the Closing Date:
(i)
the U.S. Prospectus shall have been filed with the SEC in the manner and within the time
period required by the Securities Act, and the Canadian Prospectus shall have been filed with
the Canadian Commissions in each of the Qualifying Jurisdictions and in accordance with the
Canadian Securities Laws, and a receipt obtained therefor;
(ii)
no stop order suspending the effectiveness of the Registration Statement, or any post-effective
amendment to the Registration Statement, shall be in effect and no proceedings for such
purpose shall have been instituted or threatened by the SEC;
(iii)
no order preventing or suspending the use of the Canadian Prospectus shall have been
issued and no proceeding for that purpose shall have been initiated or threatened by any
Canadian Commission or other securities regulatory authority in Canada;
(iv)
no order, ruling, determination having the effect of suspending the issuance, sale, exercise or
conversion or ceasing the trading of the Common Shares or securities convertible into
Common Shares, or any other securities of the Company shall have been issued by any
Governmental Authority in Canada or the United States and no proceedings for that purpose
shall have been instituted or shall be pending or, to the knowledge of the Company, shall be
contemplated or threatened by any such court, securities regulatory authority or stock
exchange;
-43-
(v)
the Canadian Prospectus Supplement shall have been filed with the Canadian Commissions
in each of the Qualifying Jurisdictions in accordance with the Shelf Procedures and a U.S.
Prospectus Supplement shall have been filed with the SEC;
the Registration Statement and all amendments thereto shall not contain an untrue statement
of a material fact or omit to state a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary to
make the statements therein not misleading; and (a) neither the Prospectuses nor any
amendment or supplement thereto, shall include a misrepresentation or an untrue statement
of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the statements
therein, in the light of the circumstances under which they are made, not misleading, (b) no
Time of Sale Prospectus, and no amendment or supplement thereto, shall include an untrue
statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the
statements therein, in the light of the circumstances under which they are made, not
misleading and (c) none of the free writing prospectuses, if any, shall include an untrue
(vi)
statement of a material fact or, omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the
statements therein, in the light of the circumstances under which they are made, not
misleading; and
(vii)
all requests for additional information on the part of the SEC or any Canadian Commission
shall have been complied with.
(g)
No Material Adverse Effect. For the period from the date of this Agreement and to and
including the Closing Date, in the judgment of the Co-Lead Underwriters, there shall not have
occurred any Material Adverse Effect.
(h)
Officers’ Certificate. On the Closing Date, the Underwriters and CF US shall have received a
written certificate, addressed to the Underwriters and CF US, executed by the President and
Chief Executive Officer of the Company and the Chief Financial Officer of the Company, in
each case, in such capacity and not in his personal capacity, dated as of the Closing Date, to
the effect that the conditions set forth in Section 6(f) have been met, and further to the effect
that:
(i)
the representations, warranties and covenants of the Company set forth in Section 3 of this
Agreement are true and correct in all material respects with the same force and effect as though
expressly made on and as of such Closing Date, except that any representations and
warranties qualified by materiality or “Material Adverse Effect” shall be true and correct in all
respects;
-44-
(ii)
as at the Closing Date, no order, ruling or determination having the effect of ceasing or
suspending trading in the Common Shares or any securities convertible into Common Shares
has been issued and no proceedings for such purpose are pending or, to the best of the
knowledge, information and belief of the person signing such certificate, are contemplated or
threatened; and
(iii)
the Company has complied with all the agreements hereunder and satisfied all the conditions
on its part to be performed or satisfied hereunder at or prior to such Closing Date.
(i)
Certificates of the Company. The Underwriters having received certificates dated the Closing
Date, addressed to the Underwriters and CF US, signed by the Corporate Secretary of the
Company, in such capacity and not personally, in form and content satisfactory to the
Underwriters, acting reasonably, with respect to:
(i)the constating documents and articles of the Company;
(ii)
the resolutions of the directors of the Company relevant to the distribution of the Units in each
of the Qualifying Jurisdictions and in the United States, allotment, issue (or reservation for
issue) and sale of the Units, the authorization of this Agreement, and the other agreements and
transactions contemplated by this Agreement; and
(iii)the incumbency and signatures of signing officers of the Company.
(j)
Good Standing. The Co-Lead Underwriters shall have received on and as of the day prior to
the Closing Date, satisfactory evidence of the good standing of the Company and its Material
Subsidiaries in their respective jurisdictions of organization, in each case in writing or any
standard form of telecommunication from the appropriate Governmental Authorities of such
jurisdictions.
(k)
Listing. The Unit Shares, Warrant Shares, Additional Unit Shares, Additional Warrant Shares
and Underwriter Warrant Shares shall have been conditionally approved for listing on the TSX
and approved for listing on the NYSE MKT, subject, in the case of the TSX, to the fulfillment of
the usual post-closing requirements and, in the case of the NYSE MKT, only to notice of
issuance at or prior to the Closing Date.
(l)
Warrant Indenture. The Warrant Indenture shall have been executed and delivered by the
Company and Computershare Trust Company of Canada in form and substance satisfactory to
the Co-Lead Underwriters and their counsel, acting reasonably.
-45-
Lock-Up Agreements from Directors and Officers of the Company. On or prior to the
Closing Date, the Company shall have furnished to the Co-Lead Underwriters an agreement
(m)in the form of Exhibit “B” hereto from each of the persons listed on Exhibit “A” hereto, and such
agreement shall be in full force and effect on the Closing Date.
(n)
Certificate of Transfer Agent. The Company having delivered to the Underwriters on the
Closing Date, as the case may be, a certificate of Computershare Investor Services Inc. as
registrar and transfer agent of the Common Shares, which certifies the number of Common
Shares issued and outstanding on the date prior to the Closing Date.
(o)No Termination. The Underwriters shall not have previously terminated their obligations
pursuant to Section 8 of this Agreement.
(p)
Additional Documents. On or before the Closing Date, the Co-Lead Underwriters and
counsel for the Underwriters shall have received such information and other customary closing
documents as they may reasonably request for the purposes of enabling them to pass upon
the issuance and sale of the Units as contemplated herein, or in order to evidence the
accuracy of any of the representations and warranties, or the satisfaction of any of the
conditions or agreements, herein contained; and all proceedings taken by the Company in
connection with the issuance and sale of the Units as contemplated herein and in connection
with the other transactions contemplated by this Agreement shall be reasonably satisfactory in
form and substance to the Co-Lead Underwriters and counsel for the Underwriters.
If any condition specified in this Section 6 is not satisfied when and as required to be satisfied,
this Agreement may be terminated by the Co-Lead Underwriters by notice to the Company at any
time on or prior to the Closing Date, which termination shall be without liability on the part of any
party to any other party, except that Section 5, Section 6 and Section 10 shall at all times be
effective and shall survive such termination.
Section 7Representations, Warranties and Covenants of the Underwriters.
(1)               The Underwriters hereby severally, and not jointly, nor jointly and severally, represent
and warrant to the Corporation, the following:
(a)
Registration. The Underwriters are, and will remain so, until the completion of the Offering,
appropriately registered under applicable Securities Laws so as to permit it to lawfully fulfill its
obligations hereunder.
(b)
Authority. The Underwriters have good and sufficient right and authority to enter into this
Agreement and complete the transactions contemplated under this Agreement on the terms
and conditions set forth herein in all material respects and this Agreement has been duly
authorized, executed and delivered by each of the Underwriters and is a legal, valid and
binding agreement of the Underwriters enforceable in accordance with its terms, except to the
extent that enforceability may be limited by bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium
or similar laws affecting creditors' rights generally and by general equitable principles.
-46-
(2)               Each Underwriter, severally and not jointly, covenants with the Company, after the
Closing Date, that the Underwriters will (a) use their reasonable best efforts to complete the
distribution of the Units as promptly as possible and in any event on or before August 10, 2016
and (b) give prompt written notice to the Company or its counsel when, in the opinion of the
Underwriters, they have completed distribution of the Units, and, as soon as practicable but in
any event not later than August 10, 2016, will provide the Company or its counsel in writing, with
a breakdown of the number of Units distributed in each of the Qualifying Jurisdictions and in the
United States where that breakdown is required by a Canadian Commission or the SEC, as the
case may be, for the purpose of calculating fees payable to, or making filings with, that Canadian
Commission or the SEC, as the case may be.
(3)               Each Underwriter, severally and not jointly, covenants with the Company, that it will
comply with applicable Securities Laws in connection with the offer and sale and distribution of
the Units and will use its commercially reasonable efforts to ensure that all members of any
selling dealer group will likewise comply with Canadian Securities Laws and U.S. Securities
Laws.
(4)               No Underwriter shall be liable to the Company under this Section 7 with respect to a
default by any of the other Underwriters.
(5)               Each Underwriter, severally and not jointly, covenants with the Company not to take
any action that would result in the Company being required to file with the SEC pursuant to Rule
433(d) under the Securities Act a free writing prospectus prepared by or on behalf such
Underwriter that otherwise would not be required to be filed by the Company thereunder but for
the action of the Underwriter.
Section 8Termination of this Agreement.
(1)               In addition to any other remedies which may be available to the Underwriters, each
Underwriter shall be entitled, at such Underwriter’s sole option, to terminate and cancel, without
any liability on such Underwriter’s part, its obligations under this Agreement if, at any time prior to
the Closing Date:
(a)
Litigation. Any inquiry, action, suit, investigation or other proceeding, whether formal or
informal, is commenced, announced or threatened or any order is made by any Governmental
Authority in Canada, the United States or elsewhere, including, without limitation, the TSX or
the NYSE MKT, in relation to the Company or the Material Subsidiaries or the Company’s
directors and officers in their capacity as such with the Company which, in the sole opinion of
the Co-Lead Underwriters, acting reasonably, operates to prevent or restrict materially the
distribution or trading of the Units or any other securities of the Company in any of the
Qualifying Jurisdictions or the United States.
-47-
(b)
Financial-Out. Any change in the U.S., Canadian or international financial, political or
economic conditions or the effect of which is such as to make it, in the judgment of the Co-
Lead Underwriters, acting reasonably, impractical to market or to enforce contracts for the sale
of the Units, including without limitation, (i) if trading or quotation in any of the Company’s
securities shall have been suspended or limited by the SEC, or by the NYSE MKT or by any
Canadian Commission or by the TSX, or (ii) trading in securities generally on any of the NYSE
MKT or the TSX shall have been suspended or limited, or minimum or maximum prices shall
have been generally established on any of such stock exchanges by the SEC or FINRA, or (iii)
the declaration of any banking moratorium by any Canadian, U.S. federal or New York
authorities, or (iv) any major disruption of settlements of securities or payment or clearance
services in the United States or Canada where the securities of the Company are listed.
Disaster Out. There should develop, occur or come into effect or existence any attack on,
outbreak or escalation of hostilities or act of terrorism involving Canada, the United States or
Australia, any declaration of war by the United States Congress, any other national or
international calamity or emergency, or any governmental action, change of Applicable Law
(or in the judicial interpretation thereof), if, in the judgment of the Co-Lead Underwriters, the
effect of any such attack, outbreak, escalation, act, declaration, calamity, emergency or
governmental action, or change is material and adverse such as to make it impractical or
inadvisable to proceed with the offering of the Units or to enforce contracts for the sale of the
Units on the Closing Date, on the terms and in the manner contemplated by this Agreement,
the Time of Sale Prospectus and each of the Applicable Prospectuses or might be expected to
have a significant adverse effect on the state of financial markets in Canada or the United
(c)
States or the business, operations, management or capital of the Company or the market price
or value of the Common Shares.
(d)
Material Adverse Effect. There should occur or be announced by the Company and its
Material Subsidiaries taken as a whole, any Material Adverse Effect or a change in any
material fact, or there should be discovered any previously undisclosed material fact (other
than a material fact related solely to the Underwriters or any of their affiliates) required to be
disclosed in any Applicable Prospectus, which results, or in the sole judgment of the Co-Lead
Underwriters, is reasonably expected to result, in purchasers of a material number of Units
exercising their right under applicable legislation to withdraw from their purchase of the Units,
or, in the judgment of the Co-Lead Underwriters, acting reasonably, has or may be expected to
have a significant adverse effect on the market price or value of the Units.
-48-
(2)               The Company agrees that all representations, warranties, terms and conditions of this
Agreement (including the conditions in Section 6) shall be construed as conditions and complied
with so far as they relate to acts to be performed or caused to be performed by it, that it will use its
commercially reasonable efforts to cause such representations, warranties, terms and conditions
not to be breached and to be complied with, and that any material breach (or in the case of any
representation, warranty, term or condition qualified by materiality, any breach) or failure by it to
comply with any such conditions shall entitle any Underwriter to terminate its obligations under
this Agreement by notice to that effect given to the Company and the Co-Lead Underwriters at or
prior to the Closing Date, unless otherwise expressly provided in this Agreement.
(3)               The rights of termination contained in this Section 8 may be exercised by the
Underwriters (or any of them) and are in addition to any other rights or remedies that the
Underwriters may have in respect of any default, act or failure to act or non-compliance by the
Company in respect of any of the matters contemplated by this Agreement or otherwise. In the
event of any such termination, there shall be no further liability or obligation on the part of an
Underwriter to the Company, or on the part of the Company to such Underwriter except in respect
of any liability or obligation under any of Section 5 and Section 10 hereof which shall at all times
remain in full force and effect and shall survive such termination.
Section 9Obligation to Purchase.
(1)               Subject to the terms of this Agreement, the obligation of the Underwriters to purchase
the Firm Units or the Additional Units, if applicable, at the Closing Date, shall be several and not
joint and several and shall be limited to the number and equivalent percentage of the Firm Units
or the Additional Units, if applicable, set out opposite the name of the Underwriters respectively
below (subject to such adjustment as the Co-Lead Underwriters may determine to eliminate
fractional shares):
Number of Firm Units  Percentage 
 
  
 
 
%
Cantor Fitzgerald Canada Corporation
   4,568,750
%
Rodman & Renshaw a unit of H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC   4,568,750
Sprott Private Wealth LP
%
%
Roth Capital Partners, LLC
%
Jett Capital Advisors, LLC
 
%
42.5
    42.5
    5.0
    5.0
    5.0
    100.0
537,500
   537,500
   537,500
   10,750,000
-49-
(2)               If, on the Closing Date, any one or more of the Underwriters shall fail or refuse to
purchase the Units that it or they have agreed to purchase hereunder on such date, and the
aggregate number of Units which such defaulting Underwriter or Underwriters agreed but failed
or refused to purchase does not exceed 10% of the aggregate number of the Units to be
purchased on such date, the Co-Lead Underwriters may make arrangements satisfactory to the
Company for the purchase of such Units by other persons, including any of the Underwriters, but
if no such arrangements are made by the Closing Date, the other Underwriters shall be obligated,
severally and not jointly, in the proportions that the number of Units set forth opposite their
respective names in this Section 9 bears to the aggregate number of Units set forth opposite the
names of all such non-defaulting Underwriters, or in such other proportions as may be specified
by the Co-Lead Underwriters with the consent of the non-defaulting Underwriters, to purchase the
Units which such defaulting Underwriter or Underwriters agreed but failed or refused to purchase
on such date. If, on the Closing Date, any one or more of the Underwriters shall fail or refuse to
purchase the Units and the aggregate number of Units with respect to which such default occurs
exceeds 10% of the aggregate number of Units to be purchased on such date, and arrangements
satisfactory to the Co-Lead Underwriters and the Company for the purchase of such Units are not
made within 48 hours after such default, this Agreement shall terminate without liability of any
party to any other party (other than the defaulting underwriter, who shall remain liable to the
Company) except that the provisions of Section 5 and Section 10 shall at all times be effective
and shall survive such termination. In any such case either the Co-Lead Underwriters or the
Company shall have the right to postpone the Closing Date, but in no event past 9:00 a.m.
(Toronto time) on August 9, 2016 in order that the required changes, if any, to the Registration
Statement and the Prospectuses or any other documents or arrangements may be effected.
(3)               As used in this Agreement, the term “Underwriter” shall be deemed to include any
person substituted for a defaulting Underwriter under this Section 9. Any action taken under this
Section 9 shall not relieve any defaulting Underwriter from liability in respect of any default of
such Underwriter under this Agreement.
Section 10             Indemnification.
(1)               The Company (referred in this Section 10 as the “Company Indemnifying Party”)
agrees to indemnify and save harmless each of the Underwriters, CF US and their respective
affiliates and each of their respective directors, officers, partners, members, employees,
shareholders and agents, and each person, if any, who controls the Underwriters within the
meaning of Section 15 of the Securities Act or Section 20 of the 1934 Act (each referred to in this
Section 10 as an “Underwriter Indemnified Party”) from and against all liabilities, claims,
losses (other than loss of profits in connection with the distribution of the Units), actions, suits,
proceedings, charges, reasonable costs, damages and reasonable expenses which an
Underwriter Indemnified Party may suffer or incur or be subject to, including all amounts paid to
settle actions or satisfy judgments or awards and all reasonable legal fees and expenses that
may be incurred in advising with respect to investigating or defending any Claim (as defined in
Section 10(3)), in any way caused by, or arising directly or indirectly from, or in consequence of:
(a)
any information or statement contained in the Registration Statement, the Prospectuses, any
issuer free writing prospectus or any Supplementary Material related thereto, or in any
certificate or other document of the Company or of any officer of the Company or any of its
Material Subsidiaries delivered hereunder or pursuant hereto which contains or is alleged to
contain a misrepresentation;
-50-
(b)
any omission or alleged omission to state in the Registration Statement, the Prospectuses,
any issuer free writing prospectus, any marketing materials or any Supplementary Material
related thereto, or any certificate or other document of the Company or any officer of the
Company or any of the Material Subsidiaries delivered hereunder or pursuant hereto any fact,
whether material or not required to be stated therein or necessary to make any statement
therein not misleading in light of the circumstances under which it was made;
any order made or any inquiry, investigation or proceedings commenced or threatened by any
securities commission, stock exchange or other Governmental Authority based upon any
(c)
actual or alleged untrue statement, omission or misrepresentation in the Prospectuses, the
Registration Statement, any issuer free writing prospectus, any marketing materials or any
Supplementary Material or based upon any actual or alleged failure to comply with Canadian
Securities Laws or U.S. Securities Laws, preventing or restricting the trading in of the Firm
Shares, Warrant Shares, Additional Unit Shares or Additional Warrant Shares or the
distribution of the Units or any other securities of the Company;
(d)
the non-compliance or alleged non-compliance by the Company with any requirement of
Canadian Securities Laws or U.S. Securities laws in any of the Qualifying Jurisdictions or in
the United States or any state therein in connection with the transactions herein contemplated
including the Company’s non-compliance or alleged non-compliance with any statutory
requirement to make any document available for inspection; or
(e)
any breach of any representation or warranty of the Company contained herein or in any
certificate or other document of the Company or of any officers of the Company or any of the
Material Subsidiaries delivered hereunder or pursuant hereto or the failure of the Company to
comply with any of its obligations hereunder,
provided, however, that the foregoing indemnity shall not apply to any loss, liability, claim,
damage or expense to the extent arising out of any untrue statement or omission or alleged
untrue statement or omission made solely in reliance upon and in conformity with written
information relating to the Underwriters furnished to the Company by the Underwriters expressly
for use in the Prospectus Supplements or Time of Sale Prospectus, or any such amendment or
supplement thereto, or any issuer free writing prospectus, and further provided that the
Corporation will not be responsible for any portion of any Claim in the event and to the extent that
a court of competent jurisdiction, in a final judgment that has become non-appealable,
determines that such portion of such Claim has resulted primarily from the fraud, fraudulent
misrepresentation, wilful misconduct or gross negligence of an Underwriter Indemnified Party,
and such Underwriter Indemnified Party shall promptly reimburse the Corporation for any
amounts advanced to such Indemnified Party pursuant to this Section 10(1) in respect of such
Claim; for greater certainty, the Corporation and the Underwriters agree that they do not intend
that any failure by the Underwriters to conduct such reasonable investigation as necessary to
provide the Underwriters with reasonable grounds for believing the the Registration Statement,
the Prospectuses or the Time of Sale Prospectuses contained no misrepresentation shall
constitute “gross negligence” for purposes of this Article 10 or otherwise disentitle the
Underwriters from indemnification hereunder.
-51-
(2)               Each Underwriter, severally and not jointly (each referred to in this Section 10 as the
“Underwriter Indemnifying Party”), agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Company and its
directors and each officer and director of the Company who signed the US Prospectus or the
Canadian Prospectus, and each person, if any, who controls the Company within the meaning of
Section 15 of the Securities Act or Section 20 of the Exchange Act (each such person referred to
in this Section 10 as the “Company Indemnified Party”) against any and all loss, liability, claim,
damage and expense described in the indemnity contained in Section 10(1), as incurred, but
only with respect to untrue statements or omissions, or alleged untrue statements or omissions,
made in the Prospectus Supplements or Time of Sale Prospectus (or any amendment or
supplement thereto) in reliance upon and in conformity with information relating to such
Underwriter and furnished to the Company in writing by such Underwriter expressly for use
therein. The Company hereby acknowledges that the only information that the Underwriters have
furnished to the Company expressly for use in the Prospectus Supplements or Time of Sale
Prospectus (or any amendment or supplement thereto) are the statements set forth in the ninth
and sixteenth paragraphs under the caption “Plan of Distribution” in the Canadian Prospectus
Supplement.
(3)               If any matter or thing contemplated by this Section 10 (any such matter or thing being
hereinafter referred to as a “Claim”) is asserted against either the Underwriter Indemnified Party
or the Company Indemnified Party (as the context requires, the “Indemnified Party”), the
Indemnified Party shall notify the Company Indemnifying Party or the Underwriter Indemnifying
Party (as the context requires, the “Indemnifying Party”) as soon as practicable, of such Claim to
the extent allowable by Applicable Law (provided, however, that failure to provide such notice
shall not affect the Indemnified Party’s right to indemnification hereunder, except (and only) to the
extent of material prejudice (through the forfeiture of substantive rights and defenses) to the
Indemnifying Party therefrom) and the Indemnifying Party shall be entitled (but not required) to
assume the defence of any suit, action or proceeding brought to enforce such Claim; provided,
however, that the defence shall be conducted through legal counsel acceptable to the
Indemnified Party and that no admission of liability or settlement of any such Claim may be made
by the Indemnifying Party or the Indemnified Party without the prior written consent of the other.
(4)               In any such Claim, the Indemnified Party shall have the right to retain separate
counsel to act on its behalf provided that the fees and disbursements of such counsel shall be
paid by the Indemnified Party unless:
-52-
the Indemnifying Party fails to assume the defence of such Claim on behalf of the Indemnified
Party within five (5) business days of receiving notice thereof or, having assumed such
defence, has failed to engage counsel promptly or who is acceptable to the Indemnified
(a)
Parties, or has failed to pursue it diligently;
(b)
the Indemnifying Party and the Indemnified Party shall have mutually agreed to the retention of
the other counsel; or
(c)
the named parties to the Claim (including any added, third parties or interpleaded parties)
include the Indemnifying Party, and the Indemnifying Parties has been advised by counsel
(including internal counsel) that there are legal defences available to such Indemnified Party
that are different or in addition to those available to the Indemnifying Party, that representation
of the Indemnified Party by counsel for the Indemnifying Party is inappropriate as a result of the
potential or actual conflicting interests of those represented, or where in such Indemnified
Party’s reasonable judgment, the Claim gives rise to a conflict of interest between the
Indemnifying Party and such Indemnified Party;
in each of cases Section 10(4)(a), Section 10(4)(b) and Section 10(4)(c), the Indemnifying Party
will not have the right to assume the defence of the suit on behalf of such Indemnified Party, but
the Indemnifying Party will be liable to pay the fees and expenses of separate counsel for all
Indemnified Parties and, in addition, of local counsel in each applicable jurisdiction.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no settlement may be made by an Indemnified Party without the
prior written consent of the Indemnifying Party, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld,
conditioned or delayed.
(5)               In order to provide for a just and equitable contribution in circumstances in which the
indemnity provided in Section 10(1) or Section 10(2) would otherwise be available in accordance
with its terms but is, for any reason, held to be unavailable to or unenforceable by the Indemnified
Party or enforceable otherwise than in accordance with its terms or is insufficient to hold the
Indemnified Party harmless, the Indemnifying Party shall contribute to the aggregate of all claims,
expenses, costs and liabilities and all losses (other than loss of profits in connection with the
distribution of the Units) of the nature contemplated in this Section 10 and suffered or incurred by
the Indemnified Parties in such proportions as is appropriate to reflect the relative benefits
received by the Company on the one hand and the Underwriters on the other hand from the
distribution of the Units as well as the relative fault of the parties in connection with the Claim or
Claims which resulted in such claims, expenses, costs, damages, liabilities or losses, as well as
any other equitable considerations determined by a court of competent jurisdiction; provided that:
(i) no Underwriter shall in any event be liable to contribute, in the aggregate, any amount in
excess of the aggregate fee or any portion thereof actually received by such Underwriter
hereunder; and (ii) no party who has been determined by a court of competent jurisdiction in a
final judgment that has become non-appealable to have engaged in any fraud, fraudulent
misrepresentation, wilful misconduct or gross negligence in connection with the Claim or Claims
which resulted in such claims, expenses, costs, damages, liabilities or losses shall be entitled to
claim contribution from any person who has not been so determined to have engaged in such
fraud, fraudulent misrepresentation or gross negligence in connection with such Claim or Claims.
-53-
(6)               The rights of contribution and indemnity provided in this Section 10 shall be in
addition to and not in derogation of any other right to contribution and indemnity which the
Underwriters may have by statute or otherwise at law.
(7)               The Underwriters’ obligations to contribute pursuant to this Section 10 are several,
and not joint, in proportion to their respective underwriting commitments as set forth opposite their
respective names in Section 9 hereof.
(8)               In the event that any Company Indemnifying Party is held to be entitled to contribution
from the Underwriters under the provisions of any Applicable Law, the Company Indemnifying
Party shall be limited to contribution from each of the Underwriters in an amount not exceeding
the lesser of:
(a)
the portion of the full amount of the loss or liability giving rise to such contribution for which
each of the Underwriters is responsible, as determined above; and
(b)
the amount of the aggregate fee actually received by the Underwriters from the Company
hereunder, provided that no individual Underwriter shall be required to contribute more than
the fee actually received by such Underwriter.
(9)               If the Underwriters have reason to believe that a claim for contribution may arise, they
shall give the Indemnifying Party notice thereof in writing, but failure to notify the Indemnifying
Party shall not relieve the Indemnifying Party of any obligation which it may have to the
Underwriters under this Section 10, except (and only) to the extent of material prejudice (through
the forfeiture of substantive rights and defenses) to the Indemnifying Party therefrom.
(10)           With respect to this Section 10, the Company acknowledges and agrees that the
Underwriters are contracting on their own behalf and as agents for their respective affiliates,
directors, officers, employees and agents, and each person, if any, controlling any Underwriter or
any of its subsidiaries and each shareholder of any Underwriter. Accordingly, the Company
hereby constitutes the Underwriters as agents for each person who is entitled to the covenants of
the Company contained in this Section 10 and is not a party hereto and the Underwriters agree to
accept such agents and to hold in trust for and to enforce such covenants on behalf of such
persons.
-54-
Section 11Notification to the Underwriters.
The Company undertakes to notify the Co-Lead Underwriters immediately if it comes to its
knowledge at any time up to the Closing Date that any of the representations and warranties of
the Company in this Agreement was not true or accurate or was misleading in any material
respect when given or made or has ceased to be true or accurate in any material respect or has
become misleading by reference to the facts or circumstances from time to time subsisting and of
all other information of which it becomes aware which may give rise to an obligation to prepare
and file Supplementary Material. If, at any time prior to the Closing Date, the Co-Lead
Underwriters shall receive notification pursuant to this section or they shall otherwise become
aware that any of the representations and warranties in this Agreement is or has become or is
likely to become untrue, inaccurate or misleading in any material respect, the Co-Lead
Underwriters may (without prejudice to their right to terminate their obligations under this
Agreement pursuant to Section 8) require the Company at its own expense to make or cause to
be made such announcement as the Underwriters may reasonably determine.
Section 12Representations, Warranties and Covenants to Survive Delivery.
The representations, warranties and covenants (including indemnities) of the Company and the
Underwriters contained in this Agreement and in any certificate delivered pursuant to this
Agreement or in connection with the purchase and sale of the Units shall survive the delivery of
and payment for the Units sold hereunder and shall continue in full force and effect unaffected by
any subsequent disposition of the Units by the Underwriters or the termination of the
Underwriters’ obligations and shall not be limited or prejudiced by any investigation made by or
on behalf of the Underwriters in connection with the preparation of the Prospectuses, any
amendments or supplements related thereto or the distribution of the Units.
Section 13No Advisory or Fiduciary Relationship.
The Company acknowledges and agrees that (a) the purchase and sale of the Units pursuant to
this Agreement, including the determination of the Offering Price of the Units and any related
discounts and commissions, is an arm’s-length commercial transaction between the Company,
on the one hand, and the Underwriters, on the other hand, (b) in connection with the offering
contemplated hereby and the process leading to such transaction, each Underwriter is and has
been acting solely as a principal and is not the agent or fiduciary of the Company or its
shareholders, creditors, employees or any other party, (c) no Underwriter has assumed or will
assume an advisory or fiduciary responsibility in favour of the Company with respect to the
offering contemplated hereby or the process leading thereto (irrespective of whether such
Underwriter has advised or is currently advising the Company on other matters) and no
Underwriter has any obligation to the Company with respect to the offering contemplated hereby
except the obligations expressly set forth in this Agreement, (d) the Underwriters and their
respective affiliates may be engaged in a broad range of transactions that involve interests that
differ from those of the Company, and (e) the Underwriters have not provided any legal,
accounting, regulatory or tax advice with respect to the offering contemplated hereby and the
Company has consulted its own legal, accounting, regulatory and tax advisors to the extent it
deemed appropriate.
-55-
Section 14Notices.
All communications hereunder shall be in writing and shall be mailed, e-mailed, hand delivered,
or faxed and confirmed to the parties hereto as follows:
(a)If to the Underwriters and/or CF US:
Cantor Fitzgerald Canada Corporation
181 University Avenue, Suite 1500
Toronto, Ontario M5H 3M7
Attention: Graham Moylan
Facsimile Number: (416) 350-2985
 
and
 
H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC
430 Park Avenue, 4th Floor
New York, New York 10022
Attention: Craig Schwabe
Email: notices@hcwco.com
and
 
Cantor Fitzgerald & Co.
110 East 59th Street
New York, NY 10022
Attention: Legal Department
Facsimile Number: (212) 829-4708
 
with a copy (which shall not constitute notice) to:
 
Stikeman Elliott LLP
5300 Commerce Court West
199 Bay Street
Toronto, Ontario M5L 1B9
Attention: Simon Romano and Martin Langlois
Facsimile Number: (416) 947-0866
 
and
 
Cooley LLP
1114 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10036
Attention: Daniel I. Goldberg, Esq.
Facsimile Number: (212) 479-6275
-56-
(b)If to the Company:
Vista Gold Corp.
Suite 5, 7961 Shaffer Parkway
Littleton, Colorado
80127 USA
Attention: Mr. Frederick H. Earnest, President and Chief Executive Officer
Facsimile Number: (720) 981-1186
 
with a copy (which shall not constitute notice) to:
 
Borden Ladner Gervais LLP
1200 Waterfront Centre
200 Burrard Street
P.O. Box 48600
Vancouver, BC V7X 1T2
Attention: Melanie Bradley
Facsimile Number: (604) 622-5824
 
and
 
Dorsey & Whitney LLP
1400 Wewatta Street, Suite 400
Denver, CO 80202-5549
Attention: Jason K. Brenkert, Esq.
Facsimile Number: (303) 629-3450
Any party hereto may change the address for receipt of communications by giving written notice
to the others. The parties may change their respective addresses, e-mail addresses and facsimile
numbers for notice, by notice given in the manner aforesaid. Any such notification shall be
deemed to be effective when faxed or delivered, if faxed or delivered to the recipient on a
business day and before 3:00 p.m. (local time) on such business day, and otherwise shall be
deemed to be given at 9:00 a.m. (local time) on the next following business day.
Section 15Authority and Use of the Advice of the Co-Lead Underwriters.
The Company shall be entitled to rely and shall act on any notice, waiver, extension or other
communication given by or on behalf of the Underwriters by the Co-Lead Underwriters, who have
authority to bind the Underwriters with respect to all matters covered by this Agreement insofar as
such matters relate to the Underwriters, with the exception of matters arising under Section 10, or
notice of termination pursuant to Section 8, which notice may be given by any of the
Underwriters. The Company agrees that all written and oral opinions, advice, analysis and
materials provided by the Underwriters in connection with the offering and sale of the Units are
intended solely for the Company’s benefit and for the Company’s use only and the Company
covenants and agrees that no such opinions, advice or material will be used for any other
purpose whatsoever or reproduced, disseminated, quoted from or referred to in whole or in part at
any time, in any manner or for any purpose, without the prior consent of the Co-Lead
Underwriters in each specific circumstance.
-57-
Section 16Successors.
This Agreement will inure to the benefit of and be binding upon the parties hereto, including any
substitute Underwriters pursuant to Section 9 hereof, and to the benefit of the employees, officers
and directors and controlling persons referred to in Section 10 and in each case their respective
successors and personal representatives, and no other person will have any right or obligation
hereunder. The term “successors” shall not include any purchaser of the Units as such from any
of the Underwriters merely by reason of such purchase.
Section 17Time of the Essence.
Time shall be of the essence of this Agreement.
Section 18Partial Unenforceability.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any Section, paragraph or provision of this Agreement shall
not affect the validity or enforceability of any other Section, paragraph or provision hereof. If any
Section, paragraph or provision of this Agreement is for any reason determined to be invalid or
unenforceable, there shall be deemed to be made such minor changes (and only such minor
changes) as are necessary to make it valid and enforceable.
Section 19Governing Law and Venue.
This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the Province
of British Columbia and the federal laws of Canada applicable therein governing contracts made
and to be performed wholly therein and without reference to its principles governing the choice or
conflict of laws. The parties hereto irrevocably attorn and submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of
the courts of the Province of British Columbia, sitting in the City of Vancouver, with respect to any
dispute related to this Agreement.
Section 20Counterparts/Facsimile/Electronic Signatures.
This Agreement may be executed by any one or more of the parties to this Agreement in any
number of counterparts, each of which shall be deemed to be an original, but all such
counterparts shall together constitute one and the same instrument. The transmission by
facsimile or e-mail of a copy of the execution page hereof reflecting the execution of this
Agreement by any party hereto shall be effective to evidence that party’s intention to be bound by
this Agreement and that party’s agreement to the terms, provisions and conditions hereof, all
without the necessity of having to produce an original copy of such execution page.
Section 21CF US.
It is acknowledged and agreed that CF US is a U.S. affiliate of CFCC that will be selling the Units
in the United States on behalf of CFCC in accordance with Section 2(1) and is a party to this
Agreement for the purpose of receiving the benefit of the representations, warranties and
covenants made by the Company herein and enforcing the indemnity and contribution contained
in Section 10 hereof as an Indemnified Party.
-58-
Section 22General Provisions.
(1)               This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement of the parties to this Agreement and
supersedes all prior written or oral and all contemporaneous oral agreements, understandings
and negotiations with respect to the subject matter hereof. This Agreement may not be amended
or modified unless in writing by all of the parties hereto, and no condition herein (express or
implied) may be waived unless waived in writing by each party whom the condition is meant to
benefit. The Section headings herein are for the convenience of the parties only and shall not
affect the construction or interpretation of this Agreement.
(2)               The Company acknowledges that the Underwriters’ research analysts and research
departments are required to be independent from their respective investment banking divisions
and are subject to certain regulations and internal policies, and that such Underwriters’ research
analysts may hold and make statements or investment recommendations and/or publish research
reports with respect to the Company and/or the offering that differ from the views of its investment
bankers. The Company hereby waives and releases, to the fullest extent permitted by law, any
claims that the Company may have against the Underwriters with respect to any conflict of
interest that may arise from the fact that the views expressed by their independent research
analysts and research departments may be different from or inconsistent with the views or advice
communicated to the Company by such Underwriters’ investment banking divisions. The
Company acknowledges that each of the Underwriters is a full service securities firm and as such
from time to time, subject to applicable Canadian Securities Laws and U.S. Securities Laws, may
effect transactions for its own account or the account of its customers and hold long or short
position in debt or equity securities of the companies which may be the subject to the
transactions contemplated by this Agreement.
[Remainder of Page Intentionally Left Blank. Signature Page Follows]
The foregoing is agreed by the parties as of the date first mentioned above.
Name:
Title:
Chief Executive Officer
cantor fitzgerald canada 
corpORATION
  
 
 By:  (signed)  Laurence Rose 
  
Laurence Rose
President and Chief Executive Officer
  
 
  
  
 
 RODMAN & RENSHAW A UNIT OF
H.C. WAINWRIGHT & CO., LLC
  
 By: (signed) Mark W. Viklund
Name: Mark W. Viklund
  
Title:
  
  
 
  
 
 JETT CAPITAL ADVISORS, LLC
  
 By: (signed) Joseph Riggio
Joseph Riggio
  
  
Chief Executive Officer
 
  
  
 
 ROTH CAPITAL PARTNERS, LLC
  
 By: (signed) Aaron Gurewitz 
  
Name: Aaron Gurewitz
Title:
  
 
  
  
 
 SPROTT PRIVATE WEALTH LP
Head of Equity Capital Markets
Name:
Title:
By: (signed) Kristin McTaggart
  
Name: Kristin McTaggart
Title:
Director and Chief Compliance Officer
Acknowledged by CF US solely for the purpose of receiving the benefit of Section 22 of this
Agreement.
cantor fitzgerald & Co.
  
 By:  (signed)  Shawn Matthews
Name: Shawn Matthews
  
  
Title:
Chief Executive Officer
Accepted and agreed to as of this 2nd day of August, 2016.
VISTA GOLD CORP.
  
 By:  (signed)  Frederick H. Earnest
Name: Frederick H, Earnest
  
  
Title:
President and Chief Executive Officer
SCHEDULE “A”
MATERIAL SUBSIDIARIES
Vista Minerals (Barbados) Corp.Barbados100%
 
Vista Gold Australia Pty. Ltd.
Australia 100%
EXHIBIT “A” 
LIST OF PERSONS SUBJECT TO LOCK-UP
Directors
Michael B. Richings
John M. Clark
C. Thomas Ogryzlo
W. Durland Eppler
Tracey A. Stevenson
Frederick H. Earnest*
Senior Officers
Frederick H. Earnest*
John W. Rozelle
John F. Engele
Brent D. Murdoch
*Only one Lock-Up Agreement required
EXHIBIT “B” 
FORM OF LOCK-UP AGREEMENT
August ___, 2016
To:Cantor Fitzgerald Canada Corporation
Rodman & Renshaw a unit of H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC
(collectively, the “Co-Lead Underwriters”)
Re:Vista Gold Corp. – Lock-up Agreement
The undersigned understands that this lock-up agreement (the “Lock-Up Agreement”) is being
delivered to you in connection with the Underwriting Agreement dated August 2, 2016 (the
“Underwriting Agreement”) entered into by Vista Gold Corp. (the “Company”) and the
Underwriters (as defined in the Underwriting Agreement), with respect to the public offering (the
“Offering”) of units of the Company (the “Units”), each Unit consisting of one common share in
the capital of the Company (the “Common Shares”) and one-half of one common share
purchase warrant of the Company (the “Warrants”), each Warrant entitling the holder thereof to
purchase one Common Share.
In consideration of the benefit that the Offering will confer upon the undersigned as a [director
and/or officer] of the Company, and for other good and valuable consideration, the receipt and
sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged, the undersigned agrees that, in respect of Common
Shares owned directly or indirectly by the undersigned, or under control or direction of the
undersigned (including holding as a custodian) or with respect to which the undersigned has
beneficial ownership (as such term is used in Rule 13d-3 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934,
as amended, and the rules and regulations of the United States Securities and Exchange
Commission (the “SEC”) promulgated thereunder (the “Exchange Act”)) (collectively, the
“Locked-Up Securities”), during the period beginning from the date hereof and ending on the
day that is ninety (90) days following the date of the closing of the Offering (the “Lock-Up
Period”), the undersigned will not, without the prior written consent of the Co-Lead Underwriters,
which consent shall not be unreasonably delayed, conditioned or withheld, (i) issue, offer, sell
(including, without limitation, any short sale), contract or agree to sell, hypothecate, pledge, grant
any option to purchase or otherwise dispose of or agree to dispose of or transfer, directly or
indirectly, or establish or increase a “put equivalent position” or liquidate or decrease a “call
equivalent position” within the meaning of Section 16 of the Exchange Act with respect to, any
Locked-Up Securities, or any securities convertible into or exchangeable or exercisable for, or
warrants or other rights to purchase, the foregoing, (ii) except as permitted in Section 4(o) of the
Underwriting Agreement cause to become effective a registration statement under the United
States Securities Act of 1933, as amended, together with the rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder (the “Securities Act”), or to file a prospectus in Canada, relating to the offer and sale
of any Locked-Up Securities or securities convertible into or exercisable or exchangeable for
Locked-Up Securities or other rights to purchase Locked-Up Securities or any other securities of
the Company that are substantially similar to the Locked-Up Securities, or any securities
convertible into or exchangeable or exercisable for, or any warrants or other rights to purchase,
the foregoing, (iii) enter into any swap or other arrangement that transfers to another, in whole or
in part, any of the economic consequences of ownership of the Locked-Up Securities or any
other securities of the Company that are substantially similar to the Locked-Up Securities, or any
securities convertible into or exchangeable or exercisable for, or any warrants or other rights to
purchase, the foregoing, whether any such transaction is to be settled by delivery of Common
Shares or such other securities, in cash or otherwise or (iv) publicly announce an intention to
effect any transaction specified in clause (i), (ii) or (iii).
The foregoing paragraph shall not apply to (A) dispositions to any trust for the direct or indirect
benefit of the undersigned and/or the spouse, any lineal descendent, father, mother, brother or
sister of the undersigned, provided that such trust agrees in writing with the Underwriters to be
bound by the terms of this Lock-Up Agreement, (B) tenders pursuant to a bona fide third party
take-over bid made to all holders of Common Shares of the Company or similar acquisition
transaction provided that in the event that the take-over bid or acquisition transaction is not
completed, any Locked-Up Securities shall remain subject to the restrictions contained in this
Lock-Up Agreement, (C) any dispositions pursuant to any pre-existing 10b5-1 plans, (D) any
dispositions required to pay the exercise price of any stock options issued or outstanding under
the Company’s equity incentive compensation plans, or (E) any dispositions required for tax
withholdings in connection with the exercise or vesting of any stock options or restricted share
units issued or outstanding under the Company’s equity incentive compensation plans.
In addition, the undersigned hereby waives any and all pre-emptive rights, participation rights,
resale rights, rights of first refusal and similar rights that the undersigned may have in connection
with the Offering or with any issuance or sale by the Company of any equity or other securities in
connection with the Offering.
The undersigned hereby confirms that the undersigned has not, directly or indirectly, taken, and
hereby covenants that the undersigned will not, directly or indirectly, take, any action designed,
or which has constituted or will constitute or might reasonably be expected to cause or result in
the stabilization or manipulation of the price of any security of the Company to facilitate the sale
or resale of the Common Shares.
The undersigned understands that the Company and the Underwriters are relying upon this
Lock-Up Agreement in proceeding toward the consummation of the Offering. The undersigned
further understands that this Lock-Up Agreement is irrevocable and shall be binding upon the
undersigned’s legal representatives, successors, and assigns, and shall enure to the benefit of
the Company, the Underwriters and their legal representatives, successors and assigns.
The obligations of the undersigned pursuant to this Lock-Up Agreement may be waived in writing
in whole or in part by the Co-Lead Underwriters in their sole discretion.
This Lock-Up Agreement is governed by the laws of the Province of British Columbia and the
laws of Canada applicable therein.
Yours very truly,
Witness Name
Number of Common Shares subject to this Lock-Up Agreement