
S-1/A 1 energizerforms1-06182015.htm ENERGIZER RESOURCES INC. - S-1/A CA Filed by Filing
Services Canada Inc. 403-717-3898
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on July 29, 2015
Registration Statement No.333- 205104
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM S-1/A
Amendment No. 1
REGISTRATION STATEMENT UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
ENERGIZER RESOURCES INC.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Minnesota
 1041
(State or other jurisdiction of
(Primary Standard Industrial
 
incorporation or organization)
Classification Code Number)
20-0803515
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
520 – 141 Adelaide Street West, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5H 3L5
(416) 364-4911
(Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of registrant’s principal
executive offices)
Richard E. Schler
Chief Executive Officer
520 – 141 Adelaide Street West
Toronto, Ontario M5H 3L5
(416) 364-4911
(Name, address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of agent for service)
Copies to:
Kimberley Anderson
Dorsey & Whitney LLP
701 Fifth Ave., Suite 6100
Seattle, Washington 98104
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public: As soon as practicable after
this registration statement becomes effective
If any of the securities being registered on this Form are to be offered on a delayed or continuous basis
pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act of 1933 check the following box: [X]
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the
Securities Act, please check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number
of the earlier registration statement for the same offering. [_]
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act, check
the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective
registration statement for the same offering. [_]
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act, check
the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective
registration statement for the same offering. [_]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-
accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. (Check one):
Large Accelerated Filer [_] Accelerated Filer [_] Non-Accelerated Filer [_] Smaller Reporting Company
[X]
The Registrant hereby amends this Registration Statement on such date or dates as may be necessary
to delay its effective date until the Registrant shall file a further amendment which specifically states that
this Registration Statement shall thereafter become effective in accordance with Section 8(a) of the
Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or until the Registration Statement shall become effective on such
date as the Securities and Exchange Commission, acting pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine.
The information contained in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed. We may not sell
these securities until the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission is
effective. This prospectus is not an offer to sell these securities and we are not soliciting an offer to buy
these securities in any state where the offer or sale is not permitted.
Subject To Completion: Dated July 29, 2015
PRELIMINARY PROSPECTUS
ENERGIZER RESOURCES INC.
30,201,497 Common Shares and 10,067,166 Warrants Offered by Selling Security Holders
This prospectus relates to the sale by the selling security holders listed herein of up to 20,134,331 of our
common shares, par value $0.001 per share, 10,067,166 common share purchase warrants of our
company and 10,067,166 common shares issuable upon exercise of the common share purchase
warrants. The 20,134,331 shares and 10,067,166 common share purchase warrants being registered
will be issued upon the deemed exercise of 20,134,331 special warrants, which were purchased by the
selling security holders in a private placement completed on May 4, 2015. For a complete description of
the private placement, please see the section below entitled “Description of the May 2015 Private
Placement”.
The securities being registered include outstanding common shares, common share purchase warrants
exercisable at $0.14 per share, subject to adjustment, and common shares underlying the warrants.
The special warrants are not available for purchase pursuant to this prospectus and no additional funds
are to be received by us from the issuance of the common shares and warrants upon the deemed
exercise of the special warrants. There are currently no markets through which the special warrants or
warrants may be sold and none are expected to develop. This may affect the pricing of the warrants in
the secondary market, the transparency and availability of trading prices, the liquidity of the warrants,
and the extent of regulation. See “Risk Factors”.
The securities will be offered by the selling security holders at fixed prices, at the then-prevailing market
prices at the time of sale, at varying prices, or in negotiated transactions (See “Plan of Distribution”). Our
common shares are listed for trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange (the “TSX”) under the symbol
“EGZ”, the OTCQX Marketplace under the symbol “ENZR” and the Frankfurt Stock Exchange under the
symbol “A1CXW3”. On July 27, 2015, the closing price of the common shares on the TSX and OTCQX
Marketplace was CDN $0.065 and $0.05, respectively.
Each special warrant will be deemed to be automatically exercised on behalf of, and without any further
action or payment required on the part of, the holder thereof at 5:00 p.m. (Toronto time) on the earlier of
(the “Automatic Exercise Date”): (i) the third business day after the date a receipt is issued for a final
short form prospectus qualifying the distribution of the common shares and warrants by the securities
regulatory authorities in each of the provinces of Ontario and British Columbia and further provided that
we have filed and have in effect a resale registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part (the
“Qualification Date”); and (ii) November 4, 2015. See “Description of the May 2015 Private Placement”.
If we fail to obtain a final receipt for the final prospectus and file (and have in effect) the registration
statement by August 2, 2015, each special warrant shall thereafter entitle the holder to receive upon
exercise, for no additional consideration (the “Penalty Provision”), 1.1 common shares (instead of one
share) and 0.55 of one warrant (instead of 0.5 of one warrant). This prospectus also relates to the sale of
up to 2,013,433 shares, 1,006,716 warrants and 1,006,716 shares issuable upon exercise of such
warrants issuable pursuant to the Penalty Provision, if applicable, for a total of up to 22,147,764 shares,
11,073,882 warrants and 11,073,882 shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants.
We will not receive any proceeds from the sale of the common shares offered by the selling security
holders to the public. However, we will receive proceeds from the exercise of the warrants. The funds
that we receive are expected to be used to continue the development of the Molo Graphite Project and
for general corporate purposes. We have agreed to pay all of the costs of this offering, excluding
commissions and discounts regarding the sale of the common shares by the selling security holders.
Brokers or dealers effecting transactions in the shares should confirm the registration of these securities
under the securities laws of the states in which such transactions occur or the existence of an exemption
from such registration.
Certain selling security holders and any participating broker-dealers may be deemed to be
“underwriters” within the meaning of the Securities Act, and any commissions or discounts given to any
such broker-dealer may be regarded as underwriting commissions or discounts under the Securities Act
of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). See “Selling Security Holders” and “Plan of Distribution”.
Investing in our securities involves a high degree of risk. You should invest in the common
shares only if you can afford to lose your entire investment. See “Risk Factors” beginning on
page 9.
We may amend or supplement this prospectus from time to time by filing amendments or
supplements as required. You should read the entire prospectus and any amendments or
supplements carefully before you make your investment decision.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has
approved or disapproved of these securities or passed upon the adequacy or accuracy of this
prospectus. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
The date of this prospectus is , 2015
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
THE OFFERING
RISK FACTORS
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
PRICE RANGE OF COMMON SHARES
DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES
USE OF PROCEEDS
U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND OPERATING
RESULTS
BUSINESS
PROPERTIES
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
MANAGEMENT
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
TRANSFER AGENT AND REGISTRAR
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
6
7
9
15
17
23
18
22
28
33
35
52
52
55
65
65
66
66
66
You should rely only on the information contained in this prospectus. We have not authorized anyone to
provide you with information different from that contained in this prospectus. The distribution or
possession of this prospectus in or from certain jurisdictions may be restricted by law. This prospectus is
not an offer to sell these securities and is not soliciting an offer to buy these securities in any jurisdiction
where the offer or sale is not permitted or where the person making the offer or sale is not qualified to do
so or to any person to whom it is not permitted to make such offer or sale. The information contained in
this prospectus is accurate only as of the date of this prospectus, regardless of the time of delivery of this
prospectus or of any sale of our common shares. Our business, financial condition, results of operations
and prospects may have changed since that date.
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
This summary highlights information contained elsewhere in this prospectus and does not contain all of
the information you should consider before buying shares of our common shares. You should read the
entire prospectus carefully, especially the “Risk Factors” section and our consolidated financial
statements and the related notes appearing at the end of this prospectus, before deciding to invest in
shares of our common shares. Unless the context provides otherwise, all references to “Energizer,” “the
Company” “we,” us,” “our,” or similar terms, refer to Energizer Resources Inc. and its wholly owned
subsidiaries.
In this prospectus all references to “$” or “dollars” mean the U.S. dollar, and unless otherwise indicated
all currency amounts in this prospectus are stated in U.S. dollars. All references to “Cdn$” or “C$” refer to
the Canadian dollar. All financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States and are reported in U.S. dollars.
The Company
Corporate Structure
We were incorporated in the State of Nevada, United States of America on March 1, 2004 and
reincorporated in the State of Minnesota, United States of America on May 14, 2008.
We have has direct and indirect wholly-owned subsidiaries located in Mauritius (Energizer Resources
(Mauritius) Ltd., THB Venture Ltd. and Madagascar-ERG Joint Venture (Mauritius) Ltd.), Madagascar
(Energizer Resources Minerals Sarl, Energizer Resources Madagascar Sarl and ERG (Madagascar)
Sarl), and Ontario (2391938 Ontario Inc.).
Our principal business office, which also serves as our administration and financial office, is located at
141 Adelaide Street West, Suite 520, Toronto, Ontario, telephone (416) 364-4911.
Description of the Business
We are a mineral exploration and mine development company that is developing its feasibility-stage
Molo Graphite Project in southern Madagascar.
Our principal asset is the Molo Graphite Project. On December 14, 2011, we entered into a Definitive
Joint Venture Agreement with Malagasy Minerals Limited (“Malagasy”), a public company on the
Australian Stock Exchange, to acquire a 75% interest to explore and develop a group of industrial
minerals, including graphite, vanadium and approximately 25 other minerals. On October 24, 2013, the
Company signed a Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) with Malagasy to acquire the remaining
25% interest in the land position. On April 16, 2014, Energizer signed a Sale and Purchase Agreement
and a Mineral Rights Agreement with Malagasy to acquire the remaining 25% interest. Malagasy retains
a 1.5% net smelter return royalty.
6
THE OFFERING
20,134,331 common shares, 10,067,166 common share purchase warrants of our company
and 10,067,166 common shares issuable upon exercise of the common share purchase
warrants.
The warrants will be exercisable immediately at an exercise price of $0.14 per share and will
expire May 4, 2018.
329,519,001 (309,384,672 current outstanding plus 20,134,331 special warrants)  shares,
assuming deemed exercise of the special warrants (1)
Determined at the time of sale by the selling securityholders.
We will not receive any proceeds from the sale of the common shares or warrants by the
selling securityholders. However, if the common share purchase warrants are exercised we
will receive the exercise price of the common share purchase warrants. The common shares
that will be resold under this prospectus were issued by us on the exercise of special
warrants sold by us, or were issued upon the exercise of common share purchase warrants
granted by us. The funds that we raised through the sale of the special warrants are being
used to continue the development of the Molo Graphite Project and for general corporate
purposes. We currently expect to use any proceeds from the exercise of the warrants for the
same purposes. See “Use of Proceeds” on page 13.
Toronto Stock Exchange: “EGZ”
OTCQX Marketplace: “ENZR”
Frankfurt Stock Exchange: “A1CXW3”
There is no trading market for the warrants and we do not intend to list the warrants on any
national securities exchange or quotation system. Without an active market, the liquidity of
the warrants will be limited.
We currently intend to retain any future earnings to fund the development and growth of our
business. Therefore, we do not currently anticipate paying cash dividends.
See “Risk Factors” beginning on page 9 and other information in this prospectus for a
discussion of the factors you should consider before you decide to invest in our securities.
Securities
offered:
Common
shares
outstanding
as of June
19, 2015:
Offering
price:
Use of
proceeds:
Common
shares
Ticker
Symbols:
Listing:
Dividend
Policy:
Risk
Factors
(1)
Outstanding common shares excludes approximately 35,365,000 shares acquirable upon exercise of
options at exercise prices ranging from $0.11 to $0.30 per share and 43,167,919 common shares
acquirable upon exercise of common share purchase warrants at exercise prices ranging from $0.11
to $0.18. Outstanding common shares assumes that no additional shares and warrants will be issued
pursuant to the Penalty Provision.
Description of the May 2015 Private Placement
On May 4, 2015, Energizer closed its private placement offering of 20,550,998 special warrants at a
price of C$0.12 per special warrant, representing aggregate gross proceeds of approximately C$2.5
million. Each special warrant entitles the holder to acquire, for no additional consideration, one unit (a
“Unit”) of Energizer, with each unit comprised of one common share of Energizer (a "Unit Share") and
one-half of one common share purchase warrant (each whole common share purchase warrant, a
“Warrant”) of Energizer. Each Warrant entitles the holder thereof to purchase one common share of
Energizer (a “Warrant Share”) at a price of $0.14 per common share until May 4, 2018.
7
The special warrants will be deemed to be exercised without payment of additional consideration or
further action, on the earlier of: (i) the third business day following the day upon which we obtain a
receipt for a final prospectus qualifying the underlying common shares, warrants and warrant shares
from the securities regulatory authority in each of the provinces of Ontario and British Columbia, (and
further provided that the Company has filed (and has in effect) a resale registration statement in the
United States with the Securities and Exchange Commission relating to the common shares, warrants
and warrant shares; and (ii) November 4, 2015.
We will use commercially reasonable efforts to (i) file and obtain a receipt for the final prospectus and (ii)
file (and have in effect) the resale registration statement as soon as reasonably practicable. If we fail to
obtain a final receipt for the final prospectus and file (and have in effect) the resale registration statement
by August 2, 2015, the holders of special warrants will be entitled to receive 1.1 common shares (instead
of one common share) and 0.55 of a warrant (instead of 0.5 of a warrant) on the deemed exercise of the
special warrants. In consideration of the placement agent acting as our agent in respect of this offering,
we paid the placement agent a cash fee equal to 7% of the aggregate purchase price of the private
placement.
8
RISK FACTORS
An investment in our common shares involves a high degree of risk. You should carefully consider the
risk factors described below together with all of the other information contained in this prospectus,
including our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto, before deciding whether to invest
in our common shares. Each of these risks could have a material adverse effect on our business,
operating results, financial condition and/or growth prospects. As a result, the trading price of our
common shares could decline and you might lose all or part of your investment. Additional risks and
uncertainties not presently known to us or that we currently deem immaterial may also impair our
operations.
Risks Related to Our Operations
The report of our independent registered public accounting firm contains explanatory language that
substantial doubt exists about our ability to continue as a going concern.
The independent auditor’s report on our financial statements contains explanatory language that
substantial doubt exists about our ability to continue as a going concern. Due to our lack of operating
history and present inability to generate revenues, we have sustained operating losses since our
inception. Since our inception, up to March 31, 2015, we had accumulated net losses of $92,243,250. If
we are unable to obtain sufficient financing in the near term as required or achieve profitability, then we
would, in all likelihood, experience severe liquidity problems and may have to curtail our operations. If
we curtail our operations, we may be placed into bankruptcy or undergo liquidation, the result of which
will adversely affect the value of our common shares.
We may not have access to sufficient capital to pursue our business and therefore would be unable to
achieve our planned future growth.
We intend to pursue a strategy that includes development of our business plan. Currently we have
limited capital, which is insufficient to pursue our plans for development and growth. Our ability to
implement our plans will depend primarily on our ability to obtain additional private or public equity or
debt financing. Such financing may not be available, or we may be unable to locate and secure
additional capital on terms and conditions that are acceptable to us. Financing exploration plans through
equity financing will have a dilutive effect on our common shares. Our failure to obtain additional capital
will have a material adverse effect on our business.
Dependence on One Mineral Project
Our only material mineral property is the Molo Graphite Project. As a result, unless we acquire or
develop any additional material properties or projects, any adverse developments affecting this project
or our rights to develop this property could materially adversely affect our business, financial condition
and results of operations.
Our primary efforts are in the African country of Madagascar, where a new government has been in
place since early 2014, and our exploration permit expired in 2011 and has not yet been renewed.
Failure to renew the exploration permit or convert it into an exploitation permit would prevent the
advancementof the Molo project.
Any adverse developments to the political situation in Madagascar could have a material effect on our
business, results of operations and financial condition. Democratic elections in Madagascar occurred
toward the end of 2013 as planned by the elections calendar jointly established between the UN and the
Elections Commissions. To date, our Company has not experienced any disruptions or been placed
under any constraints in our exploration efforts due to the political situation in Madagascar. Depending
on future actions taken by the newly elected government, or any future government, our Company’s
business operations could be impacted.
The newly elected President was inaugurated on January 25, 2014 and the lower house of Parliament
took office in February 2014. A government reshuffle occurred in early 2015, with the naming of a new
Prime Minister on January 14, 2015. Ministers composing the new government were named on January
25, 2015. On May 26, 2015, the Parliament voted to impeach the President on the grounds that he had
violated the Constitution. The High Constitutional Court invalidated the claim, declaring the accusation
unfounded, on June 12, 2015. The President, the Government and the Parliament continue to operate as
before.
We are actively monitoring the political climate in Madagascar and continue to hold meetings with
representatives of the government and the Ministry attached to the Presidency in charge of Mining. The
transformation or amendment of exploration and research mining permits within the country continues to
be suspended, including the transfer and status of our company’s Molo Graphite Property permit.
Additionally, this permit expired in 2011, but the ministerial decision confirming its application for
renewal has not been issued. Our Company has continued to pay taxes and administrative fees in
Madagascar with respect to our mining permits including the permit relating to the Molo Graphite
Property (although such permit is not in our name). These payments have been acknowledged and
accepted by the Madagascar government. Further, in order to advance the Molo Graphite Property, the
current permit will need to be converted into an exploitation permit in the name of Energizer or one of our
subsidiaries. We cannot provide any assurance as to the timing of the receipt of the required permits.
Any adverse developments in respect of the legal regime in Madagascar, including changes in respect
of Madagascar mining maws, legal rights to conduct operations in Madagascar, permitted corporate
structure controls and permitted foreign operations in Madagascar (discussed above under “Madagascar
Operations”) could have a material effect on the Company’s business, results of operations and financial
condition, including the Company’s ability to operate in Madagascar.
Our common shares have been subject to penny stock regulation in the United States of
America.
Our common shares have been subject to the provisions of Section 15(g) and Rule 15g-9 of the (US)
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), commonly referred to as the “penny
stock” rule. Section 15(g) sets forth certain requirements for transactions in penny stocks and Rule 15g-
9(d)(1) incorporates the definition of penny stock as that used in Rule 3a51-1 of the Exchange Act. The
Commission generally defines penny stock to be any equity security that has a market price less than
US$5.00 per share, subject to certain exceptions. Rule 3a51-1 provides that any equity security is
considered to be penny stock unless that security is: registered and traded on a national securities
exchange meeting specified criteria set by the Commission; issued by a registered investment company;
excluded from the definition on the basis of price (at least US$5.00 per share) or the registrant’s net
tangible assets; or exempted from the definition by the Commission. If our common shares are deemed
to be “penny stock”, trading in common shares will be subject to additional sales practice requirements
on broker/dealers who sell penny stock to persons other than established customers and accredited
investors.
9
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, Inc. (“FINRA”) sales practice requirements may limit a
shareholder’s ability to buy and sell our common shares.
In addition to the “penny stock” rules described above, FINRA has adopted rules that require that in
recommending an investment to a client, a broker-dealer must have reasonable grounds for believing
that the investment is suitable for that client. Prior to recommending speculative low priced securities to
their non-institutional clients, broker-dealers must make reasonable efforts to obtain information about
the client’s financial status, tax status, investment objectives and other information. Under interpretations
of these rules, FINRA believes that there is a high probability that speculative low priced securities will
not be suitable for at least some clients. FINRA requirements make it more difficult for broker-dealers to
recommend that their clients buy our common shares, which may limit your ability to buy and sell our
stock and have an adverse effect on the market for our shares.
As a public company we are subject to complex legal and accounting requirements that will require us to
incur significant expenses and will expose us to risk of non-compliance.
As a public company, we are subject to numerous legal and accounting requirements in both Canada
and the United States of America that do not apply to private companies. The cost of compliance with
many of these requirements is material, not only in absolute terms but, more importantly, in relation to the
overall scope of the operations of a small company. Our relative inexperience with these requirements
may increase the cost of compliance and may also increase the risk that we will fail to comply. Failure to
comply with these requirements can have numerous adverse consequences including, but not limited to,
our inability to file required periodic reports on a timely basis, loss of market confidence, delisting of our
securities and/or governmental or private actions against us. We cannot assure you that we will be able
to comply with all of these requirements or that the cost of such compliance will not prove to be a
substantial competitive disadvantage vis-à-vis privately held and larger public competitors.
Compliance with changing regulation of corporate governance and public disclosure will result in
additional expenses and pose challenges for our management.
Changing laws, regulations and standards relating to corporate governance and public disclosure,
including the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and the rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and SEC regulations, have created
uncertainty for public companies and significantly increased the costs and risks associated with
accessing the U.S. public markets. Our management team needs to devote significant time and financial
resources to comply with both existing and evolving standards for public companies, which will lead to
increased general and administrative expenses and a diversion of management time and attention from
revenue generating activities to compliance activities.
Changes in tax laws or tax rulings could materially affect our financial position and results of operations.
Changes in tax laws or tax rulings could materially affect our financial position and results of operations.
For example, the current U.S. administration and key members of Congress have made public
statements indicating that tax reform is a priority. Certain changes to U.S. tax laws, including limitations
on the ability to defer U.S. taxation on earnings outside of the United States until those earnings are
repatriated to the United States, could affect the tax treatment of our foreign earnings. In addition, many
countries in the European Union, as well as a number of other countries and organizations such as the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, are actively considering changes to existing
tax laws. Certain proposals could include recommendations that would significantly increase our tax
obligations in many countries where we do business. Due to the large and expanding scale of our
international business activities, any changes in the taxation of such activities may increase our
worldwide effective tax rate and harm our financial position and results of operations.
Because we are quoted on the OTCQX instead of a national securities exchange in the United States,
our U.S. investors may have more difficulty selling their stock or experience negative volatility on the
market price of our stock in the United States.
In the United States, our common shares are quoted on the OTCQX. The OTCQX is marketed as an
electronic exchange for high growth and early stage U.S. companies and a prospective “final step
toward a NASDAQ or NYSE listing” (although no assurances can be provided that such change of
market shall occur). Trades are settled and cleared in the U.S. similar to any NASDAQ or NYSE stock
and trade reports are disseminated through Yahoo, Bloomberg, Reuters, and most other financial data
providers. The OTCQX can be significantly illiquid, in part because it does not have a national quotation
system by which potential investors can follow the market price of shares except through information
received and generated by a limited number of broker-dealers that make markets in particular stocks.
There is a greater chance of volatility for securities that trade on the OTCQX as compared to a national
securities exchange in the United States, such as the New York Stock Exchange, the NASDAQ Stock
Market or the NYSE Amex. This volatility may be caused by a variety of factors, including the lack of
readily available price quotations, the absence of consistent administrative supervision of bid and ask
quotations, lower trading volume, and market conditions. U.S. investors in our common shares may
experience high fluctuations in the market price and volume of the trading market for our securities.
These fluctuations, when they occur, have a negative effect on the market price for our common shares.
Accordingly, our U.S. shareholders may not be able to realize a fair price from their shares when they
determine to sell them or may have to hold them for a substantial period of time until the market for our
common shares improves.
10
In addition to being quoted on the OTCQX, our common shares trade on the TSX, Canada’s national
stock exchange, under the symbol EGZ and on the Frankfurt Exchange under the symbol A1CXW3.
The market price for our common shares is particularly volatile given our status as a relatively unknown
company with a small and thinly traded public float, limited operating history and lack of profits which
could lead to wide fluctuations in our share price.
The market for our common shares is characterized by significant price volatility when compared to
seasoned issuers, and we expect that our share price will continue to be more volatile than a seasoned
issuer. The volatility in our share price is attributable to a number of factors. First our common shares, at
times, are thinly traded. As a consequence of this lack of liquidity, the trading of relatively small
quantities of shares by our shareholders may disproportionately influence the price of those shares in
either direction. The price for our shares could, for example, decline precipitously in the event that a
large number of our common shares are sold on the market without commensurate demand, as
compared to a seasoned issuer which could better absorb those sales without adverse impact on its
share price. Second, we are a speculative or “risky” investment due to our limited operating history, lack
of profits to date and uncertainty of future market acceptance for our potential products. As a
consequence, more risk-adverse investors may, under the fear of losing all or most of their investment in
the event of negative news or lack of progress, be more inclined to sell their shares on the market more
quickly and at greater discounts than would be the case with the stock of a seasoned issuer. Many of
these factors are beyond our control and may decrease the market price of our common shares,
regardless of our performance. We cannot make any predictions as to what the prevailing market price
for our common shares will be at any time or as to what effect that the sale of shares or the availability of
common shares for sale at any time will have on the prevailing market price.
Shareholders should be aware that, according to SEC Release No. 34-29093, the market for penny
stocks has suffered in recent years from patterns of fraud and abuse. Such patterns include control of the
market for the security by one or a few broker-dealers that are often related to the promoter or issuer;
manipulation of prices through prearranged matching of purchases and sales and false and misleading
press releases; boiler room practices involving high-pressure sales tactics and unrealistic price
projections by inexperienced sales persons; excessive and undisclosed bid-ask differential and
markups by selling broker-dealers; and the wholesale dumping of the same securities by promoters and
broker-dealers after prices have been manipulated to a desired level, along with the resulting inevitable
collapse of those prices and with consequent investor losses. Our management is aware of the abuses
that have occurred historically in the penny stock market. Although we do not expect to be in a position
to dictate the behavior of the market or of broker-dealers who participate in the market, management will
strive within the confines of practical limitations to prevent the described patterns from being established
with respect to our securities. The occurrence of these patterns or practices could increase the volatility
of our share price.
Volatility in our common share price may subject us to securities litigation, thereby diverting our
resources that may have a material effect on our profitability and results of operations.
The market for our common shares is characterized by significant price volatility when compared to
seasoned issuers, and we expect that our share price will continue to be more volatile than a seasoned
issuer for the indefinite future. In the past, plaintiffs have often initiated securities class action litigation
against a company following periods of volatility in the market price of its securities. We may in the future
be the target of similar litigation. This type of litigation could result in substantial costs and could divert
management’s attention and resources.
Failure to achieve and maintain effective internal controls in accordance with Section 404 of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (the “Sarbanes-Oxley Act”) could have a material adverse effect on our
business and our operating results.
If we fail to comply with the requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act regarding internal
control over financial reporting or to remedy any material weaknesses in our internal controls that we
may identify, such failure could result in material misstatements in our financial statements, cause
investors to lose confidence in our reported financial information and have a negative effect on the
trading price of our common shares.
Pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and current SEC regulations, we are required to
prepare assessments regarding internal controls over financial reporting. In connection with our on-
going assessment of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting, we may discover
“material weaknesses” in our internal controls as defined in standards established by the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board, or the PCAOB. A material weakness is a significant deficiency,
or combination of significant deficiencies, that results in more than a remote likelihood that a material
misstatement of the annual or interim financial statements will not be prevented or detected. The
PCAOB defines “significant deficiency” as a deficiency that results in more than a remote likelihood that
a misstatement of the financial statements that is more than inconsequential will not be prevented or
detected.
11
In the event that a material weakness is identified, as it has been for this report, subject to expansion of
the size of our Company and our finance department, we will employ qualified personnel and adopt and
implement policies and procedures to address any material weaknesses that we identify. However, the
process of designing and implementing effective internal controls is a continuous effort that requires us
to anticipate and react to changes in our business and the economic and regulatory environments and to
expend significant resources to maintain a system of internal controls that is adequate to satisfy our
reporting obligations as a public company. We cannot assure you that the measures we will take will
remediate any material weaknesses that we may identify or that we will implement and maintain
adequate controls over our financial process and reporting in the future.
Any failure to complete our assessment of our internal control over financial reporting, to remediate any
material weaknesses that we may identify or to implement new controls, or difficulties encountered in
their implementation, could harm our operating results, cause us to fail to meet our reporting obligations
or result in material misstatements in our financial statements. Any such failure could adversely affect
the results of the management evaluations of our internal controls. Inadequate internal controls could
also cause investors to lose confidence in our reported financial information, which could have a
negative effect on the trading price of our common shares.
Should we lose the services of our key executives, our financial condition and proposed expansion may
be negatively impacted.
We depend on the continued contributions of our executive officers to work effectively as a team, to
execute our business strategy and to manage our business. The loss of key personnel, or their failure to
work effectively, could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of
operations. Specifically, we rely on Richard E. Schler, our Chief Executive Officer, Craig Scherba, our
President and Chief Operating Officer and Peter Liabotis, our Chief Financial Officer. We do not
maintain key man life insurance. Should we lose any or all of their services and we are unable to
replace their services with equally competent and experienced personnel, our operational goals and
strategies may be adversely affected, which will negatively affect our potential revenues.
Minnesota law and our articles of incorporation protect our directors from certain types of lawsuits, which
could make it difficult for us to recover damages from them in the event of a lawsuit.
Minnesota law provides that our directors will not be liable to our Company or to our stockholders for
monetary damages for all but certain types of conduct as directors. Our articles of incorporation require
us to indemnify our directors and officers against all damages incurred in connection with our business
to the fullest extent provided or allowed by law. The exculpation provisions may have the effect of
preventing stockholders from recovering damages against our directors caused by their negligence,
poor judgment or other circumstances. The indemnification provisions may require our Company to use
its assets to defend our directors and officers against claims, including claims arising out of their
negligence, poor judgment, or other circumstances.
We are a mineral exploration company with a limited operating history and expect to incur operating
losses for the foreseeable future.
We are a mineral exploration company. We have not earned any revenues and we have not been
profitable. Prior to completing exploration on our claims, we may incur increased operating expenses
without realizing any revenues. There are numerous difficulties normally encountered by mineral
exploration companies, and these companies experience a high rate of failure. The likelihood of
success must be considered in light of the problems, expenses, difficulties, complications and delays
encountered in connection with the exploration of the mineral properties that we plan to undertake.
These potential problems include, but are not limited to, unanticipated problems relating to exploration
and additional costs and expenses that may exceed current estimates. We have no history upon which
to base any assumption as to the likelihood that our business will prove successful, and we can provide
no assurance to investors that we will generate any operating revenues or ever achieve profitable
operations.
Because of the inherent dangers involved in mineral exploration, there is a risk that we may incur liability
or damages as we conduct our business.
The search for valuable minerals involves numerous hazards. As a result, we may become subject to
liability for such hazards, including pollution, cave-ins and other hazards against which we cannot, or
may elect not, to insure against. We currently have no such insurance, but our management intends to
periodically review the availability of commercially reasonable insurance coverage. If a hazard were to
occur, the costs of rectifying the hazard may exceed our asset value and cause us to liquidate all our
assets.
We can provide no assurance that we will be able to successfully bring those claims or interests into
commercial production.
We will require significant additional funds in order to place the Molo Graphite Project into commercial
production. This may occur for a number of reasons, including because of regulatory or permitting
difficulties, because we are unable to obtain any adequate funds or because we cannot obtain such
funds on terms that we consider economically feasible.
12
Because access to our properties may be restricted by inclement weather or proper infrastructure, our
exploration programs are likely to experience delays.
Access to most of the properties underlying our claims and interests is restricted due to their remote
locations and because of weather conditions. Some of our properties are only accessible by air. As a
result, any attempts to visit, test, or explore the property are generally limited to those periods when
weather permits such activities. These limitations can result in significant delays in exploration efforts, as
well as mining and production efforts in the event that commercial amounts of minerals are found. This
could cause our business to fail.
As we undertake exploration of our claims and interests, we will be subject to the compliance of
government regulation that may increase the anticipated time and cost of our exploration program.
There are several governmental regulations that materially restrict the exploration of minerals. We will
be subject to the mining laws and regulations in force in the jurisdictions where our claims are located,
and these laws and regulations may change over time. In order to comply with these regulations, we
may be required to obtain work permits, post bonds, complete environmental assessments and perform
remediation work for any physical disturbance to land. While our planned budget for exploration
programs includes a contingency for regulatory compliance, there is a risk that new regulations could
increase our costs of doing business and prevent us from carrying out our exploration program, or that
our budgeted amounts are inadequate.
Our operations are subject to strict environmental regulations, which result in added costs of operations
and operational delays.
Our operations are subject to environmental regulations, which could result in additional costs and
operational delays. All phases of our operations are subject to environmental regulation. Environmental
legislation is evolving in some countries and jurisdictions in a manner that may require stricter
standards, and enforcement, increased fines and penalties for non-compliance, more stringent
environmental assessments of proposed projects, and a heightened degree of responsibility for
companies and their officers, directors, and employees. There is no assurance that any future changes
in environmental regulation will not negatively affect our projects.
We have no insurance for environmental problems.
Insurance against environmental risks, including potential liability for pollution or other hazards as a
result of the disposal of waste products occurring from exploration and production, has not been
available generally in the mining industry. We have no insurance coverage for most environmental risks.
In the event of a problem, the payment of environmental liabilities and costs would reduce the funds
available to us for future operations. If we are unable to full pay for the cost of remedying an
environmental problem, we might be required to enter into an interim compliance measure pending
completion of the required remedy.
We do not intend to pay dividends.
We do not anticipate paying cash dividends on our common shares in the foreseeable future. We may
not have sufficient funds to legally pay dividends. Even if funds are legally available to pay dividends,
we may nevertheless decide, in our sole discretion, not to pay dividends. The declaration, payment and
amount of any future dividends will be made at the discretion of our board of directors, and will depend
upon, among other things, the results of our operations, cash flows and financial condition, operating
and capital requirements, and other factors our board of directors may consider relevant. There is no
assurance that we will pay any dividends in the future, and, if dividends are paid, there is no assurance
with respect to the amount of any such dividend.
Due to external market factors in the mining business, we may not be able to market any minerals that
may be found.
The mining industry, in general, is intensely competitive. Even if commercial quantities of minerals are
discovered, we can provide no assurance to investors that a ready market will exist for the sale of these
minerals. Numerous factors beyond our control may affect the marketability of any substances
discovered. These factors include market fluctuations, the sale price of the minerals, the proximity and
capacity of markets and processing equipment, and government regulations, including regulations
relating to prices, taxes, royalties, land tenure, land use, mineral importing and exporting and
environmental protection. The effect of these factors cannot be accurately predicted, but any
combination of these factors may result in our not receiving an adequate return on invested capital.
Our performance may be subject to fluctuations in market prices of any minerals that we find.
The profitability of a mineral exploration project could be significantly affected by changes in the market
price of the relevant minerals. A number of factors affect the market prices for other minerals. The
aggregate effect of the factors affecting the prices of various minerals is impossible to predict with
accuracy. Fluctuations in mineral prices may adversely affect the value of any mineral discoveries made
on the properties with which we are involved, which may in turn affect the market price and liquidity of
our common shares and our ability to pursue and implement our business plan. In addition, the price of
both graphite and vanadium can fluctuate significantly on a month-to-month and year-to-year basis.
13
Because from time to time we hold a significant portion of our cash reserves in Canadian dollars, we
may experience losses due to foreign exchange translations.
From time to time we hold a significant portion of our cash reserves in Canadian dollars. Due to foreign
exchange rate fluctuations, the value of these Canadian dollar reserves can result in translation gains or
losses in U.S. dollar terms. If there was a significant decline in the Canadian dollar versus the U.S.
dollar, our converted Canadian dollar cash balances presented in U.S. dollars on our balance sheet
would significantly decline. If the US dollar significantly declines relative to the Canadian dollar our
quoted US dollar cash position would significantly decline as it would be more expensive in US dollar
terms to pay Canadian dollar expenses. We have not entered into derivative instruments to offset the
impact of foreign exchange fluctuations.
We are exposed to general economic conditions, which could have a material adverse impact on our
business, operating results and financial condition.
Recently there have been adverse conditions and uncertainty in the global economy as the result of
unstable global financial and credit markets, inflation, and recession. These unfavorable economic
conditions and the weakness of the credit market may continue to have, an impact on our Company’s
business and our Company’s financial condition. The current global macroeconomic environment may
affect our Company’s ability to access the capital markets may be severely restricted at a time when our
Company wishes or needs to access such markets, which could have a materially adverse impact on
our Company’s flexibility to react to changing economic and business conditions or carry on our
operations.
Climate change and related regulatory responses may impact our business.
Climate change as a result of emissions of greenhouse gases is a current topic of discussion and may
generate government regulatory responses in the near future. It is impracticable to predict with any
certainty the impact of climate change on our business or the regulatory responses to it, although we
recognize that they could be significant. However, it is too soon for us to predict with any certainty the
ultimate impact, either directionally or quantitatively, of climate change and related regulatory responses.
To the extent that climate change increases the risk of natural disasters or other disruptive events in the
areas in which we operate, we could be harmed. While we maintain rudimentary business recovery
plans that are intended to allow us to recover from natural disasters or other events that can be
disruptive to our business, our plans may not fully protect us from all such disasters or events.
The current financial environment may impact our business and financial condition that we cannot
predict.
The continued instability in the global financial system and related limitation on availability of credit may
continue to have an impact on our business and our financial condition, and we may continue to face
challenges if conditions in the financial markets do not improve. Our ability to access the capital markets
has been restricted as a result of the economic downturn and related financial market conditions and
may be restricted in the future when we would like, or need, to raise capital. The difficult financial
environment may also limit the number of prospects for potential joint venture, asset monetization or
other capital raising transactions that we may pursue in the future or reduce the values we are able to
realize in those transactions, making these transactions uneconomic or difficult to consummate.
Risks Related to our Securities
We will require additional capital in the future and no assurance can be given that such capital will be
available on terms acceptable to us or at all.
We will require additional capital in the future and no assurance can be given that such capital will be
available on terms acceptable to us or at all. Our currently available funds will not be sufficient to finance
the development capital costs of the Molo Graphite Project as disclosed in the Feasibility Study.
Accordingly, we will need to raise further equity and/or debt financing to fund development of the Molo
Graphite Project. The success and the pricing of any such equity and/or debt financing will be
dependent upon the prevailing market conditions at that time, the outcomes of the permitting and
development activities or any relevant studies and exploration programs at the Molo Graphite Project. If
additional capital is raised by an issue of securities, this may have the effect of diluting stockholders’
interests. Any debt financing, if available, may involve financial covenants which limit the our operations.
If we cannot obtain such additional capital, we may not be able to complete the development of the Molo
Graphite Project which would have a materially adverse effect on our business, operating results and
financial condition.
Market Price of Common Shares
Securities of small-cap and mid-cap companies have experienced substantial volatility in the recent
past, often based on factors unrelated to the financial performance or prospects of the companies
involved. These factors include macroeconomic developments in North America and globally and
market perceptions of the attractiveness of particular industries. The price of our common shares is also
likely to be significantly affected by short-term changes in graphite prices and demand, the U.S. dollar,
the Malagasy ariary, the Canadian dollar, and our financial condition or results of operations as reflected
in its financial statements. Other factors unrelated to the performance of our Company that may have an
effect on the price of the common shares include the following: the extent of analytical coverage
available to investors concerning our business may be limited if investment banks with research
capabilities do not follow our Company’s securities; lessening in trading volume and general market
interest in our Company’s securities may affect an investor’s ability to trade significant numbers of our
common shares; the size of our public float may limit the ability of some institutions to invest in our
securities; and a substantial decline in the price of our common shares that persists for a significant
period of time could cause our Company’s securities, if listed on an exchange, to be delisted from such
exchange, further reducing market liquidity.
14
As a result of any of these factors, the market price of our common shares at any given point in time may
not accurately reflect the long-term value of the Company. Class action litigation often has been brought
against companies following periods of volatility in the market price of their securities. We may in the
future be the target of similar litigation. Securities litigation could result in substantial costs and damages
and divert management’s attention and resources.
There is no Public Market for Warrants which will negatively impact the liquidity of the Warrants
There is currently no market for the Warrants and no market is expected to develop. Without an active
market, the liquidity of the Warrants will be limited. The Warrants have an exercise price of $0.14 per
Warrant Share (the “Exercise Price”) and can be exercised prior to 5:00 p.m. (Toronto time) on May 4,
2018 (the “Expiry Date”). In the event the market price of our common shares does not exceed the
Exercise Price of the Warrants during the period when the Warrants are exercisable, the Warrants may
not have any value. Holders of the Warrants will have no rights as stockholders of our Company until
they exercise the Warrants in accordance with their terms. Upon exercise of the Warrants, holders of our
common shares deliverable on the exercise of such Warrants will be entitled to exercise the rights of a
stockholder in respect of our common shares only in respect of matters for which the record date occurs
after the exercise date.
Dilution to Common Shares
As of May 3, 2015 (the day prior to the issuance of the Special Warrants), we had 308,382,672 common
shares issued and outstanding and an aggregate of 78,532,919 common shares reserved for issue
pursuant to outstanding options, warrants, stock incentive plans, convertible, exercisable and
exchangeable securities, property agreements and other rights to acquire our common shares. On May
20, 2015, we issued 1,000,000 shares to Malagasy pursuant to the Sale and Purchase Agreement and
Mineral Rights Agreement. Following the Automatic Exercise Date, assuming that the Penalty Provision
has not been triggered, there will be an additional 20,134,331 common shares and 10,067,166 Warrants
issued and outstanding. See “Description of Securities Being Distributed”. The increase in the number of
common shares and Warrants issued and outstanding, and the sale of the common shares and
Warrants, may have a depressive effect on the price of our common shares. In addition, as a result of
such additional common shares and Warrant Shares, the voting power of our existing stockholders will
be diluted.
Negative Operating Cash Flow
We reported negative cash flow from operations for the year ended June 30, 2014 and for the nine
months ended March 31, 2015. It is anticipated that we will continue to report negative operating cash
flow in future periods, likely until one or more of its mineral properties are placed into production. It is
expected that a portion of the net proceeds from the sale of the special warrants will be used for working
capital to fund negative operating cash flow. See “Use of Proceeds”.
Inability to Enforce Legal Rights
Substantially all of our assets are located outside of the United States, in Madagascar. It may not be
possible for investors to enforce judgments in the United States against our assets. In addition, many of
our directors and officers, and some of the experts named in this prospectus, are residents of Canada or
otherwise reside outside the United States, and all or a substantial portion of their assets, are located
outside the United States. It may also be difficult for holders of our common shares who reside in the
United States to realize in the United States upon judgments of courts of the United States predicated
upon our civil liability and the civil liability of our directors, officers and experts under the U.S. federal
securities laws.
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Certain information contained in this Prospectus and the documents incorporated by reference herein
constitutes “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of U.S. securities laws, regarding
management’s plans and objectives for future operations including plans and objectives relating to the
Company’s business plan and future economic performance that are based upon assumptions about
future economic conditions and courses of action. Any statement in this Prospectus that is not a
statement of an historical fact constitutes a “forward-looking statement”. In some cases, “forward-looking
information” or a “forward-looking statement” can be identified by the use of words such as “seek”,
“expect”, “anticipate”, “budget”, “plan”, “estimate”, “continue”, “forecast”, “intend”, “believe”, “predict”,
“potential”, “target”, “may”, “could”, “would”, “might”, “will” and similar words or phrases (including
negative variations) suggesting future outcomes or statements regarding an outlook. “Forward-looking
information” and “forward-looking statements” in this Prospectus and the documents incorporated by
reference herein includes, but is not limited to: information about the use of proceeds, the Company’s
exploration and development activities, including information regarding the Company’s mineral projects,
the Company’s exploration and development plans, including anticipated costs and timing thereof and
anticipated time to production, and expectations regarding estimated annual production and mine life;
the Company’s plans for growth strategies, exploration activities, earn-ins or otherwise; anticipated
trends in the mining industry; negotiations and expectations regarding the ability to obtain and retain
sufficient capital for future operations; and anticipated needs for working capital.
15
“Forward-looking information” and “forward-looking statements” involve known and unknown risks,
uncertainties and other factors which may cause actual results, performance or achievements, or
industry results, to differ materially from those anticipated in such “forward-looking information” and
“forward-looking statements”. The Company believes the expectations reflected in such “forward-looking
information” and “forward-looking statements” are reasonable, but no assurance can be given that these
expectations will prove to be correct and you are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-
looking information contained herein. “Forward-looking information” and “forward-looking statements” in
this Prospectus are based on factors and assumptions regarding, amongst other things: the Company’s
ability to continue as a going concern, access to sufficient capital, operating in Madagascar, penny stock
regulation in the United States, Financial Industry Regulatory Authority Inc. sales practice requirements,
costs of complex legal and accounting requirements, costs of compliance with changing regulation of
corporate governance and public disclosure, changes in tax laws or tax rulings, difficulty selling common
shares over the OTCQX Marketplace, market price of the common shares, securities regulation in
connection with the volatility in the price of the common shares, achieving and maintaining effective
internal controls in accordance with Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, dependence on key
executives, ability to recover damages against the Company’s directors due to protections under
corporate laws and the Company’s constating documents, speculative nature of mineral property
exploration, limited operating history and operating losses, recovery of commercially exploitable
minerals, dangers in mineral exploration, ability to successfully bring mineral claims or interests into
commercial production, property access issues, increased cost and timelines due to compliance with
government regulation, costs and delays due to environmental regulations, lack of insurance for
environmental problems, lack of dividend payments, marketing of any minerals recovered, fluctuations in
market prices of any minerals recovered, foreign exchange translations, general economic conditions,
impact of climate change and related regulatory responses and challenges related to the current
financial environment. The Company considers the factors and assumptions on which the “forward-
looking information” and “forward-looking statements” are based to be reasonable at the time it was
prepared, but cautions readers that such assumptions may ultimately prove to be incorrect and therefore
there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in “forward-looking information” and “forward-
looking statements” will be realized. Management decisions, including budgeting, are subjective in
many respects and periodic revisions must be made to reflect actual conditions and business
developments, the impact of which may cause us to alter marketing, capital investment and other
expenditures, which may also materially adversely affect the Company’s results of operations. In light of
significant uncertainties inherent in the “forward-looking information” and “forward-looking statements”
included in the Prospectus, the inclusion of such information should not be regarded as a representation
by the Company or any other person that the Company’s objectives or plans will be achieved.
Some of the risks and other factors which could cause actual results to differ materially from those
expressed in the “forward-looking information” and “forward-looking statements” contained in this
Prospectus and the documents incorporated by reference herein include, but are not limited to: use of
proceeds; permitting and development activities not being continued; additional financing; market price
of common share; no public market for Warrants; dilution to common shares; negative operating cash
flow; inability to enforce legal rights; dependence on one project; and operating in Madagascar.
Although the Company has attempted to identify important factors that could cause actual results or
events to differ materially from those described in the “forward-looking information” and “forward-looking
statements”, you are cautioned that this list is not exhaustive and there may be other factors that the
Company has not identified. Furthermore, we undertake no obligation to update or revise any forward-
looking information included in, or incorporated by reference in, this Prospectus if these beliefs,
estimates and opinions or other circumstances should change, except as otherwise required by
applicable law.
We qualify all the forward-looking statements contained in this prospectus by the foregoing cautionary
statement.
In addition, please see “Cautionary Note to United States Investors Regarding Mineral Reserve and
Resource Estimates”.
16
PRICE RANGE OF COMMON SHARES
Market Information
Our common shares are quoted on the OTCQX under the symbol “ENZR”, the TSX under the symbol
“EGZ” and the Frankfurt Stock Exchange under the symbol “A1CXW3”. The table below sets forth the
high and low closing sale prices of our common shares for the fiscal quarters indicated as reported on
the OTCQX and TSX. Over-the-counter market quotations reflect inter-dealer prices, without retail mark-
up, markdown or commission and may not necessarily represent actual transactions.
Period
Fiscal year ended June 30, 2016
First quarter ended September 30, 2015 (up to July 27,
2015)
Fiscal year ended June 30, 2015
First quarter ended September 30, 2014
Second quarter ended December 31, 2014
Third quarter ended March 31, 2015
Fourth quarter ended June 30, 2015
Fiscal year ended June 30, 2014
First quarter ended September 30, 2013
Second quarter ended December 31, 2013
Third quarter ended March 31, 2014
Fourth quarter ended June 30, 2014
Fiscal year ended June 30, 2013
First quarter ended September 30, 2012
Second quarter ended December 31, 2012
Third quarter ended March 31, 2013
Fourth quarter ended June 30, 2013
Fiscal year ended June 30, 2012
First quarter ended September 30, 2011
Second quarter ended December 31, 2011
Third quarter ended March 31, 2012
Fourth quarter ended June 30, 2012
Fiscal year ended June 30, 2011
First quarter ended September 30, 2010
Second quarter ended December 31, 2010
Third quarter ended March 31, 2011
OTCBB / OTCQX
(US$)
High
Low
TSX / TSX-V
(CDN$)
High
Low
$0.09
$0.05
$0.11
$0.05
$0.28
$0.19
$0.13
$0.11
$0.28
$0.16
$0.17
$0.14
$0.41
$0.37
$0.34
$0.22
$0.36
$0.26
$0.44
$0.48
$0.33
$0.50
$0.58
$0.10
$0.09
$0.08
$0.08
$0.10
$0.11
$0.12
$.011
$0.27
$0.29
$0.17
$0.12
$0.18
$0.15
$0.17
$0.22
$0.18
$0.195
$0.39
$0.305
$0.215
$0.14
$0.14
$0.11
$0.105
$0.105
$0.10
$0.28
$0.18
$0.18
$0.15
$0.39
$0.37
$0.34
$0.23
$0.34
$0.23
$0.43
$0.48
$0.34
$0.51
$0.63
$0.11
$0.12
$0.13
$0.12
$0.27
$0.29
$0.18
$0.11
$0.17
$0.15
$0.16
$0.22
$0.18
$0.20
$0.38
Fourth quarter ended June 30, 2011
$0.45
$0.30
$0.42
$0.28
Our common shares commenced trading on the TSX-V on May 5, 2010. Our common shares ceased
trading on the TSX-V and commenced trading on the TSX on June 16, 2011. Our common shares
commenced trading on the OTCQX on August 28, 2013. Prior to that our common shares traded on the
OTCBB.
Holders
As of September 19, 2014, there were approximately 2,500 holders of record of common shares.
Dividends
We have never declared any cash dividends with respect to our common shares. Future payment of
dividends is within the discretion of our board of directors, and will depend upon, among other things,
the results of our operations, cash flows and financial condition, operating and capital requirements, and
other factors our board of directors may consider relevant. Although there are no material restrictions
limiting, or that are likely to limit, our ability to pay dividends on our common shares, we presently intend
to retain future earnings, if any, for use in our business and have no present intention to pay cash
dividends on our common shares.
17
Issuer Repurchases of Equity Securities
None
DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES
The Company is authorized to issue up to 650,000,000 Common Shares, par value $0.001 per share. A
total of 640,000,000 of the shares shall be deemed Common Shares. The remaining 10,000,000 shares
shall be divisible into classes and series, have the designations, voting rights, and other rights and
preferences, and be subject to the restrictions, that the board of directors may from time to time establish,
fix and determine. As at June 19, 2015, 309,384,672 Common Shares were outstanding and no shares
of preferred stock were outstanding.
Common Shares
Holders of common shares of the Company are entitled to receive notice of any meetings of
stockholders of the Company and to attend and to cast one vote per common share at all such meetings.
In the event that the Company liquidates, dissolves or winds-up its operations, the holders of the
common shares are entitled to share equally and rateably in the Company’s assets, if any, remaining
after the payment of all of the Company’s debts and liabilities and the liquidation preference of any
shares of preferred stock that may then be outstanding. The common shares have no pre-emptive rights,
no cumulative voting rights, and no redemption, sinking fund, or conversion provisions. Holders of
common shares are entitled to receive dividends, if and when declared by the Board of Directors, out of
funds legally available for such purpose, subject to the dividend and liquidation rights of any preferred
stock that may then be outstanding.
Warrants
The Warrants will be issued pursuant to the terms of definitive Warrant Certificates (the “Warrant
Certificates”) issued by the Company. Each whole Warrant will entitle the holder thereof to purchase
one Warrant Share at a price of US$0.14 subject to adjustment in certain circumstances, at any time
prior to 5:00 p.m. (Toronto time) on May 4, 2018, after which time the Warrants will expire and become
null and void.
The Warrant Certificates provide that in the event of certain alterations of the outstanding common
shares, including any subdivision, consolidation or reclassification, an adjustment shall be made to the
terms of the Warrants such that the holders shall, upon exercise of the Warrants following the occurrence
of any of those events, be entitled to receive the same number and kind of securities that they would
have been entitled to receive had they exercised their Warrants prior to the occurrence of those events.
No fractional Warrant Shares will be issued upon the exercise of the Warrants. The holding of Warrants
does not make the holder thereof a stockholder of the Company or entitle the holder to any right or
interest granted to stockholders.
The Warrants will be exercisable only pursuant to an exemption or exclusion from the registration
requirements of the U.S. Securities Act and all applicable state securities laws. Therefore, the Warrants
will not be exercisable in the United States or by, or for the account or benefit of, a U.S. person (as each
of those terms are defined in Regulation S promulgated by the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission), nor will certificates representing the Warrant Shares issuable upon exercise of the
Warrants be registered or delivered to an address in the United States, unless an exemption or
exclusion from registration under the U.S. Securities Act and any applicable state securities laws is
available and the Company has received an opinion of counsel of recognized standing or other
evidence reasonably satisfactory to the Company to such effect, in form and substance reasonably
satisfactory to the Company. The Company has agreed to use commercially reasonable efforts to file
with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and take effective a Resale Registration Statement
relating to the Securities.
The foregoing summary of certain provisions of the Warrant Certificates is not complete and is qualified
in its entirety by reference to the provisions of the Warrant Certificates.
USE OF PROCEEDS
We will not receive any proceeds from the sale or distribution of the securities by the selling security
holders. We may receive proceeds from the exercise of the Warrants upon exercise of these warrants, if
any, and will expect to use the proceeds from any exercise to continue the development of the Molo
Graphite Project and for general corporate purposes.
DETERMINATION OF OFFERING PRICE
Our common shares are quoted on the TSX and the OTCQX in the United States. The actual offering
price of the securities covered by this prospectus will be determined by prevailing market prices at the
time of sale or by private transactions negotiated by the selling security holders. The offering price will
thus be determined by market factors and the independent decisions of the selling security holders.
SELLING SECURITY HOLDERS
This prospectus covers the offering of up to 20,134,331 shares of our common shares, 10,067,166
common share purchase warrants of our company and 10,067,166 common shares issuable upon
exercise of the common share purchase warrants.
18
The securities issued to the selling security holders are “restricted” securities under applicable federal
and state securities laws and are being registered to give the selling security holders the opportunity to
sell their securities. The registration of such securities does not necessarily mean, however, that any of
these securities will be offered or sold by the selling security holders. The selling security holders may
from time to time offer and sell all or a portion of their securities in the over-the-counter market, in
negotiated transactions, or otherwise, at market prices prevailing at the time of sale or at negotiated
prices.
The registered securities may be sold directly or through brokers or dealers, or in a distribution by one or
more underwriters on a firm commitment or best efforts basis. To the extent required, the names of any
agent or broker-dealer and applicable commissions or discounts and any other required information with
respect to any particular offer will be set forth in an accompanying prospectus supplement. See the “Plan
of Distribution” section of this document.
Each of the selling security holders reserves the sole right to accept or reject, in whole or in part, any
proposed purchase of the registered securities to be made directly or through agents. The selling
security holders and any agents or broker-dealers that participate with the selling security holders in the
distribution of their registered securities may be deemed to be “underwriters” within the meaning of the
Securities Act, and any commissions received by them and any profit on the resale of the registered
shares may be deemed to be underwriting commissions or discounts under the Securities Act.
We will receive no proceeds from the sale of the registered securities. We have agreed to bear the
expenses of registration of the securities, other than commissions and discounts of agents or broker-
dealers and transfer taxes, if any.
Selling Security Holder Information
The number of shares beneficially owned by each selling stockholder is listed as at closing of the
offering on May 4, 2015.
Name
VR Global Partners, LP(3)
P. David McNeely(4)
Robert HW. Wells(5)
Anson Investments Master Fund LP(6)
Dr. T. Ewert Inc.(7)
Stichting Bewaarder Commodity Discovery
Fund(8)
Marquest Mutual Fund Inc. - Explorer Series
Fund by its investment manager Marquest
Asset Management Inc.(9)
Marquest Small/Mid Cap Fund by its
investment manager Marquest Asset
Management Inc.(10)
Marquest Asset Management Inc. for
Endeavour Growth Fund(11)
Marquest Resource Fund by its Investment
manager Marquest Asset Management Inc.
(12)
W. Stanley Dart(13)
Brent & Jacqueline Reynolds(14)
Percentage
of Shares 
Owned(1)
Before Offering
Total
Number of 
Shares 
Beneficially
Owned
40,509,570 11.58%
9,474,999 3.02%
7,184,500 2.29%
5,001,000 1.59%
3,124,999 1.00%
After Offering
Number
of 
Shares
Offered
Shares
Owned(2)
Percentage
of 
Shares
Owned
5,001,00035,508,57010.15%
4,374,9995,100,000 1.63%
4,999,5002,185,000 *
*
5,001,000-
3,124,999-
*
2,737,000 *
2,250,000487,000
*
2,726,181 *
562,500 2,163,681 *
2,312,499 *
2,312,499-
1,749,999 *
1,749,999-
375,000
300,000
150,000
*
*
*
375,000 -
300,000 -
150,000 -
*
*
*
*
*
Represents less than one percent of the outstanding common shares. If we fail to obtain a final receipt
for the final prospectus and file (and have in effect) the registration statement by August 2, 2015, the
*
holders of special warrants will be entitled to receive 1.1 common shares (instead of one common
share) and 0.55 of a warrant (instead of 0.5 of a warrant) on the deemed exercise of the special
warrants. The holdings above do not include the additional securities issuable in such event.
(1)
Denominator used for calculation is each individual’s or entity’s Unit Shares plus the Company’s
current outstanding common shares of 309,384,672 (assuming conversion of the special warrants).
19
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
This table assumes that each stockholder will sell all of the shares it acquired as a result of the
subscription agreement for the special warrants. Stockholders are not required to sell their shares.
See “Plan of Distribution.”
Includes 38,842,570 common shares, 1,667,000 warrants to purchase common shares and 1,667,000
common shares which would be received upon exercise of the warrants to purchase common shares.
Representatives of this selling securityholder have advised us that Richard Deitz is the natural person
with voting or dispositive power with respect to the securities held by this selling securityholder.
Includes 8,016,666 common shares, 1,458,333 warrants to purchase common shares and 1,458,333
common shares which would be received upon exercise of the warrants to purchase common shares.
Includes 5,518,000 common shares, 1,666,500 warrants to purchase common shares and 1,666,500
common shares which would be received upon exercise of the warrants to purchase common shares.
Includes 3,334,000 common shares, 1,667,000 warrants to purchase common shares and 1,667,000
common shares which would be received upon exercise of the warrants to purchase common shares.
Representatives of this selling securityholder have advised us that Moez Kassam is the natural
person with voting or dispositive power with respect to the securities held by this selling
securityholder.
Includes 2,083,333 common shares, 1,041,666 warrants to purchase common shares and 1,041,666
common shares which would be received upon exercise of the warrants to purchase common shares.
Includes 1,987,000 common shares, 750,000 warrants to purchase common shares and 750,000
common shares which would be received upon exercise of the warrants to purchase common shares.
Representatives of this selling securityholder have advised us that Edwin Bergshoeff is the natural
person with voting or dispositive power with respect to the securities held by this selling
securityholder.
Includes 2,538,681 common shares, 187,500 warrants to purchase common shares and 187,500
common shares which would be received upon exercise of the warrants to purchase common shares.
Representatives of this selling securityholder have advised us that Gerry Brockelsby is the natural
person with voting or dispositive power with respect to the securities held by this selling
securityholder.
Includes 1,541,666 common shares, 770,833 warrants to purchase common shares and 770,833
common shares which would be received upon exercise of the warrants to purchase common
shares. Representatives of this selling securityholder have advised us that Gerry Brockelsby is the
natural person with voting or dispositive power with respect to the securities held by this selling
securityholder.
Includes 1,166,666 common shares, 583,333 warrants to purchase common shares and 583,333
common shares which would be received upon exercise of the warrants to purchase common
shares. Representatives of this selling securityholder have advised us that Gerry Brockelsby is the
natural person with voting or dispositive power with respect to the securities held by this selling
securityholder.
Includes 250,000 common shares, 125,000 warrants to purchase common shares and 125,000
common shares which would be received upon exercise of the warrants to purchase common
shares. Representatives of this selling securityholder have advised us that Gerry Brockelsby is the
(10)
(11)
(12)
natural person with voting or dispositive power with respect to the securities held by this selling
securityholder.
Includes 200,000 common shares, 100,000 warrants to purchase common shares and 100,000
common shares which would be received upon exercise of the warrants to purchase common
shares.
Includes 100,000 common shares, 50,000 warrants to purchase common shares and 50,000
common shares which would be received upon exercise of the warrants to purchase common
shares.
(13)
(14)
Each of the selling stockholders has represented to us that it is not a broker-dealer nor is it affiliated with
any broker-dealer in the United States. Except as otherwise provided in this prospectus, none of the
selling stockholders is affiliated or has been affiliated with us, any of our predecessors or affiliates (other
than as a shareholder) during the past three years.
We have no knowledge of any other arrangements, including any pledge by any person of our
securities, the operation of which may at a subsequent date result in a change in control of the
Company.
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
Each selling securityholder of our common shares and warrants and any of their pledgees, donees,
transferees, assignees and successors-in-interest may, from time to time, sell any or all of their common
shares on the OTCQX or the TSX or any other stock exchange, market or trading facility on which the
securities are traded or in private transactions. These sales may be at fixed or negotiated prices. A
selling stockholder may use any one or more of the following methods when selling securities:
20
•
•ordinary brokerage transactions and transactions in which the broker-dealer solicits purchasers;
block trades in which the broker-dealer will attempt to sell the shares as agent but may position and
resell a portion of the block as principal to facilitate the transaction;
•purchases by a broker-dealer, as principal, and resale by the broker-dealer for its account;
•an exchange distribution in accordance with the rules of the applicable exchange;
• privately negotiated transactions;
settlement of short sales entered into after the effective date of the registration statement of which this
prospectus is a part;
a broker-dealer may agree with a selling stockholder to sell a specified number of such shares at a
stipulated price per share;
• a combination of any such methods of sale;
through the writing or settlement of options or other hedging transactions, whether through an options
exchange or otherwise; or
• any other method permitted pursuant to applicable law.
•
•
•
A selling stockholder may also sell shares under Rule 144 under the Securities Act, if available, rather
than under this prospectus.
Broker-dealers engaged by the selling stockholders may arrange for other broker-dealers to participate
in sales. Broker-dealers may receive commissions or discounts from the selling stockholders (or, if any
broker-dealer acts as agent for the purchaser of shares, from the purchaser) in amounts to be negotiated,
but, except as set forth in a supplement to this prospectus, in the case of an agency transaction not in
excess of a customary brokerage commission in compliance with FINRA Rule 5110.
In connection with the sale of the common shares and warrants or interests therein, the selling
stockholders may enter into hedging transactions with broker-dealers or other financial institutions,
which may in turn engage in short sales of the common shares in the course of hedging the positions
they assume. The selling stockholders may also sell shares of the common shares short and deliver
these securities to close out their short positions, or loan or pledge the common shares to broker-dealers
that in turn may sell these securities. The selling stockholders may also enter into option or other
transactions with broker-dealers or other financial institutions or the creation of one or more derivative
securities which require the delivery to such broker-dealer or other financial institution of shares offered
by this prospectus, which shares such broker-dealer or other financial institution may resell pursuant to
this prospectus (as supplemented or amended to reflect such transaction).
The selling stockholders and any broker-dealers or agents that are involved in selling the shares and
warrants may be deemed to be “underwriters” within the meaning of the Securities Act in connection with
such sales. In such event, any commissions received by such broker-dealers or agents and any profit on
the resale of the shares purchased by them may be deemed to be underwriting commissions or
discounts under the Securities Act. Each selling stockholder has informed the Company that it does not
have any written or oral agreement or understanding, directly or indirectly, with any underwriter or other
person to distribute the common shares. In no event shall any broker-dealer receive fees, commissions
and markups which, in the aggregate, would exceed customary fees and commissions.
The selling stockholders may from time to time pledge or grant a security interest in some or all of the
common shares owned by them and, if they default in the performance of their secured obligations, the
pledgees or secured parties may offer and sell the common shares from time to time under this
prospectus after we have filed an amendment to this prospectus under Rule 424(b)(3) or other
applicable provision of the Securities Act amending the list of selling stockholders to include the
pledgee, transferee or other successors in interest as selling stockholders under this prospectus.
We are required to pay certain fees and expenses incurred by us incident to the registration of the
shares and warrants, but we will not receive any proceeds from the sale of the common shares and
warrants by the selling stockholders.
The selling stockholders and any underwriters, broker-dealers or agents that participate in the sale of the
common shares and warrants may be “underwriters” within the meaning of Section 2(11) of the
Securities Act. Any discounts, commissions, concessions or profit they earn on any resale of such
shares may be underwriting discounts and commissions under the Securities Act. Any selling
stockholder who is an “underwriter” within the meaning of Section 2(11) of the Securities Act will be
subject to the prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act and the provisions of the Exchange
Act and the rules thereunder relating to stock manipulation.
21
The shares and warrants will be sold only through registered or licensed broker-dealers if required
under applicable state securities laws. In addition, in certain states, the shares and warrants may not be
sold unless they have been registered or qualified for sale in the applicable state or an exemption from
the registration or qualification requirement is available and is complied with.
Under applicable rules and regulations under the Exchange Act, any person engaged in the distribution
of the resale common shares and warrants may not simultaneously engage in market making activities
with respect to the common shares and warrants for the applicable restricted period, as defined in
Regulation M, prior to the commencement of the distribution. In addition, the selling securityholders will
be subject to applicable provisions of the Exchange Act, and the rules and regulations thereunder,
including Regulation M, which may limit the timing of purchases and sales of the common shares by the
selling securityholders or any other person. We will make copies of this prospectus available to the
selling securityholders and have informed them of the need to deliver a copy of this prospectus to each
purchaser at or prior to the time of the sale (including by compliance with Rule 172 under the Securities
Act).
U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS
The following is a general summary of the material U.S. federal income tax consequences arising from
and relating to the acquisition of Unit Shares, the exercise, disposition and lapse of Warrants, and the
acquisition, ownership and disposition of Warrant Shares.
Scope of this Summary
This summary is for general information purposes only and does not purport to be a complete analysis or
listing of all potential U.S. federal income tax consequences related to the acquisition, ownership and
disposition of Unit Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares. Except as specifically set forth below, this
summary does not discuss applicable tax reporting requirements. In addition, this summary does not
take into account the individual facts and circumstances of any particular holder that may affect the U.S.
federal income tax consequences to such holder. Accordingly, this summary is not intended to be, and
should not be construed as, legal or U.S. federal income tax advice with respect to any particular holder.
Each holder should consult its own tax advisors regarding the U.S. federal, state and local, and non-U.S.
tax consequences related to the acquisition, ownership and disposition of Unit Shares, Warrants and
Warrant Shares.
No legal opinion from U.S. legal counsel or ruling from the Internal Revenue Service (the “IRS”) has
been requested, or will be obtained, regarding the U.S. federal income tax consequences related to the
acquisition, ownership and disposition of Unit Shares, Warrants, and Warrant Shares. This summary is
not binding on the IRS, and the IRS is not precluded from taking a position that is different from, and
contrary to, the positions taken in this summary.
Authorities
This summary is based on the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), Treasury
Regulations (whether final, temporary, or proposed), published rulings of the IRS, published
administrative positions of the IRS, and U.S. court decisions that are applicable and, in each case, as in
effect and available, as of the date of this Prospectus. Any of the authorities on which this summary is
based could be changed in a material and adverse manner at any time, and any such change could be
applied on a retroactive basis. This summary does not discuss the potential effects, whether adverse or
beneficial, of any proposed legislation that, if enacted, could be applied on a retroactive basis.
U.S. Holders
As used in this summary, the term “U.S. Holder” means a beneficial owner of Unit Shares, Warrants and
Warrant Shares acquired pursuant to this Prospectus that is, for U.S. federal income tax purposes:
an individual who is a citizen or resident of the U.S.;
a corporation (or other entity taxable as a corporation) organized under the laws of the U.S., any
state thereof or the District of Columbia;
an estate whose income is subject to U.S. federal income taxation regardless of its source; or
a trust that (1) is subject to the primary supervision of a court within the U.S. and the control of one
or more U.S. persons for all substantial decisions or (2) has a valid election in effect under
applicable Treasury Regulations to be treated as a U.S. person.
22
Non-U.S. Holders
The term “Non-U.S. Holder” means any beneficial owner of Unit Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares
acquired pursuant to this Prospectus that is neither a U.S. Holder nor a partnership (including an entity
treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes). A Non-U.S. Holder should review the
discussion under the heading “Non-U.S. Holders” below for more information.
Holders Subject to Special U.S. Federal Income Tax Rules
This summary deals only with persons or entities who hold Unit Shares, Warrants, and Warrant
Shares as a capital asset within the meaning of Section 1221 of the Code (generally, property
held for investment purposes). This summary does not address all aspects of U.S. federal
income taxation that may be applicable to holders in light of their particular circumstances or to
holders subject to special treatment under U.S. federal income tax law, such as (without
limitation): banks, insurance companies, and other financial institutions; dealers or traders in
securities, commodities or foreign currencies; regulated investment companies; U.S. expatriates
or former long-term residents of the U.S.; persons holding Unit Shares, Warrants, and Warrant
Shares as part of a straddle, appreciated financial position, synthetic security, hedge, conversion
transaction or other integrated investment; persons holding Unit Shares, Warrants, and Warrant
Shares as a result of a constructive sale; entities that acquire Unit Shares, Warrants, and Warrant
Shares that are treated as partnerships for U.S. federal income tax purposes and partners in
such partnerships; real estate investment trusts; holders that acquired Unit Shares, Warrants, or
Warrant Shares in connection with the exercise of employee stock options or otherwise as
consideration for services; or holders that are “controlled foreign corporations” or “passive
foreign investment companies.” Holders that are subject to special provisions under the Code,
including holders described immediately above, should consult their own tax advisors regarding
the U.S. federal, state and local, and non-U.S. tax consequences arising from and relating to the
acquisition, ownership and disposition of Unit Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares.
If an entity or arrangement that is classified as a partnership (or other “pass-through” entity) for
U.S. federal income tax purposes holds shares of Unit Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares, the
U.S. federal income tax consequences to such entity and the partners (or other owners) of such
entity generally will depend on the activities of the entity and the status of such partners (or
owners). This summary does not address the tax consequences to any such owner or entity.
Partners (or other owners) of entities or arrangements that are classified as partnerships or as
“pass-through” entities for U.S. federal income tax purposes should consult their own tax
advisors regarding the U.S. federal income tax consequences arising from and relating to the
acquisition, ownership and disposition of Unit Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares.
Tax Consequences Not Addressed
This summary does not address the U.S. state and local, U.S. federal estate and gift, U.S. federal
alternative minimum tax, or non-U.S. tax consequences to holders of the acquisition, ownership
and disposition of Unit Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares. Each holder should consult its
own tax advisors regarding the U.S. state and local, U.S. federal estate and gift, U.S. federal
alternative minimum tax, and non-U.S. tax consequences of the acquisition, ownership and
disposition of Unit Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares.
U.S. Holders
Exercise of Warrants
A U.S. Holder generally will not recognize gain or loss on the exercise of a Warrant and related
receipt of a Warrant Share (unless cash is received in lieu of the issuance of a fractional Warrant
Share). A U.S. Holder’s initial tax basis in the Warrant Share received on the exercise of a Warrant
should be equal to the sum of (i) the U.S. Holder’s tax basis in the Warrant plus (ii) the exercise
price paid by the U.S. Holder on the exercise of the Warrant. A U.S. Holder’s holding period for
the Warrant Share received on the exercise of a Warrant should begin on the date that the
Warrant is exercised by the U.S. Holder.
23
Disposition of Warrants
A U.S. Holder will recognize gain or loss on the sale or other taxable disposition of a Warrant in
an amount equal to the difference, if any, between (i) the amount of cash plus the fair market
value of any property received and (ii) the U.S. Holder’s tax basis in the Warrant sold or otherwise
disposed of. Any such gain or loss generally will be a capital gain or loss, which will be long-term
capital gain or loss if the Warrant is held for more than one year. Long-term capital gains
recognized by certain non-corporate U.S. Holders (including individuals) will generally be subject
to a maximum U.S. federal income tax rate of 20%. Deductions for capital losses are subject to
complex limitations under the Code.
Expiration of Warrants without Exercise
Upon the lapse or expiration of a Warrant, a U.S. Holder will recognize a loss in an amount equal
to such U.S. Holder’s tax basis in the Warrant. Any such loss generally will be a capital loss and
will be long-term capital loss if the Warrant is held for more than one year. Deductions for capital
losses are subject to complex limitations under the Code.
Certain Adjustments to the Warrants
Under Section 305 of the Code, an adjustment to the number of Warrant Shares that will be
issued on the exercise of the Warrants, or an adjustment to the exercise price of the Warrants,
may be treated as a constructive distribution to a U.S. Holder of the Warrants if, and to the extent
that, such adjustment has the effect of increasing such U.S. Holder’s proportionate interest in the
Company’s “earnings and profits” or assets, depending on the circumstances of such
adjustment (for example, if such adjustment is to compensate for a distribution of cash or other
property to the Company’s stockholders). Adjustments to the exercise price of a Warrant made
pursuant to a bona fide reasonable adjustment formula that has the effect of preventing dilution
of the interest of the holders of the Warrants should generally not result in a constructive
distribution. (See the more detailed discussion of the rules applicable to distributions made by
the Company under the heading “Distributions on Unit Shares and Warrant Shares,” below).
Distributions on Unit Shares and Warrant Shares
Distributions made on Unit Shares and Warrant Shares generally will be included in a U.S.
Holder’s income as ordinary dividend income to the extent of the Company’s current and
accumulated earnings and profits (determined under U.S. federal income tax principles) as of the
end of the Company’s taxable year in which the distribution occurs. However, with respect to
dividends received by certain non-corporate U.S. Holders, such dividends are generally taxed at
the applicable long-term capital gains rates (currently at a maximum tax rate of 20%), provided
certain holding period and other requirements are satisfied. Distributions in excess of the
Company’s current and accumulated earnings and profits will be treated as a return of capital to
the extent of a U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in the Unit Shares and Warrant Shares and
thereafter as capital gain from the sale or exchange of such Unit Shares and Warrant Shares,
which will be taxable according to rules discussed under the heading “Sale, Certain
Redemptions or Other Taxable Dispositions of Unit Shares and Warrant Shares,” below.
Dividends received by a corporate holder may be eligible for a dividends received deduction,
subject to applicable limitations.
Sale, Certain Redemptions or Other Taxable Dispositions of Unit Shares and Warrant Shares
Upon the sale, certain qualifying redemptions, or other taxable disposition of Unit Shares or
Warrant Shares, a U.S. Holder generally will recognize capital gain or loss equal to the difference,
if any, between (i) the amount of cash and the fair market value of any property received upon
such taxable disposition and (ii) the U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in the Unit Shares or
Warrant Shares. Such capital gain or loss will be long-term capital gain or loss if a U.S. Holder’s
holding period in the Unit Shares or Warrant Shares is more than one year at the time of the
taxable disposition. Long-term capital gains recognized by certain non-corporate U.S. Holders
will generally be subject to a maximum U.S. federal income tax rate of 20%. Deductions for capital
losses are subject to complex limitations under the Code.
Additional Tax on Passive Income
Individuals, estates and certain trusts whose income exceeds certain thresholds will be required
to pay a 3.8% Medicare surtax on “net investment income” including, among other things,
dividends and net gain from the disposition of property (other than property held in certain
trades or businesses). U.S. Holders should consult their own tax advisors regarding the effect, if
any, of this tax on their ownership and disposition of Unit Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares.
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding
24
Information reporting requirements generally will apply to payments of dividends on Unit Shares
and Warrant Shares and to the proceeds of a sale of Unit Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares
paid to a U.S. Holder unless the U.S. Holder is an exempt recipient (such as a corporation).
Backup withholding will apply to those payments if the U.S. Holder fails to provide its correct
taxpayer identification number, or certification of exempt status, or if the U.S. Holder is notified by
the IRS that it has failed to report in full payments of interest and dividend income. Backup
withholding is not an additional tax, and any amounts withheld under the backup withholding
rules generally will be allowed as a refund or a credit against a U.S. Holder’s U.S. federal income
tax liability, if any, provided the required information is furnished in a timely manner to the IRS.
Non-U.S. Holders
Exercise of Warrants
A Non-U.S. Holder generally will not recognize gain or loss on the exercise of a Warrant and
related receipt of a Warrant Share (unless cash is received in lieu of the issuance of a fractional
Warrant Share and certain other conditions are present, as discussed below under “Sale or Other
Taxable Disposition of Unit Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares”). A Non-U.S. Holder’s initial
tax basis in the Warrant Share received on the exercise of a Warrant should be equal to the sum
of (i) the Non-U.S. Holder’s tax basis in the Warrant, plus (ii) the exercise price paid by the Non-
U.S. Holder on the exercise of the Warrant. A Non-U.S. Holder’s holding period for the Warrant
Share received on the exercise of a Warrant should begin on the date that the Warrant is
exercised by the Non-U.S. Holder.
Disposition of Warrants
A Non-U.S. Holder will recognize gain or loss on the sale or other taxable disposition of a Warrant
in an amount equal to the difference, if any, between (a) the amount of cash plus the fair market
value of any property received and (b) such Non-U.S. Holder’s tax basis in the Warrant sold or
otherwise disposed of. Any such gain or loss generally will be a capital gain or loss, which will be
long-term capital gain or loss if the Warrant is held for more than one year. Any such gain
recognized by a Non-U.S. Holder will be taxable for U.S. federal income tax purposes according
to rules discussed under the heading “Sale or Other Taxable Disposition of Unit Shares,
Warrants and Warrant Shares” below.
Expiration of Warrants without Exercise
Upon the lapse or expiration of a Warrant, a Non-U.S. Holder will recognize loss in an amount
equal to such Non-U.S. Holder’s tax basis in the Warrant. Any such loss generally will be a capital
loss and will be long-term capital loss if the Warrants are held for more than one year. Deductions
for capital losses are subject to complex limitations under the Code.
Certain Adjustments to the Warrants
Under Section 305 of the Code, an adjustment to the number of Warrant Shares that will be
issued on the exercise of the Warrants, or an adjustment to the exercise price of the Warrants,
may be treated as a constructive distribution to a Non-U.S. Holder of the Warrants if, and to the
extent that, such adjustment has the effect of increasing such Non-U.S. Holder’s proportionate
interest in the “earnings and profits” or assets, of the Company, depending on the
circumstances of such adjustment (for example, if such adjustment is to compensate for a
distribution of cash or other property to the Company’s shareholders). Adjustments to the
exercise price of a Warrant made pursuant to a bona fide reasonable adjustment formula that has
the effect of preventing dilution of the interest of the holders of the Warrants should generally not
result in a constructive distribution. See the more detailed discussion of the rules applicable to
distributions made by the Company under the heading “Distributions on Unit Shares and
Warrant Shares” below.
Distributions on Unit Shares and Warrant Shares
Distributions on Unit Shares and Warrant Shares will constitute dividends for U.S. federal income
tax purposes to the extent paid from the current and accumulated earnings and profits of the
Company, as determined under U.S. federal income tax principles. To the extent those
distributions exceed the Company’s current and accumulated earnings and profits, they will
constitute a return of capital and will first reduce a Non-U.S. Holder’s tax basis in Unit Shares or
Warrant Shares, but not below zero, and then will be treated as gain from the sale of stock, which
will be taxable according to rules discussed under the heading “Sale or Other Taxable
Disposition of Unit Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares” below. Any dividends paid to a Non-
U.S. Holder with respect to Unit Shares or Warrant Shares generally will be subject to withholding
tax at a 30% gross rate, subject to any exemption or lower rate under an applicable treaty if the
Non-U.S. Holder provides the Company with a properly executed IRS Form W-8BEN or W-8BEN-
E, unless the Non-U.S. Holder provides the Company with a properly executed IRS Form W-8ECI
(or other applicable form) relating to income effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or
business within the U.S.
25
Dividends that are effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business within the U.S.
and includible in the Non-U.S. Holder’s gross income are not subject to the withholding tax
(assuming proper certification and disclosure), but instead are subject to U.S. federal income tax
on a net income basis at applicable graduated U.S. federal income tax rates. Any such effectively
connected income received by a non-U.S. corporation may, under certain circumstances, be
subject to an additional branch profits tax at a 30% rate, subject to any exemption or lower rate as
may be specified by an applicable income tax treaty.
A Non-U.S. Holder of Unit Shares or Warrant Shares who wishes to claim the benefit of an
applicable treaty rate or exemption is required to satisfy certain certification and other
requirements. If a Non-U.S. Holder is eligible for an exemption from or a reduced rate of U.S.
withholding tax pursuant to an income tax treaty, it may obtain a refund of any excess amounts
withheld by timely filing an appropriate claim for refund with the IRS.
Sale or Other Taxable Disposition of Unit Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares
In general, a Non-U.S. Holder of Unit Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares will not be subject to
U.S. federal income tax on gain recognized from a sale, exchange, or other taxable disposition of
such Unit Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares, unless:
the gain is effectively connected with a U.S. trade or business carried on by the Non-U.S.
Holder (and, where an income tax treaty applies, is attributable to a U.S. permanent
establishment of the Non-U.S. Holder), in which case the Non-U.S. Holder will be subject to
tax on the net gain from the sale at regular graduated U.S. federal income tax rates, and if
the Non-U.S. Holder is a corporation, may be subject to an additional U.S. branch profits tax
at a gross rate equal to 30% of its effectively connected earnings and profits for that taxable
year, subject to any exemption or lower rate as may be specified by an applicable income
tax treaty;
the Non-U.S. Holder is an individual who is present in the U.S. for 183 days or more in the
taxable year of disposition and certain other conditions are met, in which case the Non-U.S.
Holder will be subject to a 30% tax on the gain from the sale, which may be offset by U.S.
source capital losses; or
the Company is or has been a “U.S. real property holding corporation” (“USRPHC”) for U.S.
federal income tax purposes at any time during the shorter of the Non-U.S. Holder’s holding
period or the 5-year period ending on the date of disposition of Unit Shares, Warrants or
Warrant Shares; provided, with respect to the Unit Shares and Warrant Shares, that as long
as the Company’s common shares are regularly traded on an established securities market
as determined under the Treasury Regulations (the “Regularly Traded Exception”), a Non-
U.S. Holder would not be subject to taxation on the gain on the sale of Unit Shares or
Warrant Shares under this rule unless the Non-U.S. Holder has owned: (i) more than 5% of
the Company’s common shares at any time during such 5-year or shorter period; (ii)
Warrants with a fair market value on the date acquired by such holder greater than the fair
market value on that date of 5% of the Company’s common shares; or (iii) aggregate equity
securities of the Company with a fair market value on the date acquired in excess of 5% of
the fair market value of the Company’s common shares on such date (in any case, a “5%
Shareholder”). Since the Warrants are not expected to be listed on a securities market, the
Warrants are unlikely to qualify for the Regularly Traded Exception. In determining whether
a Non-U.S. Holder is a 5% Shareholder, certain attribution rules apply in determining
ownership for this purpose. The Company believes that it is not currently, and has not been
during one or more of the past 5 years, a USRPHC for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
The Company can provide no assurances that it is not currently, and has not been during
one or more of the past 5 years, a USRPHC, or if it is or has been a USRPHC, that the Unit
Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares will meet the Regularly Traded Exception at the time a
Non-U.S. Holder purchases such securities or sells, exchanges or otherwise disposes of
such securities. Non-U.S. Holders should consult with their own tax advisors regarding the
consequences to them of investing in a USRPHC. If the Company is a USRPHC, a Non-U.S.
Holder will be taxed as if any gain or loss were effectively connected with the conduct of a
trade or business as described above in “Distributions on Unit Shares and Warrant Shares”
in the event that (i) such holder is a 5% Shareholder, or (ii) the Regularly Traded Exception
is not satisfied during the relevant period.
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding
Generally, the Company must report annually to the IRS and to Non-U.S. Holders the amount of
dividends paid on the Unit Shares and Warrant Shares to Non-U.S. Holders and the amount of
tax, if any, withheld with respect to those payments. Copies of the information returns reporting
such dividends and withholding may also be made available to the tax authorities in the country
in which a Non-U.S. Holder resides under the provisions of an applicable income tax treaty.
In general, a Non-U.S. Holder will not be subject to backup withholding with respect to payments
of dividends that the Company makes, provided the Company receives a statement meeting
certain requirements to the effect that the Non-U.S. Holder is not a U.S. person and the Company
does not have actual knowledge or reason to know that the holder is a U.S. person, as defined
under the Code, that is not an exempt recipient. The requirements for the statement will be met if
(i) the Non-U.S. Holder provides its name, address and U.S. taxpayer identification number, if any,
and certifies, under penalty of perjury, that it is not a U.S. person (which certification may be
made on IRS Form W-8BEN or W-8BEN-E) or (ii) a financial institution holding the instrument on
behalf of the Non-U.S. Holder certifies, under penalty of perjury, that such statement has been
received by it and furnishes the Company or the Company’s paying agent with a copy of the
statement. In addition, a Non-U.S. Holder will be subject to information reporting and, depending
on the circumstances, backup withholding with respect to payments of the proceeds of a sale of
shares of Unit Shares, Warrants, and Warrant Shares within the U.S. or conducted through
certain U.S.-related financial intermediaries, unless the statement described above has been
received, and the Company do not have actual knowledge or reason to know that a holder is a
U.S. person, as defined under the Code, that is not an exempt recipient, or the Non-U.S. Holder
otherwise establishes an exemption. Backup withholding is not an additional tax and any
amounts withheld under the backup withholding rules will be allowed as a refund or a credit
against a Non-U.S. Holder’s U.S. federal income tax liability, if any, provided the required
information is furnished in a timely manner to the IRS.
26
Rules Relating to Foreign Accounts
A 30% United States federal withholding tax may apply to any dividends paid with respect to Unit
Shares or Warrant Shares, and to gross proceeds from a disposition of Unit Shares, Warrants or
Warrant Shares by Non-U.S. Holders occurring after December 31, 2016, in each case paid to (i) a
“foreign financial institution” (as specifically defined in the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act
of 2010 (“FATCA”) and administrative guidance as modified by an applicable intergovernmental
agreement between the United States and a foreign jurisdiction (an “IGA”), if any), whether such
foreign financial institution is the beneficial owner or an intermediary, unless such foreign
financial institution agrees to verify, report and disclose its United States “account” holders (as
specifically defined in FATCA and administrative guidance as modified by an applicable IGA, if
any) and meets certain other specified requirements or (ii) a non-financial foreign entity, whether
such non-financial foreign entity is the beneficial owner or an intermediary, unless such entity
provides a certification that the beneficial owner of the payment does not have any substantial
United States owners or provides the name, address and taxpayer identification number of each
such substantial United States owner and certain other specified requirements are met. In certain
cases, the relevant foreign financial institution or non-financial foreign entity may qualify for an
exemption from, or be deemed to be in compliance with, these requirements. In addition, to avoid
withholding with respect to dividends paid with respect to Unit Shares or Warrant Shares, and
gross proceeds from a disposition of Unit Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares by Non-U.S.
Holders occurring after December 31, 2016, a Non-U.S. Holder must generally provide the
Company or other applicable payor with a statement meeting certain requirements to the effect
that the Non-U.S. Holder is not a U.S. person and the Company does not have actual knowledge
or reason to know that the holder is a U.S. person, as defined under the Code. The requirements
for the statement will be met if (i) the Non-U.S. Holder provides its name, address and U.S.
taxpayer identification number, if any, and certifies, under penalty of perjury, that it is not a U.S.
person and provides certain other information (which certification may be made on IRS Form W-
8BEN or W-8BEN-E or such other applicable IRS Form available at www.irs.gov) or (ii) a financial
institution holding the instrument on behalf of the Non-U.S. Holder certifies, under penalty of
perjury, that such statement has been received by it and furnishes the Company, paying agent,
or other applicable payor with a copy of the statement. Each Non-U.S. Holder should consult its
own tax advisor regarding FATCA, administrative guidance, and IGAs and whether they may be
relevant to its acquisition, ownership and disposition of Unit Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares.
27
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND OPERATING
RESULTS
Recent Developments
During the third quarter of fiscal 2015, we issued a feasibility study during the quarter in respect
of the Molo Graphite Property. Pursuant to the terms of the Sale and Purchase Agreement
relating to the Molo Graphite Property, our company is required to issue 1,000,000 shares and
pay Cdn$700,000 to Malagasy Minerals Inc. In the coming months our company plans to pursue
negotiations in respect of potential off-take agreements with graphite end users and continue to
seek project financing alternatives (debt and equity). Discussions in respect of these matters
have been ongoing for the past 18 months and are planned to continue during the coming
months. The Company is continuing to review optimization strategies in hopes of reducing both
the capital and operating costs relating to the Molo Graphite Property.
On May 5, 2015 our Company closed a private placement offering (the “Offering”) of 20,550,998
special warrants (“Special Warrants”) at a price of C$0.12 per Special Warrant, representing
aggregate gross proceeds of approximately C$2.5 million. Each Special Warrant entitles the
holder to acquire one Unit of the Company, with each Unit comprised of one unit share and one
half of one Warrant. Each Warrant entitles the holder to purchase one common share at a price of
$0.14 per common share until May 4, 2018. The Special Warrants will be deemed to be exercised
without payment of additional consideration or further action, on the earlier of: (i) the third
business day following the day upon which our Company obtains a receipt for a final prospectus
(the “Final Prospectus”) qualifying the underlying common shares, Warrants, Warrant Shares
(collectively the “Underlying Securities”) from the securities regulatory authority in each of the
provinces of Ontario and British Columbia and further provided that the Company has filed (and
has in effect) a resale registration statement (the “Registration Statement”) in the United States
with the Securities and Exchange Commission relating to the Underlying Securities; and (ii)
November 4, 2015. Our Company will use its commercially reasonable efforts to (i) file and obtain
a receipt for the Final Prospectus and (ii) file (and have in effect) the Registration Statement as
soon as reasonably practicable. If our Company fails to obtain a final receipt for the Final
Prospectus and file (and have in effect) the Registration Statement by August 2, 2015, the holders
of Special Warrants will be entitled to receive 1.1 common shares (instead of one common share)
and 0.55 of a Warrant (instead of 0.5 of a Warrant) on the deemed exercise of the Special
Warrants.
Results Of Operations For the Interim Period Ended March 31, 2015
We have had no operating revenues from inception on March 1, 2004 through to March 31, 2015.
Our activities have been financed from the proceeds of securities subscriptions. Explanations for
material fluctuations during the nine-month period ended March 31, 2015 when compared to the
nine-month period ended March 31, 2014 are as follows:
Amounts expensed on mineral properties totalled $4,540,898 (March 31, 2014: $4,290,899), which
represents an increase of $249,999. $2.9 million was spent on the Madagascar Molo Graphite Project
primarily on work required to complete our company’s feasibility study, authored by DRA Minerals - our
EPCM. $1.6 million was spent on the Sagar Property on a drill program to satisfy our Canadian tax
agency flow-through share commitment. As the flow-through share commitment has been satisfied, we
anticipate costs going forward on the Sagar Property will decrease and ultimately be eliminated.
Professional fees totalled $688,393, down $878,994 from the nine-month period ended March 31, 2014
total of $1,567,387. This represents a 56% decrease in costs between periods. Significant decreases in
amounts between periods are as follows:
•
•
○A decrease of approximately $360,000 resulted in the expensing of the entire amount due to the former
CEO of the company in the prior period.
○An approximate $300,000 decrease in legal fees as a result of less corporate activity requiring legal
counsel as compared to the prior period.
○ A $200,000 decrease in employee’s compensation during the period.
General and administrative costs relate to costs associated with running the Toronto office and the
Madagascar operations, cost for travel, investor relations and promotion fees and TSX fees. These
costs decreased by $279,618 between periods (March 31, 2015: $631,655 and March 31, 2014:
$911,273). This represents a 31% decrease between periods. Significant decreases in amounts
between periods are as follows:
Travel costs were approximately $60,000 lower. In the prior period, significant travel occurred to the far
east and Europe to meet with potential off-take partners. While management travelled to these locals
again during the current period, the frequency was less when compare to the prior period.
○
•
•
•
28 
   
○Promotion expenses were $125,000 lower as fewer initiatives were pursued due to limited cash
resources and the focus on competing the feasibility study.
○ Rental charges were $20,000 lower primarily due to foreign exchange fluctuations.
○ Filing fees were $20,000 lower due to less fees paid the TSX for submission filings.
○ Courier and postage costs were $25,000 lower.
Stock-based compensation decreased by $54,155 (March 31, 2015: $627,264 and March 31, 2014:
$681,419). This expense is the Black-Scholes theoretical cost to issue stock options. A total of
9,280,000 stock options were issued during the nine-month period ended March 31, 2015 at a price
between $0.15 and $0.20 (March 31, 2014: 7,130,000 stock options issued at prices between $0.11
and $0.18 per share).
Depreciation increased by $22,356 (March 31, 2015: $40,994, March 31, 2014: $18,638). This increase
is due to the purchase of various fixed assets, including vehicles, which occurred late in fiscal 2014.
Foreign currency translation was in a gain position for the period ended March 31, 2015 (gain of
$123,900) and a gain position for the period ended March 31, 2014 (gain of $236,661). This item arises
due to the fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates at the time that transactions occur in a
currency other than our functional currency of US dollars and due to the revaluation of balance sheet
items from foreign currencies into US dollars as of the date of the balance sheet, namely March 31,
2015. During the current period ended, the U.S. dollar continued materially to strengthened relative to
the Canadian dollar (a 9% increase) and other currencies that the Company transacts in resulting in a
small loss.
Investment income decreased by $18,978, specifically from $27,260 for the nine-month period ended
March 31, 2014 to $8,282 for the nine-month period ended March 31, 2015. These amount relate to
returns on our passive investments and interest income on cash balances.
The warrant liability change resulted in a decrease in net loss by $358,573 for the nine-month period
ended March 31, 2015. This warrant liability did not exist as of March 31, 2014. Certain warrants that
are currently issued by our company are considered derivative instruments as they were issued in
Canadian Dollars, a currency other than the Company’s functional currency of the US dollar. The
estimated fair value of warrants accounted for as liabilities was determined on as of March 31, 2015
and are marked to market at each financial reporting period. The change in fair value of the warrant
liability is recorded in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss as a gain or
loss and estimated using the Binomial model.
For the nine month period ended March 31, 2015, the Company sold marketable securities and
recognized a gain on sale of $12,278 (March 31, 2014: $Nil) which has been recorded in the statement
of operations and comprehensive loss and removed from accumulated other comprehensive income.
For the nine months ended March 31, 2014, the Company determined that $63,849 of unrealized losses
were other than temporary and as such were recognized as an “other expense” in net loss and removed
from accumulated other comprehensive income. No entry was recorded for the nine-month period
•
•
•
•
•
ended March 31, 2015.
Results of Operations for the Year ended June 30, 2014
We have had no operating revenues from inception on March 1, 2004 through to the year ended
June 30, 2014. Our activities have been financed from the proceeds of securities subscriptions.
The following are explanations for the material fluctuations/disparities during the year ended
June 30, 2014 when compared to the year ended June 30, 2013:
•
•
Amounts spent on mineral properties totaled $7,343,541 (June 30, 2012: $3,720,735), which represents
an increase of $3,622,806. Significant items expensed during the year ended June 30, 2014 include
$1,500,000 on our BFS with DRA for the Molo Graphite Project, $1,000,000 in expenses relating to
acquiring the remaining 25% interest in the Molo Graphite Project and additional mining claims,
$1,100,000 in metallurgical testing and related, $600,000 on infill drilling and $400,000 on permitting
plus a total of $2,300,000 on work for the Sagar property to go toward satisfying the Canada Revenue
Agency flow-through commitment based on flow-through funds raised during the calendar year of 2013.
During fiscal year ending June 30, 2013 expenses incurred primarily related to metallurgical tests and
fees to consulting geologists..
Professional fees totaled $1,765,769, up $101,804 from the year ended June 30, 2013 total of
$1,663,965. This represents a 5% increase in costs between periods which relates to higher legal costs
incurred during the period for drafting confidentiality and related agreements for potential off-take
partners, the acquisition of the remaining 25% interest in the Molo Graphite Property, costs relating to
the Sagar Property divestiture and other agreements.
 29 
   
General and administration relates to fees associated with running the Toronto office and the
Madagascar operations on the property and travel. These costs increased by $9,041 between periods
(June 30, 2014: $1,357,682, and June 30, 2013: $1,348,641). The reason for this increase is travel
costs for numerous trips to South Africa to liaise with DRA, Madagascar to meet government officials,
and visit the property, Europe to meet with GMP and potential equity investors and debt providers and
Asia to meet with potential financiers, potential joint venture partners and potential off-take partners.
Stock-based compensation decreased by $789,259 (June 30, 2014: $681,419 and June 30, 2013:
$1,470,678). This expense is the Black-Scholes theoretical cost to issue stock options.
Depreciation increased from by $22,830 (June 30, 2014: $44,446, June 30, 2013: 21,616). This
increase is due to the increase in fixed assets during the year.
Foreign currency translation was in a loss position for the year ended June 30, 2014 (loss $60,076) and
a gain position during the first year ending June 30, 2013 (gain: $93,395). This item arises due to the
fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates at the time that transactions occur in a currency other
than our functional currency of US dollars and due to the revaluation of balance sheet items from
foreign currencies into US dollars as of the date of the balance sheet, namely June 30, 2014.
Investment income decreased by $211,900 from $307,992 for the year ended June 30, 2013 to $96,092
for the year ended June 30, 2014. Returns on our passive investments were the reason for this
decrease.
•
•
•
•
•
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Foreign Currencies
As at March 31, 2015, we had cash on hand of $717,287. Our working capital deficiency $677,431
which excludes the warrant liability which are non-cash items reflected as liabilities. We hold a
material portion of cash reserves in Canadian dollars. Due to foreign exchange rate fluctuations,
the value of these Canadian dollar reserves can result in translation gains or losses in US dollar
terms. If there was to be a significant decline in the Canadian dollar against the US dollar, the US
dollar value of that Canadian dollar cash position presented on our balance sheet would also
significantly decline. If the US dollar significantly declines relative to the Canadian dollar, our
quoted US dollar cash position would also significantly decline. Such foreign exchange declines
could cause us to experience losses. In addition to paying expenses in Canadian dollars, we also
pay expenses in South African Rand, Madagascar Ariary and Australian Dollars. During the
current period ended March 31, 2015, the U.S. dollar materially strengthened relative to the
Canadian dollar and other currencies that our company transacts. Therefore, we are subject to
risks relating to movements in those currencies.
There are no assurances that we will be able to achieve further sales of common shares or any
other form of additional financing. If we are unable to achieve the financing necessary to
continue the plan of operations, then we will not be able to continue with our business plan and
our venture will fail.
Capital Financing
•
•
•
For the year ended June 30, 2014, we raised net proceeds of $9,559,926 through the issuance of
90,523,283 common shares and 39,312,130 common share purchase warrants.
For the nine-month period ended March 31, 2015, we raised net proceeds of $4,957,408 through the
issuance of 39,185,714 common shares and $72,049 through the exercise of 571,353 common share
broker warrants.
Subsequent to the end of the quarter, we raised aggregate gross proceeds of approximately Cdn$2.5
million through the issuance of 20,550,998 special warrants at a price of Cdn$0.12 per special warrant.
We will require additional funding during the calendar year of 2015, which will likely be in the form
of an equity financing from the sale of our common shares. However, we cannot provide
investors with any assurance that we will be able to raise sufficient funding from the sale of
common shares to finance our business plan.
Issuances of Securities
We have funded our business to date from sales of our securities. From July 1, 2014 through
March 31, 2015, the Company issued the following unregistered securities:
•
•On July 3, 2014, we issued 4,800,000 stock options to directors and officers at $0.15 per share.
On September 18, 2014, 571,353 broker warrants were exercised at $0.126 for total proceeds of
$72,049.
•On September 26, 2014, we issued 34,285,714 common shares at $0.14 per share raising $4,800,000.
 30 
   
•On December 30, 2014, we issued 4,900,000 common shares at $0.12 per share raising $588,000.
Subsequent to the end of the quarter, we raised aggregate gross proceeds of approximately Cdn$2.5
million through the issuance of 20,550,998 special warrants at a price of Cdn$0.12 per special warrant.
•
The offer and sale of all shares of our securities listed above were affected in reliance on the
exemptions for sales of securities not involving a public offering, as set forth in Regulation S
promulgated under the Securities Act.
We anticipate that additional funding will be in the form of equity financing from the sale of our
common shares. However, we cannot provide investors with any assurance that we will be able
to raise sufficient funding for additional phases of our business plan. We do not have any
arrangements in place for any future equity financing. There are no assurances that we will be
able to achieve further sales of our common shares or any other form of additional financing. If
we are unable to achieve the financing necessary to continue our business plan, our venture will
fail.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements including arrangements that would affect the
liquidity, capital resources, market risk support and credit risk support or other benefits.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Principals of Consolidation and Basis of Presentation
Our Company’s consolidated financial statements are presented in accordance with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”), and are expressed in United
States dollars. These consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Energizer
Resources Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, Energizer Resources (Mauritius) Ltd., THB
Ventures Ltd., Energizer Resources Madagascar Sarl, Energizer Resources Minerals Sarl,
Madagascar-ERG Joint Venture (Mauritius) Ltd, ERG (Madagascar) Sarl and 2391938 Ontario Inc.
All inter-company balances and transactions have been eliminated on consolidation.
Mineral Property Costs
Mineral property exploration costs are expensed as incurred. We have not yet realized any
revenues from its mineral operations. When it has been determined that a mineral property can
be economically developed as a result of establishing probable and proven reserves, the costs
then incurred to develop such property will be capitalized. Such costs will be amortized using the
units of production method over the estimated life of the probable reserve. If properties are
abandoned or the carrying value is determined to be in excess of possible future recoverable
amounts we will write off the appropriate amount.
Financial Instruments
The fair value of cash and cash equivalents, amounts receivable, marketable securities, loan to
related parties and accounts payable and accrued liabilities were estimated to approximate their
carrying values due to the immediate or short term maturity of these financial instruments. Our
exploration operations are in Madagascar and Canada, which result in exposure to market risks
from changes in foreign currency rates.
Foreign Currency Translation
Our functional and reporting currency is United States Dollars. Monetary assets and liabilities
denominated in foreign currencies are translated using the exchange rate prevailing at the
balance sheet date. Gains and losses arising on settlement of foreign currency denominated
transactions or balances are included in the consolidated statements of operations and
comprehensive loss.
Stock-Based Compensation
We have a stock option plan. All stock based awards granted, including those granted to
directors not acting in their capacity as directors, are accounted for using the fair value based
method, using the Black Scholes pricing model. The fair value of stock options granted is
recognized as an expense within the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive
loss and a corresponding increase in additional paid in capital. Any consideration paid by
eligible participants on the exercise of stock options is credited to common shares. The
additional paid in capital amount associated with stock options is transferred to common shares
upon exercise.
Flow-through shares
The Company has financed a portion of its exploration activities through the issuance of flow-
through shares. Flow-through shares are a Canadian income tax incentive. Under the terms of
the flow-through share agreements, the tax attributes of the related exploration expenditures are
renounced by the Company to the benefit of flow-through share subscribers. Proceeds from the
issuance of flow-through shares are allocated between the offering of shares and the sale of tax
benefits. An allocation is made based on the difference between the quoted price of the existing
shares and the amount that the investor paid for the shares. A liability is recognized for this
difference. The liability is reduced and a reduction of the premium liability is recorded as other
income as eligible expenditures are incurred and when the Company files the appropriate
renunciation forms with Canadian tax authorities.
31
Use of Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of these consolidated financial
statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the period. On an
ongoing basis, management evaluates its judgments and estimates in relation to assets,
liabilities, revenue and expenses. Management uses past experience and other factors as the
basis for its judgments and estimates. Actual results may differ from those estimates. The
impacts of estimates are pervasive throughout these consolidated financial statements, and may
require accounting adjustments based on future occurrences. Revisions to accounting
estimates are recognized in the period in which the estimate is revised and the revision affects
current and future periods. Areas where significant estimates and assumptions are used include:
the Black Scholes valuation of warrants and stock options issued and the valuation recorded for
future income taxes.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
The following are recent FASB accounting pronouncements, which may have an impact on the
Company’s future consolidated financial statements.
•
•
•
“Income Taxes (ASC Topic 740): Presentation of an Unrecognized Tax Benefit when a Net Operating
Loss Carry-forward, a Similar Tax Loss, or a Tax Credit Carry-forward Exists” (“ASU 2013-11”) was
issued during July 2013. FASB issued guidance on how to present an unrecognized tax benefit. The
guidance is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2014.
“Development Stage Entities (ASC Topic 915): Elimination of Certain Financial Reporting
Requirements, Including an Amendment to Variable Interest Entities Guidance in Topic 810,
Consolidation” (“ASU 2014-10”) was issued during June 2014. FASB issued guidance to improve
financial reporting by reducing the cost and complexity associated with the incremental reporting
requirements for development stage entities. This guidance is effective for annual periods beginning
after December 15, 2014 with early adoption allowed.
“Presentation of Financial Statements Going Concern (ASC Topic 205-40): Disclosure of Uncertainties
about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern (“ASU 2014-15”) was issued during August
2014. FASB issued guidance on how to account for and disclose going concern risks. This guidance is
effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2016.
The Company is currently evaluating the impact of ASC Topic 740 and ASC Topic 205-40 FASB
accounting pronouncements. The Company has elected to adopt the provisions of ASC 2014-10
into these consolidated financial statements. The adoption of ASC 2014-10 did not have a
significant impact on the Company’s results of operations, financial performance or cash flows.
32
BUSINESS
Corporate Structure
We were incorporated in the State of Nevada, United States of America on March 1, 2004 and
reincorporated in the State of Minnesota on May 14, 2008.
We have wholly-owned subsidiaries located in Mauritius (Energizer Resources (Mauritius) Ltd.,
THB Venture Ltd. and Madagascar-ERG Joint Venture (Mauritius) Ltd.), Madagascar (Energizer
Resources Minerals Sarl, Energizer Resources Madagascar Sarl and ERG (Madagascar) Sarl),
and Ontario (2391938 Ontario Inc.).
Description of the Business
We are a mineral exploration and mine development company that is developing its feasibility-
stage Molo Graphite Project in southern Madagascar.
Our principal asset is the Molo Graphite Project. On December 14, 2011, we entered into a
Definitive Joint Venture Agreement with Malagasy Minerals Limited (“Malagasy”), a public
company on the Australian Stock Exchange, to acquire a 75% interest to explore and develop a
group of industrial minerals, including graphite, vanadium and approximately 25 other minerals.
On October 24, 2013, we signed a Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) with Malagasy to
acquire the remaining 25% interest in the land position. On April 16, 2014, Energizer signed a Sale
and Purchase Agreement and a Mineral Rights Agreement with Malagasy to acquire the
remaining 25% interest. Malagasy retains a 1.5% net smelter return royalty. In February 2015, a
feasibility study on the Molo Graphite Project was completed. The Molo Graphite Project is
discussed in more detail under “Properties.”
In addition to the Molo Graphite Project, we also hold interests in the Green Giant Property in
Madagascar and the Sagar Property in Québec, Canada. We currently do not consider these
properties to be material to us.
Green Giant Property. During 2007 we acquired a 75% interest in the Green Giant Property in
Madagascar and entered into a joint venture agreement for the Green Giant Property with
Madagascar Minerals and Resources Sarl ("MMR"). In 2009, we acquired the remaining 25%
interest for $100,000. MMR retains a 2% NSR. The NSR can be purchased at our option, for
$500,000 in cash or common shares for the first 1% and at a price of $1,000,000 in cash or
common shares for the second 1%. On April 16, 2014, we signed a Joint Venture Agreement with
Malagasy, whereby Malagasy acquired a 75% interest for non industrial minerals on the property.
We retain remaining 25% and have a free carried interest through the BFS. No specific
consideration was received for this transaction as it was part of the Molo Graphite Project
transaction dated April 16, 2014.
Sagar Property. During 2006, we purchased from Virginia Mines Inc. ("Virginia") a 100% interest
in 382 claims located in northern Quebec, Canada. Virginia retains a 2% NSR on certain claims
within this property with other unrelated vendors holding a 1% NSR on certain claims, and a 0.5%
NSR on other claims. For the other vendor's NSR, we have the right to buy back half of the 1%
NSR for $200,000 and half of the 0.5% NSR for $100,000. In February 2014 we entered into an
agreement to sell an interest Sagar to Honey Badger Exploration Inc. (“TUF”), a public company
related by common management. In July 2014, that agreement was revised into an option
agreement, pursuant to which TUF will acquire an initial 35% interest in the Sagar property once
TUF pays us Cdn$150,000 and TUF has spent Cdn$1,500,000 developing the Sagar property.
TUF can earn interests up to 75% over a four year period by (i) spending a total of Cdn$9,000,000,
(ii) paying us Cdn$900,000 and (iii) issuing to us the lesser of 15% of TUF’s issued and
outstanding shares or 35,000,000 shares. Once TUF holds 75%, it can acquire the remaining
interest by paying us an additional Cdn$2,000,000 and issuing the lesser of 19.5% of TUF’s
outstanding shares or up to 60,000,000 shares, including all previously issued shares.
Recent Developments
On July 28, 2015 the Company announced that Mr. Schler had stepped down as Chief Executive
Officer and a director of the Company, effective September 1, 2015. Mr. Schler will continue to
provide ongoing consulting services to the Company. Mr. Scherba will replace Mr. Schler as the
Company's Chief Executive Officer and will also continue to act as President.
Madagascar Operations
Purchase of the Molo Graphite Project
The Company purchased its 75% interest in the Molo Graphite Project from Malagasy on
December 14, 2011 and subsequently purchased the remaining 25% of the Molo Graphite Project
through the Sale and Purchase Agreement and Mineral Rights Agreement with Malagasy on April
16, 2014. The Company satisfied itself as to its contractual right of ownership of the Molo
Graphite Project through: (i) the receipt and review of title opinions regarding the mining
concessions and mineral rights to the Molo Graphite Project provided by the Company’s
Madagascar legal counsel, Madagascar Law Offices, a law firm in Madagascar recognized as
having expertise in mining law matters (“Madagascar Counsel”); (ii) searches conducted in the
registry of the Bureau du Cadastre Minier de Madagascar or the Mining Bureau (the “BCMM”), the
agency of the Madagascar Federal Government responsible for controlling and applying the
Madagascar Mining Code, in which all applications, grants, transfers and assignments of permits,
mining concessions and other evidence of mineral rights to explore, develop and operate mineral
properties; (iii) site visits by the Company’s consultants, management and directors; (iv)
meetings with senior Madagascar government officials including the Minister of Mines and the
Minister of Finance; (v) evidence of correspondence with the BCMM pursuant to which
exploration, development and operational plans and detailed reports of work performed and
geological and technological studies are required to be submitted; (vi) evidence of payment to
the BCMM in respect of government fees, charges, taxes and annual exploration and exploitation
fees payable on the mineral titles held; (vii) the review, negotiation and execution of various
agreements relating to the acquisition/transfer of certain mining titles; and (viii) evidence of the
entering into of agreements with certain possessors of surface land covering the majority of the
area used for ongoing exploration and operations on its property interests.
Non-Recurring Expenses Relating to the Molo Graphite Project
We have spent over US$4.5 million on the our properties during fiscal 2015, including US$1.2
million on exploration expenditures on properties that are no longer held by us which are
therefore non-recurring expenses. Approximately US$3.3 million was spent on the Molo Graphite
Project, of which US$2.5 million was spent on the Feasibility Study and due to its completion, is
therefore a non-recurring expense. Additionally, approximately US$600,000 was paid to Malagasy
pursuant to the Mineral Rights Agreement which is also a non-recurring expense as it is a
milestone payment. The remaining US$200,000 was paid to salaried employees whom the Issuer
has included in its ongoing budget. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
Condition and Operating Results - Results of Operations for the Interim Period Ended March 31,
2015.” Further expenses related to the Feasibility Study since the quarter ended March 31, 2015
are discussed above. Other than nominal amounts in respect to its base operations in
Madagascar, we do not believe that there will be any non-recurring expenses that are of a
different nature but are of a similar quantum that may need to be funded in the next six months
that will exceed $750,000 because: (i) the Feasibility Study has been completed and we do not
anticipate preparing any new technical reports over the next six months; (ii) the US$1.0 million
commercial production milestone payment to Malagasy will not be paid over the next six months
as the Molo Graphite Project will not be at production stage within that timeframe; and (iii) our
current focus is entering into discussions with potential off-take and project finance partners
which does not have a significant cash cost to us.
Madagascar Mining Laws
Pursuant to the Constitution of Madagascar and the Madagascar Mining Code, as a general rule
foreign and domestic persons are equally able to own property in Madagascar. The Madagascar
Mining Code allows exploration and exploitation work to be conducted by private companies, or
local individuals, through mining concessions. As a result, ownership of property will be
impacted equally whether held directly by domestic persons or indirectly by foreign persons as a
result of any changes to the political climate, laws, regulations, taxes, or other factors affecting
land ownership in Madagascar. Certain exceptions, however, apply. Mining concessions are
granted to Malagasy nationals (whether persons or companies). Malagasy companies
(companies created under Madagascar law) can be entirely owned and controlled by foreign
persons or entities. In contrast with the Madagascar law on land ownership, which is not
permitted in freehold by foreigners, the Madagascar Mining Code does not impose any
restrictions with respect to control of Malagasy companies that are granted mining concessions.
33
Further, as a result of political instability in Madagascar over the past several years, the
transformation or amendment of exploration and research mining permits within the country
continues to be suspended, including the transfer and status of the Molo Graphite Project
permit. Additionally, this permit expired in 2011, and the ministerial decision confirming its
application for renewal has not been issued. The Company has continued to pay taxes and
administrative fees in Madagascar with respect to its mining permits including the permit relating
to the Molo Graphite Project (although such permit is not in the Company’s name). These
payments have been acknowledged and accepted by the Madagascar government.
Legal Rights to Conduct Operations in Madagascar
Other than a valid existence (creation under Madagascar law) and registration with the relevant
authorities (taxes, statistics, social security), the only material permits, business licenses or other
regulatory approvals required for the Company to be able to carry out business operations in
Madagascar are the exploration and exploitation mineral concessions, as the case may be, to be
granted by the BCMM. Exploitation mineral concessions are only issued by BCMM upon
completion of an environmental impact study and if need be (as determined by government
review of such study), by the issuance of an environmental permit. The Company has satisfied
itself that it has all required permits, business licenses and other regulatory approvals to carry
out its business in Madagascar through its documentary due diligence in connection with the
purchase of the Molo Graphite Project, which included among other things, the review of relevant
documentation, working papers and registrations and participation in due diligence sessions
with management, technical consultants and other relevant experts of the seller. Madagascar
Counsel who is knowledgeable about the legal requirements in Madagascar and an expert in
mining matters advised the Company that all required permits, licenses and other regulatory
approvals have been appropriately filed by the Company and Madagascar Counsel will continue
to work with the Company and the Madagascar Government to ensure that the Company
continues to be in compliance with all necessary legal requirements to carry on business and will
continue to pursue the transfer and renewal of the Molo Graphite Project permit. The Company
has been advised by Madagascar Counsel that there are currently no restrictions or conditions
that have been imposed by the government of Madagascar on the Company’s ability to operate
in Madagascar. As the President, the Government and the Parliament have re-established
standard operations as of June 2015 the Company does not anticipate any change to be
implemented by the Madagascar Government that would affect its ability to operate in
Madagascar.
Corporate Structure Controls
The risks of the corporate structure of the Company and its subsidiaries are risks that are typical
and inherent for issuers who have material assets and property interests held indirectly through
foreign subsidiaries and located in foreign jurisdictions. As a result, the Company’s business
and operations are exposed to various levels of political, economic and other risks and
uncertainties associated with operating in a foreign jurisdiction such as difference in laws,
business cultures and practices, banking systems and internal control over financial reporting.
The Molo Graphite Project is located in Madagascar, and as such, the Company’s operations in
Madagascar will be subject to the risks that are deemed to be relevant to the Company in this
regard as disclosed under the subheadings “Our primary efforts are in the African country of
Madagascar, where a new government has been in place since early 2014, and our exploration
permit expired in 2011 and has not yet been renewed. Failure to renew the exploration permit or
convert it into an exploration permit would prevent the advancement of the Molo project. “,
“Changes in tax laws or tax rulings could materially affect our financial position and results of
operations.”, “Climate change and related regulatory responses may impact our business”, “As
we undertake exploration of our claims and interests, we will be subject to the compliance of
government regulation that may increase the anticipated time and cost of our exploration
program.” and “Our operations are subject to strict environmental regulations, which result in
added costs of operations and operational delays.”. Additional risk factors in respect of the Molo
Graphite Project are contained under the heading “Risks Related to the Company” in this
Prospectus.
34
Such risks are mitigated by the Board of Directors of the Company exercising control over the
entire corporate structure by having the authority to cause the removal of the, officers and/or
directors of each of foreign subsidiaries who are either senior officers of the Company or country
managers in Madagascar, by the use of local experts (legal, accounting, tax and directors), by
maintaining local bank accounts with “as needed cash balances” with accredited banking
institutions and exercising strong controls over the use of cash, requiring at least one senior
officer from the Company to sign all cheques and money transfers, performing a complete
quarterly review of the consolidated books and records at the Company’s head office and by
frequent personal inspection and visits to the offices and project locations of the foreign
subsidiaries by the Company’s key management including the Company’s Chief Executive
Officer, President & Chief Operating Officer, Chief Financial Officer and Senior Vice-President of
Mine Development on a regular basis.
Management of the Company has control over ERG (Madagascar) SARL (“ERG Madagascar”), its
wholly-owned subsidiary that holds the contractual right to the Molo Graphite Project by virtue of
common management and by virtue of its 100% indirect equity interest (through two wholly
owned Mauritius subsidiaries) in ERG Madagascar. Therefore, the management of the Company
can effectively: (i) appoint and dismiss at any time, any and all of ERG Madagascar’s directors
and officers; (ii) instruct ERG Madagascar’s directors and officers to pursue the Company’s
business activities; and (iii) has legal rights as a shareholder to require the directors and officers
of ERG Madagascar to comply with their fiduciary obligations and can also enforce its rights by
way of shareholder remedies available to it. As a result, senior management of the Company can
effectively align the Company’s business objectives and effect the implementation of same at the
level of ERG Madagascar.
The Company has the ability to remove and appoint directors and officers in ERG Madagascar by
the signing and filing of Board resolutions related thereto with the company registry. The Board
of Directors of the Company, through its corporate governance practices and in particular the
activities of its Capital Projects Committee and Nominating Committee, regularly receives
management and technical updates and progress reports in connection with ERG Madagascar
and the Molo Graphite Project, and in so doing, is able to maintain effective oversight of the
operations and project development activities of ERG Madagascar. The opening and closing of
bank accounts of ERG Madagascar is controlled and approved by the Company’s Chief Financial
Officer. The Board of Directors of the Company is able to cause ERG Madagascar to transfer
funds and accomplish the various operating aspects of the business by way of its ability to exert
effective control over ERG Madagascar as discussed above. No money can transfer without at
least one senior officer of the Company approving, be it the Chief Executive Officer, President &
Chief Operating Officer or the Chief Financial Officer. All of the minute books and corporate
records and documents of ERG Madagascar are filed at ERG Madagascar’s office in Madagascar
and with the company registry in Antananarivo, where ERG Madagascar’s office is located, when
required. The Board of Directors of the Company are not restricted in accessing minutes books
and corporate records and documents of ERG Madagascar as they are also filed in duplicate at
the Company’s head office in Toronto.
35
Management Experience in Madagascar
The Company has been conducting business in Madagascar for eight years. Further, Messrs.
Harder, Schler (Director and Chief Executive Officer), Scherba (Director, President & Chief
Operating Officer), Liabotis (Chief Financial Officer), Borley (Director and Senior Vice President of
Mine Development), Nykoliation (Senior Vice President of Corporate Development), Comand
(Director) and Yarie (Director) have experience conducting business in Madagascar and have
varying degrees of familiarity with the legal, mining, accounting and regulatory requirements of
Madagascar. Moreover, the Company’s officers frequently review relevant materials created by
Madagascar Counsel and communicate with Madagascar Counsel, and the Company’s Country
Manager and local consulting staff whereby they are apprised of new developments in the legal
regime and new requirements that come into force from time to time, such that management is
kept aware of relevant material developments in Madagascar as they pertain to and affect the
Company’s business and operations. Any material developments will then be discussed with the
directors at the Board level. Additionally, directors and officers of the Company attend seminars
and presentations from time to time provided by legal and accounting firms on developments in
the foreign jurisdictions in which the Company conducts business. The directors and officers
also work closely with Madagascar Counsel, the Company’s Country Manager and local
consulting staff to understand and subsequently adjust firm strategies and practices in
connection with changes in Madagascar laws and regulatory regimes.
Foreign Operations in Madagascar
The government of Madagascar regulates mining activities through the Ministry in charge of
Mining and Petroleum and the BCMM, which are the regulatory authorities in charge of
authorizing research, exploration, development and exploitation. In addition, the environmental
authorities, most notably the National Office for the Environment regulate mining operations by
licensing all steps of operations that have any environmental impact. All of the directors and
officers receive updates from technical experts in this regard, allowing them to become
familiarized with applicable regulations. Some of the Company’s directors and officers have
varying levels of functional use of French, the business language in Madagascar. Knowledge of
the local business, culture and practices are imparted by these individuals to other directors and
officers of the Company. Certain of the directors and officers visit Madagascar on a regular basis
in order to ensure effective control and management of the operations of ERG Madagascar and
as a result come into contact with other employees, personnel, government officials, business
persons and customers who are locals in Madagascar, which enable them to enhance their
knowledge on these fronts. The Company relies heavily on the expertise and advice of
Madagascar Counsel in conducting its business operations in accordance with local business
culture and practices. In addition, the Company hires and engages local experts and
professionals (i.e. legal, accounting and tax consultants) to advise the Company with respect to
current and new regulations in respect of banking, financial and tax matters in Madagascar. The
Company utilizes and will continue to utilize large, established and well recognized financial
institutions in both Canada and Madagascar. The fact that the Company and ERG Madagascar
have common directors and officers also facilitates knowledge sharing in these areas.
The Company also arranges for site visits to the Molo Graphite Project and meets with local
management, Madagascar government staff, Madagascar government offices, the Company’s
consultants and vendors, and other local officials and service providers, as deemed appropriate.
Mr. Schler visits Madagascar no less than twice every three years. Messrs. Scherba and Borley
visit Madagascar at least four times per year and Mr. Liabotis visits Madagascar approximately
once every other year. Other officers, including Messrs. Nykoliation and Quentin, visit
Madagascar on an as needed basis. Board members visit Madagascar and meet with local
management and visit the Molo Graphite Project site on an as needed basis. Additional visits by
Board members occur on an as needed basis.
36
Business Language in Madagascar
The business language in Madagascar is French. In addition to the Company’s Country Manager,
Madagascar Counsel and the consulting staff who are fluent in French, Messrs. Scherba, Harder
and Comand have a functional understanding of French. Madagascar Counsel, the Country
Manager and the next most senior employee in the Country Manager’s office in Madagascar are
fluent in French and English and other local consulting staff are fluent in French and have certain
levels of proficiency in English. It is intended that any additional advisors to the Company in
Madagascar will be fluent in English. The primary language used in meetings of management and
the Board of Directors of the Company is in English. Material documents relating to the Company
that are provided to the Board of Directors are in English. To the extent than any original
documentation is in French, Madagascar Counsel or the Company’s Country Manager or other
consultants located in Madagascar assist with any translation needs. The Company does not
currently have a formal communication plan or policy in place and has not to date, experienced
any communication-related issues. The Company has not experienced and does not anticipate
experiencing communication related issues in connection with its operations in Madagascar.
Numerous service providers and consultants under the Company’s employ are fluent in French
and English and assist the Company as required. The Company will, from time to time, re-
evaluate whether a formal communication policy is necessary.
Internal Control over Financial Reporting
The Company maintains internal control over financial reporting with respect to its Madagascar
operations by taking various measures. Differences in banking systems and controls between
Canada and Madagascar are addressed by having controls over cash in both locations;
especially over access to cash, cash disbursements, appropriate authorization levels, performing
and reviewing bank reconciliations on a monthly and quarterly basis, signing each Madagascar
vendor cheque or money transfer in Canada and the segregation of duties. Before cash is
transferred to or from Madagascar, a list of payments is made and reviewed and approved by
management in Toronto. Cash balances are provided quarterly, and at the time of every cheque
run, to management in Toronto. The Chief Financial Officer reviews and approves the financial
statements of the Madagascar subsidiaries on a quarterly basis.
37
When Madagascar vendors are required to be paid, a list of all payments is compiled for review in
Toronto. This list is sent to the Chief Financial Officer of the Company along with copies of all
invoices that make up the balances and/or calculation spreadsheets supporting the numbers.
This list is reviewed and approved by both the President & Chief Operating Officer and the Chief
Financial Officer. Any differences are reconciled with Madagascar personnel prior to the cheque
run being approved. The cheques are then written out in Toronto and signed by one of the Chief
Executive Officer, the President & Chief Operating Officer or the Chief Financial Officer. The
cheques are then mailed to the Country Manager’s office for his signature. Dual signatures are
required on all cheques. The signatories are: Chief Executive Officer, the President & Chief
Operating Officer, the Chief Financial Officer and the Madagascar Country Manager. When the
cheques are mailed, office staff in Toronto prepares a wire to fund the account in Madagascar to
which the cheques are drawn. The Company usually rounds the cheque run requested amount
up to the nearest thousand and transfers that amount. Very little excess cash is maintained in
Madagascar. Money does not flow from Madagascar to Canada.
The difference in cultures and practices between the two countries is addressed by employing
competent staff in both countries who are familiar with the local laws, business culture and
standard practices, have local language proficiency, are experienced in working in the respective
jurisdictions and dealing with the respective government authorities; and have experience and
knowledge of the local banking systems and treasury requirements. The flow of funds between
Canada and Madagascar functions as intended by appointing common directors and officers as
between ERG Madagascar and the Company, involving the Company’s Chief Financial Officer,
located in Toronto, key finance personnel in Madagascar, closely monitoring the Madagascar
finance department, and by the Chief Financial Officer or others from the senior management
team carrying out personal visits to Madagascar on a regular basis. The Company documents
and assesses the design of internal controls over financial reporting on an annual basis.
Furthermore, key controls for the accounts in scope are tested across the Company on an
annual basis. This process is undertaken by the Company’s Chief Financial Officer and the
Chairman of the Audit Committee.
Market
Natural Graphite is graded into 3 forms: Flake, Amorphous and Lump. A majority of the world’s
graphite supply is amorphous (fine or powder) and is used for traditional purposes such as
automotive and steel making. Flake graphite is essential for producing batteries, specifically
lithium-ion, and for use in consumer electronics. The Molo Graphite Project contains flake
graphite. Flake graphite prices are a function of 2 factors - flake size and purity - with large flake
(+80 mesh), high Carbon (+94%) varieties commanding premium pricing. Like uranium, there is a
posted price for graphite which provides a guideline with respect to longer term trends but
transactions are largely based on direct negotiations between the buyer and seller.
Competitive Conditions in our Industry
The mineral exploration and mining industry is competitive in all phases of exploration,
development and production. We compete with a number of other entities and individuals in the
search for, and acquisition of, attractive mineral properties. As a result of this competition, the
majority of which is with companies with greater financial resources than us, we may not in the
future be able to acquire attractive properties on terms our management considers acceptable.
Furthermore, we compete with other resource companies, many of whom have greater financial
resources and/or more advanced properties that are better able to attract equity investments and
other capital. Factors beyond our control may affect the marketability of minerals mined or
discovered by us.
38
Employees
As of July 22, 2015, we had 10 total employees, 7 full-time and 3 part-time employees. In addition
to our full time employees, we engage consultants to serve several important managerial and
non-managerial functions for us.
CAUTIONARY NOTE TO UNITED STATES INVESTORS REGARDING MINERAL RESERVE AND
RESOURCE ESTIMATES
We report mineral reserve estimates in accordance with the SEC’s Industry Guide 7 (“Guide 7”)
under the United States Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “U.S. Securities Act”). As a
reporting issuer in Canada with our primary trading market in Canada, we are also required to
prepare reports on our mineral properties in accordance with Canadian National Instrument 43-
101—Standards of Disclosure for Mineral Projects (“NI 43-101”). The feasibility study referenced
in this prospectus uses the terms “mineral resource,” “measured mineral resource,” “indicated
mineral resource” and “inferred mineral resource”. We advise investors that these terms are
defined in and required to be disclosed by NI 43-101; however, these terms are not defined terms
under Guide 7 and are normally not permitted to be used in reports and registration statements
filed with the SEC. As a result, information resources determined in accordance with NI 43-101
are not contained in this document. We reference that report in this prospectus for informational
purposes only and such report is not incorporated herein by reference. Investors are cautioned
not to assume that any part or all of mineral deposits in the above categories will ever be
converted into Guide 7 compliant reserves. “Inferred mineral resources” have a great amount of
uncertainty as to their existence, and great uncertainty as to their economic and legal feasibility.
It cannot be assumed that all or any part of an inferred mineral resource will ever be upgraded to
a higher category. Under Canadian rules, estimates of inferred mineral resources may not form
the basis of feasibility or pre-feasibility studies, except in rare cases. Investors are cautioned not
to assume that all or any part of an inferred mineral resource exists or is economically or legally
mineable. Disclosure of “contained” minerals in a resource is permitted disclosure under
Canadian regulations; however, the SEC normally only permits issuers to report mineralization
that does not constitute “reserves” by SEC standards as in place tonnage and grade without
reference to unit measures.
As used in this prospectus, the terms “mineral reserve”, “proven mineral reserve” and “probable
mineral reserve” are Canadian mining terms as defined in accordance with NI 43-101 and the
Canadian Institute of Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum (the “CIM”)—CIM Definition Standards on
Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves, adopted by the CIM Council, as amended. These
definitions differ from the definitions in Guide 7. Under Guide 7 standards, a “final” or “bankable”
feasibility study is required to report reserves, the three-year historical average price is used in
any reserve or cash flow analysis to designate reserves and the primary environmental analysis
or report must be filed with the appropriate governmental authority. The Feasibility Study was
prepared in accordance with N1 43-101, but we believe the reserves disclosed in this prospectus
also comply with the requirements of Guide 7.
39
PROPERTIES
Executive Offices
The following is extracted from the summary section and other sections of the Feasibility Study,
effective February 6, 2015, prepared by DRA Projects (Pty) Limited.
The following summary does not purport to be a complete summary of the Molo Graphite Project
and is subject to all the assumptions, qualifications and procedures set out in the Feasibility
Study and is qualified in its entirety with reference to the full text of the Feasibility Study. Readers
should read this summary in conjunction with the Feasibility Study.
1.
1.1
SUMMARY
Introduction
Energizer Resources Inc. (“Energizer” or the “Company”) is a mineral exploration and
development Company based in Toronto, Canada, which is currently focused on the exploration
and development of its 100% owned, flagship Molo Graphite Project.
The Molo deposit is situated 160 kilometres (“km”) southeast of the city of Toliara, in the Tulear
region of south-western Madagascar. The deposit occurs in a sparsely populated, dry savannah
grassland region, which has easy access via a network of seasonal secondary roads radiating
outward from the village of Fotadrevo. Fotadrevo in turn has an all-weather airstrip and access to
a road system that leads to the regional capital (and port city) of Toliara and the Port of Ehoala at
Fort Dauphin via the RN10, or RN13.
Geologically Molo is situated in the Bekikiy block (Tolagnaro-Ampanihy high grade metamorphic
province) of southern Madagascar. The Molo deposit is underlain predominantly by moderately
to highly metamorphosed and sheared graphitic (biotite, chlorite and garnet-rich) quartzo-
feldspathic schists and gneisses, which are variably mineralised. Near surface rocks are
oxidised, and saprolitic to a depth, usually of less than 5m.
Molo is one of several surficial graphite trends discovered by Energizer in late 2011 and
announced in early January 2012. The deposit was originally drill tested in 2012, with an initial
seven holes being completed. Resource delineation, drilling and trenching on Molo took place
between May and November of 2012, and allowed for a maiden Indicated and Inferred Resource
to be stated in early December of the same year. This maiden mineral resource estimate formed
the basis for a Preliminary Economic Assessment (the “PEA”), which was undertaken by DRA
Mineral Projects in 2013. The positive outcome of this assessment lead Energizer to undertake
another phase of exploratory drilling and sampling in 2014, which was done under the
supervision of Caracle Creek International Consulting (Pty) Limited (“Caracle Creek” or “CCIC”).
This phase of exploration was aimed at improving the geological confidence of the deposit and
its contained mineral resources, and included an additional 32 diamond drill holes (totalling 2,063
metres) and 9 trenches (totalling 1,876 metres). Caracle Creek were subsequently engaged to
update the geological model and resource estimate. The entire database on which this new
model and resource estimate is based contains 80 drill holes (totalling 11,660 metres) and 35
trenches (totalling 8,492 metres). This new resource forms the basis for this Molo 2015 FS.
1.2
Project Location
The Molo deposit is located some 160 km SE of Madagascar’s administrative capital (and port
city) of Toliara, in the Tulear region and about 220 km NW of Fort Dauphin. It is approximately 13
km NE of the local village of Fotadrevo. See Figure 1 below.
40
Figure 1: Project Location
1.3
Project Description
The proposed development of the Molo Graphite Project includes the construction of a green
fields open pit mine, a processing plant with a capacity of 862,000 tonnes of ore per annum and
all supporting infrastructure including water, fuel, power, tailings, buildings and permanent
accommodation.
The mine will utilize four 2 megawatt diesel generators, with three running and one standby and
water is supplied from a well field which has been defined by drilling and detailed geo-
hydrological modelling. The processing plant will consist of conventional crushing, milling and
flotation circuits followed by concentrate filtering, drying and screening. The waste heat
generated by the power station will be utilized for the drying of the concentrate.
The tailings storage facility, in the form of a valley dam layout, is located approximately 1.5
kilometers to the west of the process plant and is designed to accommodate the run-of-mine
tonnage for the 26 year Life of Mine (“LOM”).
See Figure 2 below for the proposed layout of the site.
Figure 2: Site layout
1.4
Summary of financial results
Table 1 below summarizes the financial results of the Molo 2015 FS. These are based on a
discounted flow analysis of the project using nominal cash flows, which include the effect of
inflation.
41
Table 1: Summary of Financial Results
1 Post-tax: NPV (10% Discount Cash Flow)(1)(2)
2 Post-tax: IRR (1)(2)
3 Payback (2)
4 Capital cost (“CAPEX”)
5
Design Development Allowance (to cover potential quantity and rate changes during
detailed design and execution)
6 Owners Contingency
7 On-site Operating Costs (“OPEX”) per tonne of concentrate, (year 3 onward)
8
9
Transportation per tonne of concentrate (from mine site to Madagascar Port year 3
onward)
Transportation per tonne of concentrate (from Madagascar Port to European
Customer Port from year 3 onward)
10Average annual production of concentrate
11Life of Mine
12Graphite concentrate sale price (US$/tonne at Start Up - 2017)
13Average Head Grade
14Average ore mined per annum over Life of Mine
15Average stripping ratio
16Average carbon recovery
Notes
US$389,797,113
31.2%
4.84 years
US$149.9
million
US$13.8 million
US$24.6 million
US$353
US$182
US$155
53,017 tonnes
26 years
US$1,689 per
tonne
7.04%
856,701 tonnes
0.81:1
87.80%
•          Note 1: Assumes project is financed with a 50% debt and 50% equity. See “Table 12:
Alternate Case Economic Analysis of the Project” for 100% equity financing scenario.
•          Note 2: Values shown are based on nominal cash flows, which include the effect of
inflation. Costs are increased on an annual basis by the relevant inflation index.
Table 2 below summarizes key mine and process data.
Table 2: Mine & Process Data
Proven reserves
Probable reserves
14,170,000Tonnes @ 7.0% C grade
8,367,000 Tonnes @ 7.04% C grade
Average plant head feed over LOM
 
Tonnes per annum
 
 
 
 
Property Description and Ownership
7.04%
Grade (graphitic carbon)
0.81:1
Waste to ore ratio
856,701
Processing rate
26 years
Mine life
Recovery
87.8%
Average annual product tonnes53,017
 
1.5
1.5.1
 42
Property description
The Molo Graphite Project is contained in a portion of Exploration Permit #3432. The Project is
centred on UTM coordinates 413,390 Easting 7,345,713 Northing (UTM 38S, WGS 84 datum). The
Molo Graphite Project is located 11.5 km ENE of the town of Fotadrevo and covers an area of 62.5
hectares (“ha”). The Government of Madagascar designates individual claims by a central
LaBorde UTM location point, comprising a square with an area of 6.25 km2.
1.5.2
Ownership
On December 14, 2011, the Company entered into a Definitive Joint Venture Agreement (“JVA”)
with Malagasy Minerals Limited (“Malagasy”), a public company on the Australian Stock
Exchange, to acquire a 75% interest to explore and develop a group of industrial minerals,
including graphite, vanadium and approximately 25 other minerals. On October 24, 2013, the
Company signed a Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) with Malagasy to acquire the
remaining 25% interest in the land position.
On April 16, 2014, Energizer signed a Sale and Purchase Agreement and a Mineral Rights
Agreement with Malagasy to acquire the remaining 25% interest. Malagasy retains a 1.5% net
smelter return royalty (“NSR”).
The Molo Graphite Project is located within Exploration Permit #3432 as issued by the Bureau de
Cadastre Minier de Madagascar pursuant to the Mining Code 1999 (as amended) and its
implementing decrees.
CCIC has reviewed a copy of the Contrat d’amodiation pertaining to this right and are satisfied
that the rights to explore this permit have been ceded to Energizer or one of its Madagascar
subsidiaries.
Energizer holds the exclusive right to explore for a defined group of industrial minerals within the
permits listed above. These industrial minerals include the following: Graphite, Vanadium,
Lithium, Aggregates, Alunite, Barite, Bentonite, Vermiculite, Carbonatites, Corundum,
Dimensional stone (excluding labradorite), Feldspar (excluding labradorite), Fluorspar, Granite,
Gypsum, Kaolin, Kyanite, Limestone / Dolomite, Marble, Mica, Olivine, Perlite, Phosphate, Potash-
Potassium minerals, Pumice Quartz, Staurolite, and Zeolites.
Reporting requirements of exploration activities carried out by the titleholder on a Research
Permit are minimal. A titleholder must maintain a diary of events and record the names and dates
present of persons active on the project. In addition, a site plan with a scale between 1/100 and
1/10,000 showing “a map of the work completed” must be presented. Upon establishment of a
mineral resource, Research Permits may be converted into Exploitation Permits by application.
CCIC is of the opinion that Energizer is compliant in terms of its commitments under these
reporting requirements.
The Molo Graphite Project has not been legally surveyed; however, since all claim boundaries
conform to the predetermined rectilinear LaBorde Projection grid, these can be readily located on
the ground by use of Global Positioning System (“GPS”) instruments. Most current GPS units
and software packages do not however offer LaBorde among their available options, and
therefore defined shifts have to be employed to display LaBorde data in the WGS 84 system. For
convenience, all Energizer positional data is collected in WGS 84, and if necessary converted
back to LaBorde.
1.5.3
Royalties
Malagasy retains a 1.5% net smelter return royalty on the Molo Graphite Project.
1.5.4
Permits
Exploration Permit #3432 is currently held under the name of a subsidiary of Malagasy Minerals
called, Mada-Aust Sarl. The transformation or amendment of exploration and research mining
permits within the country continues to be suspended from the time that Madagascar was run by
a president who was not democratically elected. This current permit expired on August 17, 2011.
Energizer’s Madagascar domiciled subsidiary companies and Mada-Aust Sarl has continued to
pay all taxes and administrative fees to the Madagascan government and its mining ministry with
respect to all the mining permits held in country. These taxes and administrative fee payments
have been acknowledged and accepted by the Madagascan government. In addition, Energizer
continues to diligently work with the Madagascan government to obtain the necessary permits in
its name as the country clears its backlog of applications and amendments.
The research permit will be converted into an exploitation permit in due course. When the permit
is transformed from a research permit to an exploitation permit, the exploitation permit will be
issued in the name of Energizer. The exploitation permit is required to advance the Molo Graphite
Project to the developmental stage.
1.6
 43 
   
1.7
[Reserved]
Exploration
No further exploration is currently planned.
1.8
Mineral Reserve Estimate
As a result of the Molo 2015 FS, the following maiden proven and probable mineral reserves are
declared, see Table 4 below.
Table 4: Mineral Reserves
Tonnage C Grade (%)
Category
14,170,0007.00
Proven
Probable
8,367,000 7.04
Proven and Probable22,437,0007.02
Proven Reserves are reported as the Measured Resources inside the designed open pit and
above the grade cut off of 4.5% C. Similarly, the Probable Reserves are reported as the Indicated
Resources inside the designed open pit and above the grade cut-off of 4.5% C.
1.9
Metallurgical Test Work
The Molo 2015 FS is based on a full suite of metallurgical test work performed by SGS Canada
Metallurgical Services Inc. (“SGS”) which is based in Lakefield, Ontario, Canada. These tests
included laboratory scale metallurgical work and a 200 tonne bulk sample / pilot plant program.
The laboratory scale work included comminution tests, process development and optimization
tests, variability flotation, and concentrate upgrading tests.
Comminution test results place the Molo ore into the very soft to soft category with low abrasivity.
A simple reagent regime consists of fuel oil number 2 and methyl isobutyl carbinol at dosages of
approximately 120 g/t and 195 g/t, respectively. A total of approximately 150 open circuit and
locked cycle flotation tests were completed on almost 70 composites as part of the process
development, optimization, and variability flotation program. The metallurgical programs
culminated in a process flowsheet that is capable of treating the Molo ore using proven mineral
processing techniques and extraction has been successfully demonstrated in the laboratory and
pilot plant campaigns.
The tests indicated that variability exists with regards to the metallurgical response of the ore
across the deposit, which resulted in a range of concentrate grades between 88.8% total carbon
and 97.8% total carbon. Optical mineralogy on representative concentrate samples identified
interlayered graphite and non- sulphide gangue minerals as the primary source of impurities. The
process risk was mitigated with the design of an upgrading circuit, which improved the grade of a
concentrate representing the average mill product of the first five years of operation from 92.1%
total carbon to 97.1% total carbon.
The overall graphitic carbon recovery into the final concentrate of the first 5 years of operation is
87.8% based on the metallurgical response of composites using samples from all drill holes
within the five year pit design. The average composition of the combined concentrate grade is
presented in the table below.
The area composites were generated by splitting the footprint of the five year mine plan into five
zones of approximately the same size. All drill holes within one specific zone were then combined
to form an area composite. A total of fifteen area composites were generated for metallurgical
evaluation, (five zones with three depth intervals per zone). All assays were completed using
control quality analysis and cross checks were completed during the mass balancing process to
verify that the results were within the estimated measurement uncertainly of up to 1.7% relative
for graphite concentrate grades greater than 90% total carbon.
Table 5: Metallurgical Data - Flake Size Distribution and Product Grade
Mass Distribution %Product Grade(%) Carbon
Product Size
23.6
+48 mesh (jumbo flake)
14.6
+65 mesh (coarse flake)
+80 mesh (large flake)
8.2
+100 mesh (medium flake)6.9
+150 mesh (medium flake)15.5
10.1
+200 mesh (small flake)
21.1
-200 mesh (fine flake)
96.9
97.1
97.0
97.2
97.3
98.1
97.5
44
Table 6: Pricing Matrix - Flake Size Distribution Grouping and Product Grade
Product Size Mass Distribution %Product Grade (%) Carbon
>50 mesh
23.6
-50 to +80 mesh 22.7
-80 to +100 mesh6.9
46.8
-100 mesh
96.9
97.1
97.2
97.6
Vendor testing including solid-liquid separation of tailings and concentrate, screening and
dewatering of concentrate, and drying of concentrate was completed successfully.
1.10
Recovery methods
The process design is based on an annual production capacity of 862 kilotonnes of plant feed
material at a nominal head grade of 7.04% C(t) producing an estimated average of 53 kilotonnes
per annum (“ktpa”) of final concentrate.
The ore processing circuit consists of three-stage crushing followed by primary milling and
classification, a flotation separation and concentrate upgrading circuit, and graphite product and
tailings effluent handling facilities.
The crushing circuit is designed to operate 365 days per annum for 24 hours per day at ±68%
utilization and comprises a primary jaw crusher, a secondary cone crusher and a tertiary cone
crusher in closed-circuit with a double-deck classifying screen. The crushed product (P80 of
approximately 13 mm) passes through a surge bin from where it is fed to the milling circuit.
The milling and flotation circuits are designed to operate 365 days per annum for 24 hours per
day at 91% utilization. A single stage primary ball milling circuit is employed, incorporating a
closed circuit linear classifying screen and a scalping screen ahead of the mill. The scalping
screen undersize feeds a single flash flotation cell before combining with the mill discharge
material. Scalping and linear screen oversize are the feed to the primary mill. The primary ball mill
size is 4.3m diameter (inside new liners) x 4.6m (EGL) with an installed motor power of 1000 kW.
Primary milling is followed by rougher flotation which, along with flash flotation, recovers the
graphite to concentrate from the main stream. Rougher flotation employs seven forced-draught
trough cells.
The primary, fine-flake and attritioning cleaning circuits upgrade the concentrate to the final
product grade of above 94% C(t). Concentrate from the main stream feeds into the primary
cleaning circuit consisting essentially of a dewatering screen, a polishing ball mill, a column
flotation cell and flotation cleaner/cleaner scavenger trough cells.
The primary cleaner column cell concentrate gravitates to a 65 mesh classifying screen, from
where the large-flake oversize is directed to a high rate thickener located ahead of a final
concentrate attritioning circuit. Primary cleaner classifying screen undersize is pumped to the
fine-flake cleaning circuit.
The fine flake cleaning circuit consists primarily of a dewatering screen, a polishing ball mill, a
column flotation cell and flotation cleaner/cleaner scavenger trough cells. The attritioning
cleaning circuit employs a high rate thickener, an attritioning stirred mill, a column flotation cell
and flotation cleaner/cleaner scavenger trough cells. Fine flake column concentrate merges with
the +65 mesh primary cleaner classifying screen oversize as it feeds the attritioning circuit
thickener. Attritioning circuit column concentrate comprises the final concentrate stream feeding
the final concentrate thickener.
45
Combined rougher and cleaner flotation final tailings are pumped to a guard de- gritting cyclone
installation ahead of a high rate final tailings thickener. Cyclone overflow feeds the thickener.
Cyclone and thickener underflows combine and are pumped for final disposal to the tailings
storage facility (“TSF”).
Thickened final concentrate is pumped to a linear vacuum belt filter for further dewatering before
the filter cake is fed into a rotary kiln drying circuit.
A three-stage, twin stream sifting plant screens the dry concentrate (dryer product) into the pre-
determined size classes. A bagging plant is employed to weigh, sample and bag the different size
fractions discretely for loading into sea freight containers for shipment.
Chemical reagents are used throughout the primary recovery and upgrading processes. Diesel
fuel collector and liquid frother are added to various points-of- use within the flotation circuits.
Diesel collector is pumped from the main tank farm to a bulk tank at the plant, from where it
enters a manifold system which supplies multiple variable speed peristaltic pumps which
discretely pump the collector at set rates to the various points-of-use within the flotation circuits.
MIBC (methyl isobutyl carbinol) frother is delivered by road to a plant reagent store in 1m3 IBC’s,
or 210 litre steel drums. The drums are collected by forklift as required and the contents pumped
into a frother storage tank. A manifold system on the storage tank supplies multiple variable
speed peristaltic pumps, which discretely pump the frother at set rates to the various points-of-
use within the flotation circuits.
Flocculant powder (Magnafloc 919 and Magnafloc 24 for concentrate and tailings thickening
facilitation respectively) is delivered by road to the plant reagent store in 25 kg bags. The bags
are collected by forklift as required and delivered to a flocculant mixing and dosing area. Here the
flocculant is diluted as required using parallel, duplicate vendor-package automated make-up
plants, one each being dedicated to supplying the concentrate and tailings thickeners due to the
flocculant types required being different for each application. Variable speed peristaltic pumps
discretely pump the flocculant at set rates to the thickeners’ points-of-use.
Coagulant powder (Magnafloc 1707) for thickening enhancement is handled similarly to the
flocculant as described above, the exception being that a single make-up system is provided to
supply both the concentrate and tailings thickeners. Again, variable speed peristaltic pumps
discretely pump the coagulant at set rates to the thickeners’ points-of-use.
Figure 3 below gives a high level overview of the project and Figure 4 below provides a block
diagram depicting the basic process flow.
Figure 3: Project summary
46
Figure 4: Block Flow Diagram
1.11
Infrastructure
The project is located in a relatively remote part of South Western Madagascar, approximately 13
km NE of the local village of Fotadrevo. There is currently no infrastructure on site and
everything will have to be constructed.
The following elements are all part of the project scope:
•          Raw water supply (from a network of bore holes extracting ground water)
•          Power supply (temporary during construction) and then a permanent diesel power station
to supply the plant and permanent camp
•          Sanitation for the plant, permanent camp, and temporary during construction)
•          Storm water control and management
•          Temporary accommodation during construction
•          Permanent accommodation (340 people)
•          All permanent buildings (offices, workshops, stores, laboratory)
•          All buried services (potable water, sewage, stormwater, electrical reticulation)
•          In plant roads
•          Haul road
•          Tailings Storage Facility
•          Tailings pipe line to the TSF
•          Return water pipe line from the TSF back to the plant
•          Rock dumps and Run of Mine Ore (“ROM”) pads
See Figure 2 in section 1.3 for the site layout.
1.11.1
Raw Water Supply
Water is supplied by a net work of boreholes. A detailed water demand and supply analysis was
done as part of the Molo 2015 FS, and this has shown that the water demands of the plant can be
accommodated by boreholes within a radius of 5km from the plant. The daily steady state raw
water make up requirement is estimated to be 561m3 per day.
47 
   
1.11.2
Power Supply
Power is supplied by four 2 MW diesel generators. The running load for the plant is estimated to
be 2.7 MW with an additional 0.8 MW for the permanent camp and all mine infrastructure. Under
normal operation there will only be two units running, with a third allowed to assist with mill
starting, and the fourth unit as a spare for maintenance.
1.12
Product Pricing
Graphite prices are based on current quotes and projected estimates provided by UK-based
Roskill Consulting Group Ltd (“Roskill”), recognized as a leader in providing independent and
unbiased market research, pricing trends, and demand and supply analysis for the natural flake
graphite market.
The weighted average price per tonne of graphite concentrate in December 2014 was US$1,375.
This is a basket price and reflects the contribution of the different flake sizes and carbon grades
to the overall price. The start-up price (in 2017 terms) for a tonne of Molo graphite concentrate is a
projection based on Roskill information. The graphite price then escalates in the financial model
based on Roskill’s forecasts for supply and demand. The reader is cautioned that these are
forecasts and may change subject to market dynamics.
1.13
Logistics
The cost to transport one tonne of dry concentrate (0.5% moisture content) from Molo to
Rotterdam via Fort Dauphin, Madagascar, in December 2014 terms is 337 US$ / tonne. This is
based on shipping 26 tonnes of concentrate in 1 m3 bags placed inside a 40 ft. container.
The route from Molo to Fort Dauphin runs either via the RN 10 or the RN 13. Both these routes
vary from reasonable to poor condition and trucks are expected to take between four and five
days to make the round trip. A truck was run over the route by a Madagascan trucking contractor
to gauge cycle times and they managed to complete the journey in two long days each way. This
was in the dry season and in the wet season there may be periods of time when the roads
become impassable. No money has been budgeted for roads repairs or upgrades.
The Port of Ehoala at Fort Dauphin is a modern (2009) port developed by Rio Tinto for the QMM
project. It has a 15m draft with shipping lines calling on a regular basis. There are however no
crane facilities and vessels require their own cranes.
Figure 5 below shows a picture of the Port of Ehoala at Fort Dauphin.
Figure 5: Port of Ehoala at Fort Dauphin
Figure 6, Figure 7, and Figure 8 below give some insight into the varying road conditions
between Molo and Fort Daupin.
48
Figure 6: Road Conditions (1)
Figure 7: Road Conditions (2)
Figure 8: Road Conditions (3)
1.14
 49
Capital costs
The capital cost for the project is estimated to be 188.2 million US$, including a contingency of
24.5 million US$. Competitive bids were obtained for most mechanical equipment, and for the
earthworks, civils, structural steel, mechanical erection, piping and electrical, control and
instrumentation detailed Bills of Quantities were issued for competitive pricing.
The base date for the capital costs is December 2014 and no provision has been made for
escalation. The accuracy of capital costs is considered to be with +/- 10%
Table 7: Construction Capital Costs
Cost (US$ Million)
Category
149.9
Capital Cost
Design Development Allowance
13.8
Subtotal (see detail in Table 8 below)163.7
24.5
Contingency
Total
188.2*
*Excludes taxes, tariffs, duties and interest
Table 8: Initial Capital Cost Summary
Cost Centres
Cost (US$ Million)
Pre-production
37.3
Tailings Storage Facility
24.3
Mechanicals
20.8
Electrical, Control & Instrumentation20.8
17.9
External services
Earthworks
11.8
7.4
Piping
5.6
Structural
Transport
5.5
3.4
Vendor packages
2.5
Civil works
2.4
Consumables and spares
Buildings, fittings
2.1
1.9
Plate work
163.7
Total Capital Costs
Future capital expenditure expected to be incurred has been allowed for in the financial model to
cover the expansion of the TSF in year 2, the replacement of the mine fleet, the replacement of
the power plant, and for rehabilitation at the end of the project. Over the life of mine this accounts
for an additional 38.3 million US$ with 7 million US$ spent on the TSF expansion in year 2.
1.15
Operating costs
The average cash operating costs from year 3 onwards, after the expatriate staff complement is
reduced, are estimated to be 21.7 US$ per mineralized tonne processed and 353 US$ per tonne of
concentrate produced. The cash operating costs includes mine operations (owner operated),
process plant operations and general and administrative charges. They do not include shipping
from Molo to the end user, or any downstream processing costs.
50
Table 9: Operating Costs per Tonne of Feed
Category
Year 3 onwards
Mining
US$3.90
Processing
US$11.00
General and Administrative
US$6.80
Total OPEX per Tonne of FeedUS$21.70
Costs have been rounded.
Table 10: Operating Costs per Tonne of Concentrate produced at the Mine Site
Year 3 onwards
Category
US$64
Mining
US$179
Processing
US$110
General and Administrative
Total OPEX cost per Tonne of Concentrate at Mine SiteUS$353
Costs have been rounded
The operating costs expressed above are considered to be accurate to +/- 10%, and assume a
varying US$ inflation rate of 1.6% in 2015 and escalating to 2.0% from 2017 onward. Currency
inflation rates were also considered in the financial model and were applied to the South African
Rand and Malagasy Ariary portions of the opex costs.
Please note that these operating costs assume that the plant is able to successfully handle the
variability in the ore body, as shown by the SGS test work discussed in detail in Section 13.
Should the plant not perform as expected this could have a material impact on operating costs
as:
•          The flake size distribution could be worse than expected
•          The product grade could be lower than expected
•          The recoveries could be lower than expected or a combination of all of these
1.16
Economic analysis
Table 11 below summarizes the economic analysis of the project using discounted cash flow
methods.
Table 11: Economic Analysis of the Project
Category
Average price / tonne of concentrate (at start up, 2017)
Internal Rate of Return (“IRR”) - Project Equity
NPV @ 8% Discounted Cash Flow
NPV @ 10% Discounted Cash Flow
NPV @ 12% Discounted Cash Flow
Project Payback Period
* Assumes that the project is financed through 50% equity finance and 50% corporate debt. The debt
assumptions used in the model assumes a rate of 5.75% over LIBOR, with LIBOR forecast to escalate to
3.54% by 2022. An arranging fee is also assumed.
Value
US$1,689
31.2%
US$521,602,408
US$389,797,113
US$293,649,899
4.84 years
Note
51
All values in the above table do not account for inflation and assume that a satisfactory
investment agreement is negotiated under Madagascar’s LGIM (Loi Sur les Grands
Investissements Miniers) tax laws covering large scale mining investments, for which this project
qualifies. Also included in the above table are forecasted prices for 2017, which coincides with
the year the Molo mine is expected to be in production.
The exchange rates used in the financial model are as follows:
•          11.31 South African Rand (“ZAR”) to US$1, moving in line with purchasing power parity
•          0.833 Euro to US$1, fixed for the modelled period
•          2,746 Malagasy Ariary (“MGA”) to US$1, moving in line with purchasing power parity
Table 12 below has been reproduced from page 339 of the Feasibility Study. Table 12
summarizes the ‘Alternate Case’ financing scenario whereby the funding assumption for the
Molo Graphite Project is 100% equity finance. All other assumptions remain constant.
Table 12: ‘Alternate Case’ Economic Analysis of the Project
Metric
Nominal IRR
Nominal NPV at 10% Discount RateUS$376.7m
Real IRR
Real NPV at 10% Discount Rate
22.2%
US$273.6m
Value
24.4%
1.17
Environmental & Permitting
A comprehensive Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (“ESIA”) was completed to local
Malagasy, Equator Principles, Word Bank and International Finance Corporation (“IFC”)
standards. The process was preceded by an Environmental Legal Review and an Environmental
and Social Screening Assessment; both providing crucial information to align the project
development and design with international best practice on sustainable project development.
The ESIA submission is subject to approval of the investment amount by Madagascar’s Ministry
of Mines. The application was submitted on 30th January 2015 and the approval of the
investment amount is in progress. Energizer will receive a Global Environmental Permit upon
approval of the ESIA, a process which is expected to take six months from date of submission.
A comprehensive permitting register is in place and additional sectorial permit applications will
form part of the early execution phase. Approval of the sectorial applications is expected within
the same six month period as the ESIA review.
No material issues were identified in relation to Environmental, Social and Permitting processes
and through the stakeholder engagement process the local and regional community has
expressed a desire for the project to move forward.
1.18
1.18.1
Conclusions
Geology
Energizer’s 2011 exploration programme delineated a number of new graphitic trends in
southern Madagascar. The resource delineation drilling undertaken during 2012-2014 focussed
on only one of these, the Molo deposit, and this has allowed for an independent, updated
resource statement for the Molo deposit, which is stated in accordance with the CIM Guidelines.
1.18.2
Mining
Maiden mineral reserves of 22 437 000 tonnes have been declared for the Molo Graphite Project
at an average grade of 7.02% and based on the information contained in the Molo 2015 FS it is
possible to economically mine this deposit.
1.18.3
Metallurgical Test Work
Comprehensive metallurgical test programs culminated in a process flowsheet that is capable of
treating the Molo ore using conventional and established mineral processing techniques.
Process risks associated with the variability with regards to metallurgical performance have been
mostly mitigated through the addition of an upgrading circuit.
1.18.4
Recovery Methods
The laboratory, pilot and vendor test work conducted prior to and during the study defined the
required process flow sheet. This was duly translated into a full-scale production plant flow sheet
as described within this report. The flow sheet unit processes were populated and individual
component equipment selected according to either pilot plant precedents or, where
52
these were not available, proven practice within the industry, in conjunction with suitably
experienced vendors. All process designs and selections were based on conventional, proven
mineral processing practices.
The processing selections and configurations built into the design are adequately suited to the
requirements. Based on the mining and metallurgical test work information presented elsewhere
within the Molo 2015 FS, and assuming within specification ROM ore is fed to the plant, the
required recovery is expected to be attainable at the throughput stated. Note that this recovery is
based on lab and pilot scale test work and may reduce slightly on a full scale plant due to
operational inefficiencies. This possible reduction has not been taken into account in the
financial analysis.
1.18.5
Infrastructure
All infrastructure required for the project has to be installed from scratch and has been allowed
for in the project budget.
1.18.6
Water
The detailed hydrogeological analysis has concluded that the plant can be supplied from a well
field.
1.18.7
Environmental, Social
A comprehensive Environmental and Social Impact Assessment has been done, and is in the
process of being submitted to Madagascan government for approval.
1.18.8
Permitting
Various permits will have to be obtained for the project including an Environmental Permit and a
Mining permit. The most urgent permit is for Energizer to renew the exploration permit covering
the project.
1.18.9
Tailings
It is possible to construct the required tailings storage facility and a suitable site has been
identified. Geochemical and hydrogeological test work has shown that the facility does not need
to be lined.
1.18.10
Risks
The qualitative risk assessment identified 56 risks of which 9 were extremely high before
controls. After controls were applied the number of extremely high risks was reduced to two.
These risks are:
1.
The exploration permit covering the Molo pit expired in 2011 and has yet to be officially renewed
(Exploration Permit #3432 is the permit in question).
2. Current delays in issuing new mining permits.
After controls were applied the remaining high risks are as follows, (reduced from 39 to 18):
Inaccurate landownership data.
1. Requirement that all voids / excavations be backfilled without exception.
2.
3. The unit costs of moving product are high.
4. Project NPV and IRR lower than the PEA
5. Theft during construction & operation (diesel, cable, etc.)
6. No off take agreements signed yet or formal product specifications received.
7.The current execution strategy calls for contracts to be placed before permits are granted.
8. The project has modelled the diesel price at 0.8 US$ / litre.
9.
ESIA review timeframes could extend past the planned project start date - indications are 6-9 months
for ESIA approval from date of submission to the O.N.E (The Madagascan Government department of
the Environment)
10.The process design may not achieve the optimal balance between the competing requirements of:
 53 
   
a. Maximizing coarse flake recovery
b. Maximizing product carbon grade
c.
11.
Future Land Claims (Ancestral Rights).
Maximizing overall recovery
12.
The process plant may not achieve a consistent on spec product, especially as the feed grade to the
plant varies and this may make process control difficult.
13. Madagascan political situation remains potentially unstable.
14. Difficult logistics getting material on and off the island plus very bad roads.
15.
Contractors P&G’s high due to locality.
16. The projects returns are reliant on a real term increase in the price of graphite.
17. Implementation of the preferential taxation arrangement may be difficult.
18. The debt funding assumptions may not be achievable.
1.19
1.19.1
Recommendations
Geology
No further recommendations at present.
1.19.2
Mining
The long mine life of the Molo Graphite Project will allow for potential optimisation of drilling and
blasting designs during execution that could reduce operating costs slightly.
From a pure mining perspective the Molo Graphite Project is very small and provided reasonable
levels of short term planning are applied it should have very few challenges in delivering the
required tonnages at the required grade to meet the production targets set out in this Molo 2015
FS.
1.19.3
Metallurgical Test Work
The following recommendations are made for additional metallurgical testwork prior to the
detailed engineering stage:
•          Evaluate a range of different attrition mill media to determine if flake degradation can be
reduced without affecting the concentrate grade;
•          Develop a grinding energy versus concentrate grade relationship for the best grinding
media. This will allow a more accurate prediction of the required attrition mill grinding energy as a
function of the final concentrate grade;
•          Conduct attrition mill vendor tests to aid in the sizing of the equipment;
•          Carry out vendor testing on graphite tailings using the optimized reagent regime proposed
by the reagent supplier; and
•          Complete a series of flotation tests on samples covering the mine life past the initial 5
years.
1.19.4
Recovery Methods
Optimization and refinement opportunities exist regarding the process design which could reveal
benefits over the equipment selections and unit process detail within the current design. The
latter are based essentially on test work outcomes pursued and reported on thus far for study
purposes.
Appropriate test work is recommended prior to the initiation or during the course of a detailed
design phase preceding construction. This would include the following:
•          Bulk material flow test work;
54
•          Additional test work, in conjunction with vendors and in line with ongoing technical
developments, aimed at further refinement of the polishing and attrition milling processes;
•          Concentrate attritioning circuit static and dynamic thickening tests, including reagent
scoping and optimization trials;
•          Further investigation into potentially replacing the final tailings disposal positive
displacement pumps with more common centrifugal pump trains by reducing the slurry solids
concentration for overland pumping. This will include examination into whether the overall water
balance and supply system can reasonably accommodate such a change.
1.19.5
Infrastructure
The following are recommended prior to the detailed design stage:
•          Additional geotechnical investigations at the proposed new construction and permanent
camp site, particularly at the location of the new potable water storage tanks
•          A detailed geotechnical investigation will need to be undertaken to identify and confirm
suitable sources of concrete aggregate and concrete sand materials at the location of the project
site. This testing will need to include for concrete material testing and the production of concrete
trial mixes with the material identified
•          The geotechnical information will also need to confirm the suitability for construction of all
the material to be excavated from the Return Water Dam (“RWD”). It is proposed that all the
material excavated from the RWD is utilised in the works as processed fill material
•          Confirmation as to whether the material from the proposed borrow pit near Fotadrevo
(which will be used to supply all fill material for the TSF starter wall construction) can be utilised
as fill material, or if this material can be stabilized in some manner and used in the works
•          A detailed topographical survey will need to be undertaken of the proposed construction
site, borrow pit areas and the access road between Fotadrevo and the mine site. This information
is required prior to the final detailed design of the plant layout and associated earthworks
1.19.6
Water
The following is recommended during the detailed design phase:
•          Updating the current dynamic water balance including a dynamic TSF water balance. The
current water balance only assumed average monthly inflows from the TSF into the RWD. It
would be recommended to confirm the water availability on the Molo Graphite Project if drought
conditions occur and the TSF model element is included in the dynamic water balance
•          Water quality and quantity data is required to provide a baseline for comparison once the
Molo Mine is commissioned. To provide the necessary baseline data, regular ground and surface
water quality monitoring must be carried out leading up to the date when the Molo Mine will be
commissioned. Additionally proposed monitoring and scavenger wells must be installed. This
also should include the installation of flow meters on relevant pipelines to verify the dynamic
water balance with measured flow rates during operations
•          The installation of a weather station on the Molo Graphite Project site should be done as
soon as possible.
•          The installation and testing of the additional well field boreholes must be undertaken. The
groundwater resource model must be updated to include site specific borehole data.
•          The environmental geochemical test work of the Molo 2015 FS should be confirmed by
selective testing of samples from the latest exploration and metallurgical test programs. The
geochemical model should be updated accordingly.
1.19.7
Environmental, Social
•          GCS recommends the installation of a suitable weather station at or as near as possible to
the proposed project site, even before construction commences. Accurate, local weather data is
almost non-existent in Madagascar. This data will prove invaluable for model calibration,
improvement in baseline understanding and for future energy supply options which could utilise
wind and or solar power generation
•          Clean energy supply should be considered as a medium to long term target
55
•          Appointment of a community representative and the establishment of a mandate to
sensitise the local communities prior to any project activities
•          Monitoring and auditing to commence at project preparation phase
•          Compilation of Standard Operating Procedures for Environmental and Social aspects
requiring direct management and intervention
•          It is recommended that actual activity data, (e.g. kilometres travelled, or litres of diesel
consumed) for a financial year is used when a Green House Gas (“GHG”) assessment is being
calculated. Given that this project involves an estimation of a future GHG assessment for
activities yet to begin, a series of assumptions have been made in order to obtain the activity data
required to undertake this calculation
•          Community recruitment, skills development and training should begin at project
preparation phase
1.19.8
Permitting
•          An application for the exploration permit in Energizer’s name is a critical step in the larger
permitting and licensing regime and requires early attention and dedicated involvement
•          Security of land tenure is a process and is estimated to take 7 months, thus this process
should be commissioned as early as possible
•          Application for all other necessary permits (water use, construction, mineral processing,
transportation, export, labour etc should be undertaken within the ESIA review period (6 months),
which is expected to be from March till August 2015
•          Compilation of a comprehensive legal register
•          Municipal elections are scheduled for July 2015. It is recommended that all above-
mentioned permitting processes should commence prior to and in anticipation of these elections
The permitting and licensing of the proposed Molo Graphite Project requires dedicated attention
to ensure consistent momentum in application for and delivery of permits and licenses. This is
extremely relevant within the Malagasy context.
1.19.9
Tailings
Additional work required during detailed design of the TSF and adjacent RWD is as follows:
•          The full rheology and beaching characteristics for the tailings are not known which leaves
uncertainties regarding the optimum deposition design. This will need to be investigated via large
scale tests once suitably sized pilot process plant samples are available. It should be noted that
such large scale tests will also provide additional more representative samples which can be
used to carry out further testing of other tailings characteristics, such as consolidation,
permeability and shear strength, which should be used to validate / revise the assumptions made
for the stability assessments, seepage / drainage assessments and water balance
•          The geotechnical investigation was carried out for the general TSF area only, and was not
focused on the specific design elements as the location of these was not known at the time.
Additional focused geotechnical investigations will be required to confirm the geotechnical
conditions at specific locations
•          The depth to groundwater is not known in the immediate vicinity of the RWD. In the event
that ground water is shallow, it may not be possible to excavate the RWD basin to the required
depth without employing dewatering measures, or alternatively constructing an additional RWD
downstream. The depth to groundwater and any seasonal fluctuations will need to be
investigated by installation of a groundwater monitoring borehole, which must be monitored
during the wet season
•          Water quality data is required over a period of time to provide a baseline for comparison
once the TSF is commissioned. To provide the necessary baseline data, regular ground and
surface water monitoring must be carried out leading up to the date when the TSF is
commissioned
•          The overall design will need to be developed to a level required for construction and to
optimise the design with regard to technical, environmental and economic considerations, whilst
taking due cognisance of additional information made available, including the additional studies
detailed”
56
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
We are currently not involved in any litigation that we believe could have a materially adverse
effect on our financial condition or results of operations. There is no action, suit, proceeding,
inquiry or investigation before or by any court, public board, government agency, self-regulatory
organization or body pending or, to the knowledge of the executive officers of our company or
any of our subsidiaries, threatened against or affecting our company, our common shares, any of
our subsidiaries or of our company’s or our company’s subsidiaries’ officers or directors in their
capacities as such, in which an adverse decision could have a material adverse effect.
MANAGEMENT
Our directors hold office until the next annual meeting of the stockholders and the election and
qualification of their successors. Officers are elected annually by the Board of Directors and
serve at the direction of the Board of Directors.
The following table sets forth the name, age, and position of each executive officer and director
the Company as at September 19, 2014.
Name
AgePosition
62 Chairman of the Board of Directors and Director
V. Peter Harder
Richard E. Schler 61 Chief Executive Officer and Director
42 President, Chief Operating Officer and Director
Craig Scherba
79 Vice Chairman and Director
John Sanderson
46 Senior Vice President of Mine Development and Director
Robin Borley
44 Chief Financial Officer
Peter Liabotis
49 Senior Vice President of Exploration and Director
Quentin Yarie
48 Director
Dean Comand
Dalton Larson
74 Director
Albert A. Thiess, Jr.67 Director
Directors of the Company hold their offices until the next annual meeting of the Company’s
shareholders and until their successors have been duly elected and qualified or until their earlier
resignation, removal of office or death. Executive officers of the Company are elected by the
board of directors to serve until their successors are elected and qualified. There are no family
relationships between any director or executive officer of the Company.
V. Peter Harder, LL.D, M.A., B.A. (Hons) (Manotick, Canada): Mr. Harder was appointed Chairman
of the Board of Directors during September 2013 and has served as a director of our Company
since July 2009. He is a Senior Policy Advisor to Denton Canada (“Dentons”), a Canadian
national law firm and international affiliation. Prior to joining Dentons, Mr. Harder was a long-
serving Deputy Minister in the Government of Canada. First appointed a Deputy Minister in 1991,
he served as the most senior public servant in a number of federal departments including
Treasury Board, Solicitor General, Citizenship and Immigration, Industry and Foreign Affairs and
International Trade. At Foreign Affairs, Mr. Harder assumed the responsibilities of the Personal
Representative of the Prime Minister to three G8 Summits (Sea Island, Gleneagles and St.
Petersburg). Mr. Harder is also a director of Power Financial Corporation (TSX: PWF), IGM
Financial Corporation (TSX: IGM), Telesat Canada, Northland Power Inc. (TSX: NPI), Timberwest
Forest Company and Magna International Inc. (TSX: MG, NYSE: MGA). In 2008, Mr. Harder was
elected the President of the Canada China Business Council (CCBC).
John Sanderson Q.C. (Vancouver, Canada): Mr. Sanderson has been the Company’s Vice
Chairman of the Board since October 2009 and a director of our Company since January 2009.
Mr. Sanderson was Chairman of the Board of the Company from January 2009 to September
2009. Mr. Sanderson is a chartered mediator, chartered arbitrator, consultant and lawyer called to
the bar in the Canadian provinces of Ontario and British Columbia. Mr. Sanderson’s
qualifications to serve as a director include his many years of legal and mediation experience in
various industries. He has acted as mediator, facilitator and arbitrator across Canada, and
internationally, in numerous commercial transactions, including insurance claims, corporate
contractual disputes, construction matters and disputes, environmental disputes, inter-
governmental disputes, employment matters, and in relation to aboriginal claims. He has
authored and co-authored books on the use and value of dispute resolution systems as an
alternative to the courts in managing business and legal issues.
Richard Schler, MBA (Toronto, Canada): Mr. Schler was appointed Chief Executive Officer in
September 2013 and has been a director since April 2006. He has previously held other senior
positions with the Company, including the roles of Executive Vice-President and Chief Financial
Officer. Mr. Schler also currently serves as a director and Chief Executive Officer of MacDonald
Mines Exploration Ltd., Honey Badger Exploration Inc. and Red Pine Exploration Inc, all of which
are resource exploration companies trading on the TSX - Venture Exchange headquartered in
Toronto, Canada. Before joining these companies, Mr. Schler held various senior management
positions with noted corporations. He has over 25 years of experience in the manufacturing
sector. Mr. Schler is experienced in financial management and business operations and has
been successful in raising funds in the capital markets.
57
Craig Scherba, P.Geol. (Oakville, Canada): Mr. Scherba was appointed as our President and Chief
Operating Officer during September 2012 and a director during January 2010. Mr. Scherba served
as Vice President, Exploration of the Company from January 2010 to September 2012. . Mr.
Scherba has been a professional geologist (P. Geol.) since 2000, and his expertise includes
supervising large Canadian and international exploration. Mr. Scherba also serves as Vice
President, Exploration of MacDonald Mines Exploration Ltd, Red Pine Exploration Inc. and Honey
Badger Exploration Inc which are resource exploration company trading on the TSX - Venture
Exchange. In addition, Mr. Scherba was professional geologist with Taiga Consultants Ltd.
(“Taiga”), a mining exploration consulting company from March 2003 to December 2009. He was
a managing partner of Taiga between January 2006 and December 2009. Mr. Scherba was an
integral member of the exploration team that developed Nevsun Resources’ high grade gold,
copper and zinc Bisha project in Eritrea. While at Taiga, Mr. Scherba served as the Company’s
Country and Exploration Manager in Madagascar during its initial exploration stage.
Robin Borley (Johannesberg, South Africa): Mr. Borley was appointed our Senior Vice President
(“SVP”) of Mine Development during December 2013. Mr. Borley is a Graduate mining
engineering professional and a certified mine manager with more than 25 years of international
mining experience building and operating mining ventures. He has held senior management
positions both internationally and within the South African mining industry. Until October 2014,
Mr. Borley served as Mining Director for DRA Mineral Projects. In addition, Mr. Borley was
instrumental as the COO of Red Island Minerals in a developing a Madagascar coal venture. His
diverse career has spanned resource project management, evaluation, exploration and mine
development. Robin has completed several mine evaluations including operational and financial
evaluations of new and existing operations across a diverse range of resource sectors. He has
experience in the management of underground and surface mining operations from both the
contractor and owner miner environments. From 2006 through to 2012, Robin participated in the
BEE management buy-out transaction of the Optimum Colliery mining property from BHP,
through its independent listing and its ultimate sale to Glencore in December 2012.
Peter Liabotis, CPA, CA (Oakville, Canada): Mr. Liabotis was appointed as our Chief Financial
Officer (“CFO”) & SVP during September 2012 and prior to that was our Vice President – Finance
from October 2009 to August 2012. Mr. Liabotis is currently the CFO & SVP of Red Pine
Exploration Inc., MacDonald Mines Exploration Ltd., and Honey Badger Exploration Inc., all of
which are resource exploration companies trading on the TSX - Venture Exchange. From August
2008 to September 2009 Mr. Liabotis worked as controller for EFG Wealth Management (Canada).
From July 1998 through July 2008, Mr. Liabotis was the CFO & SVP of Olympia Capital, a
Bermuda corporation leading the sale of this business to a French Bank. Prior to July 1998, Mr.
Liabotis worked for two years at PriceWaterhouseCoopers in Bermuda and two years with KPMG
in Canada Mr. Liabotis is a member of the Board of Directors of Honey Badger Exploration, Inc.
Mr. Liabotis is a Chartered Professional Accountant (through the Chartered Professional
Accountants of Ontario), received his Bachelor of Commerce, Honours from the University of
Windsor and received his Bachelor of Arts from the Western University (in Ontario, Canada).
Quentin Yarie, P.Geol. (Toronto, Canada): Mr. Yarie has served as a director of our Company
since 2008. Mr. Yarie is an experienced geophysicist and a successful entrepreneur with over 20
years’ experience in mining and environmental/engineering. Mr. Yarie has project management
and business development experience as he has held positions of increasing responsibility with
a number of Canadian-based geophysical service providers. Since January 2010, Mr. Yarie has
been Senior Vice President Exploration for MacDonald Mines Exploration Ltd, Red Pine
Exploration Inc. and Honey Badger Exploration Inc all listed on the TSX-Venture Exchange
headquartered in Toronto, Canada. From October 2007 to December 2009, Mr. Yarie was a
business development officer with Geotech Ltd, a geo-physical airborne survey company. From
September 2004 to October 2007, Mr. Yarie was a senior representative of sales and business
development for Aeroquest Limited. From 1992-2001, he was a partner of a specialized
environmental and engineering consulting group where he managed a number of large projects
including the ESA of the Sydney Tar Ponds, the closure of the Canadian Forces Bases in
Germany and the Maritime and Northeast Pipeline project.
Dean Comand (Ancaster, Canada): Mr. Comand is a former executive of Sherritt International,
where he held the position of Vice President of Operations for Sherritt’s Madagascar Ambatovy
Project, which is one of the largest lateritic nickel mines in the world. Ambatovy is a joint venture
between Sherritt International, Japan’s Sumitomo Corp, Korea’s Resources Corp (KORES) and
Canada’s SNC Lavalin Inc.. Mr Comand is a Professional Engineer (P.Eng) and Certified
Engineering Technologist (CET) who earned his Maintenance Manager Professional Designation
(MMP) license in 2006 and his Charter Director designation (C.Dir) in 2012. He is currently
consulting for numerous clients around the world in the mining and energy sectors. Mr. Comand
spent the past 3.5 years in Madagascar and successfully led the organization through
construction, commissioning and operations of the project to commercial production.
Throughout his career he has consistently held senior positions in complex operations,
business development, environmental management, maintenance, and project construction. Mr.
Comand, P. Eng, CET MMP CDir, is a Mechanical Engineer with extensive Madagascar mining
operations experience and holds his P. Eng designation in the province of Ontario as well as
designation as a Certified Engineering Technologist.
Dalton Larson (Surrey, Canada): Mr. Larson is a Canadian attorney with more than 35 years as a
member of the Law Society of British Columbia and has significant experience in the capital
markets, specifically the equity and debt sectors. Mr. Larson is a former partner of a major
Vancouver Law firm, now McMillan LLP and currently maintains a private practice along with a
successful investment business. As an expert in alternate dispute resolution, Dalton has
extensive experience as a professional arbitrator and mediator. He holds a Master’s Degree in
law from the University of London, England and has served more than 25 years as a director of
several investment funds managed by the CW Funds group of companies, affiliated with
Ventures West Management Inc., which was one of the largest venture capital firms in Canada. He
has served as Chairman of the Board of Directors of a Philippine ethanol company and was a
founding shareholder and first Chairman of the Board of Directors of the First Coal Corporation,
which started operations in 2004 and raised in excess of $65 million in equity to finance its
development activities. This company was sold to Xstrata in 2011 for in excess of $150 million.
58
Albert A. Thiess, Jr. (Bluffton, United States of America): Mr. Thiess was appointed a Director
during May 2012. Mr. Thiess brings over 35 years of accounting, finance and management
experience to the Company. Mr. Thiess served as an audit partner in Coopers & Lybrand, LLP
and with PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP following the merger of those firms in 1998. He served
clients in the automotive, banking, retail and manufacturing industries, as well as serving as the
Managing Partner of the Detroit, Michigan and Los Angeles, California offices. He also was
elected to the Governing Council of Coopers & Lybrand. Following the merger with
PricewaterhouseCoopers, Mr. Thiess managed various global functions for the newly merged
firm.
Arrangements between Directors and Officers
To our knowledge, there is no arrangement or understanding between any of our officers and
any other person pursuant to which the officer was selected to serve as an officer.
Legal Proceedings, Cease Trade Orders and Bankruptcy
To the best of the Company’s knowledge, during the past ten years, none of the following
occurred with respect to a director or executive officer of the Company: (1) any bankruptcy
petition filed by or against any business of which such person was a general partner or executive
officer either at the time of the bankruptcy or within two years prior to that time; (2) any conviction
in a criminal proceeding or being subject to a pending criminal proceeding (excluding traffic
violations and other minor offenses); (3) being subject to any order, judgment or decree, not
subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, of any court of any competent jurisdiction,
permanently or temporarily enjoining, barring, suspending or otherwise limiting his involvement
in any type of business, securities or banking activities; (4) being found by a court of competent
jurisdiction (in a civil action), the Securities and Exchange Commission or the commodities
futures trading commission to have violated a Federal or state securities or commodities law, and
the judgment has not been reversed, suspended or vacated; (5) being subject of, or a party to,
any federal or state judicial or administrative order, judgment, decree, or finding, not
subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, relating to an alleged violation of any federal or
state securities or commodities law or regulation or any law or regulation respecting financial
institutions or insurance companies or prohibiting mail or wire fraud or fraud in connection with
any business entity; or (6) being subject of, or a party to, any sanction or order, not subsequently
reversed, suspended or vacated, of any self-regulatory organization, any registered entity of the
Commodity Exchange Act, or any equivalent exchange, association, entity or organization that
has disciplinary authority over its members or persons associated with a member.
Audit Committee and Audit Committee Financial Expert
The Company has an audit committee comprised of John Sanderson, Peter Harder and Albert A.
Thiess, Jr., all of whom are financially literate. Each are independent directors as they do not
have involvement in the day-to-day operations of the Company. The audit committee is a key
component of the Company’s commitment to maintaining a higher standard of corporate
responsibility.
The audit committee assists our board of directors in its oversight of the company’s accounting
and financial reporting processes and the audits of the company’s financial statements,
including (i) the quality and integrity of the company’s financial statements, (ii) the company’s
compliance with legal and regulatory requirements, (iii) the independent auditors’ qualifications
and independence and (iv) the performance of the company’s internal audit functions and
independent auditors, as well as other matters which may come before it as directed by the board
of directors. Further, the audit committee, to the extent it deems necessary or appropriate, among
its several other responsibilities, shall:
•          be responsible for the appointment, compensation, retention, termination and oversight of
the work of any independent auditor engaged for the purpose of preparing or issuing an audit
report or performing other audit, review or attest services for the Company;
•          discuss the annual audited financial statements and the quarterly unaudited financial
statements with management and, if necessary the independent auditor prior to their filing with
the SEC in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K and Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q;
•          review with the company’s financial management on a periodic basis (a) issues regarding
accounting principles and financial statement presentations, including any significant changes
in the company’s selection or application of accounting principles, and (b) the effect of any
regulatory and accounting initiatives, as well as off-balance sheet structures, on the financial
statements of the company;
59
•          monitor the Company’s policies for compliance with federal, state, local and foreign laws
and regulations and the Company’s policies on corporate conduct;
•          maintain open, continuing and direct communication between the board of directors, the
committee and both the company’s independent auditors and its internal auditors; and
•          monitor our compliance with legal and regulatory requirements, with the authority to initiate
any special investigations of conflicts of interest, and compliance with federal, state and local
laws and regulations, including the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.
Code of Ethics
The Company has adopted a code of business conduct and ethics that applies to its directors,
officers, and employees, including its principal executive officers, principal financial officer,
principal accounting officer, controller or persons performing similar functions. If we make
substantive amendments to the Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Officers or the Code of
Business Conduct and Ethics or grant any waiver, including any implicit waiver, we will disclose
the nature of such amendment or waiver on our website or in a report on Form 8-K within four
days of such amendment or waiver.
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Summary Compensation
The table below sets forth certain summary information concerning the compensation paid or
accrued during each of our last three completed fiscal years to our principal executive officer and
four other most highly compensated executive officers who received compensation over
$100,000 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2013 (collectively, the “Named Executive Officers” or
“NEO”):
Name and
Principal
Position
Fiscal
Year
Salary
($)
Bonus
($)
Stock
Award
($)
Note 6
Option
Award
($)
Non Equity
Inventive Plan
Compensaton
($)
Richard E.
Schler,
CEO and
Director **
Craig
Scherba
(5)
2014 218,955(3)0
2013 197,008
2012 201,407
 
 
2014 167,305(3)0
(4)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Change in
Pension Value
and Non
Qualified
Deferred
Compensation
Earnings ($)
0
0
0
0
All Other
Compensation
($)
NOTE 1
Total
($)
NOTE 1
84,174 (1)
280,428 (1)
557,033 (1)
 
61,566 (1)
303,129
(1)
477,438
(1)
758,440
(1)
 
228,871
(1)
President,
COO and
Director
 
Robin
Borley,
SVP and
Director***
 
Peter
Liabotis,
Chief
Financial
Officer
Brent
Nykoliation,
SVP
Kirk
McKinnon,
Former
CEO and
Director*
(5)
(3)
0
0
0
0
2012
2013 130,000
105,214
(5)
(4)
(4)
2014 116,900(3)0
2013 0
0
0
2012 0
 
 
 
2014 210,055
2013 171,500
2012 168,764
 
2014 210,259
2013 190,009
2012 162,085
 
2014 496,574
2013 268,360
2012 248,207
(4)
(4)
0
0
0
0
0
0
(3)
(5)
(7)
(5)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
134,700 (1)
260,035 (1)
 
26,820 (1)
0
0
 
58,755 (1)
98,780 (1)
247,975 (1)
 
61,825 (1)
125,720 (1)
275,345 (1)
 
44,932 (1)
380,118 (1)
739,062 (1)
264,700
365,249
(1)
(1)
 
143,720
(1)
0
0
 
268,810
(1)
270,280
(1)
416,739
(1)
 
272,084
(1)
315,729
(1)
437,430
(1)
 
541,506
(1)
648,478
(1)
987,269
(1)
Mr. McKinnon resigned as Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board of Directors on
*
September 12, 2013.
** Mr. Schler was appointed Chief Executive Officer on September 19, 2013.
***
(1)
Mr. Borley was appointed Senior Vice President of Mine Development and a Director on December 1,
2013.
The values in the “All Other Compensation” above do not represent a cash payment of any kind.
Rather these values represent the calculated Black-Scholes theoretical value of granted options. It is
important to note that these granted options may or may not
60
ever be exercised. Whether granted options are exercised or not will be based primarily, but not
singularly, on the Company’s future stock price and whether the granted options become “in-the-
money”. If these granted options are unexercised and expire, the cash value or benefit to the
above noted individuals is $nil.
(2)
Shares valued at $0.17 per share based on quoted market price issued to these individuals and/or to
companies controlled by them.
(3) Salary and/or consulting fees paid and accrued for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2014.
(4) Salary and/or consulting fees paid and accrued for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012.
(5) Salary and/or consulting fees paid and accrued for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2013.
The amounts, if any, in the “Stock Awards” column of the “Summary Compensation” table have been
calculated based upon the aggregate grant date fair value computed in accordance with FASB ASC
(6)
Topic 718 and there are no awards subject to performance conditions.
(6)Includes full severance amount in fiscal 2014, of which $264,922 was due to be paid in fiscal 2015.
Employment Agreements
The Company does not have an employment agreement or consulting agreement with Messrs.
Schler, Scherba, Liabotis or Nykoliation. Each receives consulting fees and/or monthly salaries.
Mr. Schler was appointed Chief Executive Officer on September 19, 2013. Messrs. Schler and
Borley receive approximately $17,000 per month. Messrs. Scherba, Liabotis and Nykoliation
receive approximately Cdn$12,000 per month. Compensation for these individuals varies from
month to month depending on various factors.
Outstanding Stock Options and Stock Appreciation Rights Grants
Outstanding stock options granted to Named Executive Officers (“NEO’s”) and Directors as at
June 30, 2014 are as follows:
Option Awards
Name
No. of
Securities
Underlying
Unexercised
Options
Exercisable (#)
No. of
Securities
Underlying
Unexercised
Options
Unexercisable
(#)
Equity Incentive Plan Awards:
Number of Securities Underlying
Unexercised Unearned Options (#)
Option
Exercise
Price ($)
Option
Expiration
Date
Richard E.
Schler,
NEO
600,000
225,000
200,000
1,340,000
675,000
650,000
170,000
200,000
475,000
0
0
0.30
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.29
0.21
0.11
0.15
0.18
July 1,
2016
Oct 24,
2016
Dec 1,
2016
March 7,
2017
July 13,
2016
Feb 27,
2018
July 9,
2018
Sept 19,
2018
Jan 10,
2019
July 1,
2016
Craig
Scherba,
NEO
Peter
Liabotis,
NEO
350,000
200,000
200,000
400,000
750,000
180,000
500,000
350,000
200,000
200,000
350,000
550,000
150,000
500,000
0
0
0
0
Robin
Borley,
NEO
125,000
75,000
300,000
0
0
450,000
200,000
200,000
Brent
Nykoliation,
0.30
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.21
0.11
0.18
0.30
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.21
0.11
0.18
0.28
0.21
0.18
0.30
0.20
0.21
Oct 24,
2016
Dec 1,
2016
March 7,
2017
Feb 27,
2018
July 9,
2018
Jan 10,
2019
July 1,
2016
Oct 24,
2016
Dec 1,
2016
March 7,
2017
Feb 27,
2018
July 9,
2018
Jan 10,
2019
March 7,
2017
Feb 27,
2018
Jan 10,
2019
July 1,
2016
Oct 24,
2016
Dec 1,
2016
March 7,
2017
NEO
350,000
0
0
700,000
175,000
75,000
400,000
Kirk
McKinnon,
Former
NEO
675,000
575,000
650,000
1,420,000
975,000
800,000
170,000
225,000
0
0
61
0.28
0.21
0.11
0.15
0.18
0.30
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.29
0.21
0.11
0.15
Feb 27,
2018
July 9,
2018
Sept 19,
2018
Jan 10,
2019
July 1,
2016
Oct 24,
2016
Dec 1,
2016
March 7,
2017
July 13,
2016
Feb 27,
2018
July 9,
2018
Sept 19,
2018
The Company has no stock appreciation rights.
Outstanding Stock Awards at Year End
There were no outstanding stock awards as at June 30, 2014.
Options Exercises and Stocks Vested
No options were exercised and no stocks vested during the year ended June 30, 2014.
Grants of Plan-Based Awards
There were no grants of plan-based awards to a named executive officer during the year ended
June 30, 2014.
Non Qualified Deferred Compensation
As at June 30, 2014, the Company had no formalized deferred compensation plan.
Long-Term Incentive Plan Awards Table
There are no Long-Term Incentive Plans in place at this time.
Aggregated Option Exercises and Fiscal Year-End Option Values
On March 9, 2006, the Company filed a Form S-8 registration statement in connection with its
newly adopted 2006 Stock Option Plan (the “2006 Plan”) allowing for the direct award of shares
or granting of stock options to acquire up to a total of 2,000,000 common shares. On December
18, 2006, February 16, 2007, July 11, 2007, September 29, 2009, May 3, 2011, March 1, 2012,
February 27, 2013, and December 23, 2013, the 2006 Plan was amended to increase the stock
option pool by a total of 35,500,000 additional common shares. The following table summarizes
the continuity of the Company’s stock options:
Number of SharesWeighted average exercise price ($)
Outstanding June 30, 2012 23,690,000
7,595,000
Granted
Exercised
(700,000)
(1,695,000)
Expired
Cancelled
(1,750,000)
Outstanding, June 30, 201327,140,000
Granted
7,130,000
(5,600,000)
Expired
Cancelled
(200,000)
Outstanding, June 30, 201428,470,000
0.29
0.23
0.15
0.15
0.32
0.28
0.16
0.39
0.26
0.23
Additional information regarding options outstanding as at June 30, 2014 is as follows:
Exercise
Price
0.30
0.29
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.23
0.21
0.11
0.15
0.13
0.18
0.18
Outstanding
Number of
shares
3,700,000
1,695,000
1,800,000
2,240,000
5,850,000
180,000
5,875,000
1,255,000
750,000
250,000
4,625,000
250,000
Weighted average
life in years
Exercisable
Weighted average
exercise price
Number of
shares
Weighted average
exercise price
2.01
2.04
2.32
2.42
2.69
2.90
3.67
4.03
4.22
4.28
4.53
4.61
0.30
0.29
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.23
0.21
0.11
0.15
0.13
0.18
0.18
3,700,000
1,695,000
1,800,000
2,240,000
5,850,000
180,000
5,875,000
1,255,000
750,000
250,000
4,625,000
250,000
0.30
0.29
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.23
0.21
0.11
0.15
0.13
0.18
0.18
62
The following are changes in the number of stock options outstanding subsequent to the
Company’s June 30, 2014 year end, and as of the date of this report, 9,280,00 stock options were
used at prices between $0.15 to $0.20 and expiry dates between July 3, 2019  and February 26,
2020, and a total of 2,385,000 stock options have been cancelled.
As a result of these transactions, 35,365,000 stock options were outstanding as of the date of this
report.
Compensation of Directors
Directors who provide services to the Company in other capacities has been previously reported
under “Summary Compensation”. The following table summarizes compensation paid to or
earned by our directors who are not Named Executive Officers for their service as directors of
our company during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2014.
Name
Fees
Earned or
Paid in
Cash ($)
Stock
Awards
($)
John
Sanderson,
0
Director
Quentin
Yarie,
Director
V. Peter
Harder,
Director
Johann de
Bruin,
Director
Albert A.
Thiess, Jr,
Director
0
0
154,296
0
0
0
0
0
0
Option
Awards
(1)
($)
44,548
(1)
53,810
(1)
52,243
(1)
11,175
(1)
13,518
(1)
Non-Equity
Incentive Plan
Compensation
($)
Change in Pension Value
and Nonqualified Deferred
Compensation Earnings
($)
All other
Comp-
ensation
($)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total (1)
($)
44,548
(1)
208,106
(1)
52,243
(1)
11,175
(1)
13,518
(1)
(1)
The values in the “Option Awards” and included within the “Total” columns above do not represent a
cash payment of any kind. Rather these values represent the calculated Black-Scholes theoretical
value of granted options. It is important to note that these granted options may or may not ever be
exercised. Whether granted options are exercised or not will be based primarily, but not singularly, on
the Company’s future stock price and whether the granted options become “in-the-money”. If these
granted options are unexercised and expire, the cash value or benefit to the above noted individuals is
$nil.
Pension Benefits
As of June 30, 2014, the Company had no pension or retirement plans.
Equity Compensation Plan Information
The following table sets forth information as of June 30, 2014 for all compensation plans not
directly approved by the Company’s security holders but issued pursuant to the shareholder
approved Amended and Restated Stock Option Plan. Options reported below were issued under
the Company’s Plan.
63
Name
Option Awards as of June 30, 2014
No. of Common
shares
Underlying
Unexercised
Common shares
Purchase
Options
Exercisable (#)
Date
of
Grant
Additional Consideration to be
Received Upon Exercise or
Material Conditions required to
Exercise
Richard
Schler,
NEO
600,000
225,000
200,000
1,340,000
675,000
650,000
170,000
200,000
475,000
July
1,
2011
Oct
24,
2011
Dec
1,
2011
March
7,
2012
July
13,
2012
Feb
27,
2013
July
9,
2013
Sept
19,
2013
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
Option
Exercise
Price ($)
Value
Realized
if
Exercised
($) *
Option
Expiration
Date
0.30
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.29
0.21
0.11
0.15
0.18
0
0
0
0
0
0
3,400
0
0
July 1,
2016
Oct 24,
2016
Dec 1,
2016
March 7,
2017
July 13,
2017
Feb 27,
2018
July 9,
2018
Sept 19,
2018
Jan 10,
2019
Craig
Scherba,
NEO
350,000
200,000
200,000
400,000
750,000
180,000
500,000
Peter
Liabotis,
NEO
350,000
200,000
200,000
350,000
550,000
150,000
500,000
Jan
10,
2014
July
1,
2011
Oct
24,
2011
Dec
1,
2011
March
7,
2012
Feb
27,
2013
July
9,
2013
Jan
10,
2014
July
1,
2011
Oct
24,
2011
Dec
1,
2011
March
7,
2012
Feb
27,
2013
July
9,
2013
Jan
10,
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
0.30
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.21
0.11
0.18
0
0
0
0
0
3,600
0
0.30
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.21
0.11
0.18
0
0
0
0
0
3,000
0
July 1,
2016
Oct 24,
2016
Dec 1,
2016
March 7,
2017
Feb 27,
2018
July 9,
2018
Jan 10,
2019
July 1,
2016
Oct 24,
2016
Dec 1,
2016
March 7,
2017
Feb 27,
2018
July 9,
2018
Jan 10,
2019
2014
March
7,
2012
Feb
27,
2013
Jan
10,
2014
July
1,
2011
Oct
24,
2011
Dec
1,
2011
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
March
7,
2012
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
Feb
27,
2013
July
9,
2013
Sept
19,
2013
Jan
10,
2014
July
1,
2011
Oct
24,
2011
Dec
1,
2011
0.28
0.21
0.18
0.30
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.21
0.11
0.15
0.18
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3,500
0
0
March 7,
2017
Feb 27,
2018
Jan 10,
2019
July 1,
2016
Oct 24,
2016
Dec 1,
2016
March 7,
2017
Feb 27,
2018
July 9,
2018
Sept 19,
2018
Jan 10,
2019
July 1,
2016
Oct 24,
2016
None.
0.30
0
Robin
Borley,
NEO
125,000
75,000
300,000
450,000
200,000
200,000
Brent
Nykoliation,
NEO
350,000
700,000
175,000
75,000
400,000
300,000
Quentin
Yarie,
Director
50,000
150,000
300,000
300,000
100,000
50,000
425,000
V. Peter
Harder,
Director
225,000
25,000
75,000
100,000
275,000
25,000
250,000
250,000
March
7,
2012
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
Feb
27,
2013
July
9,
2013
Sept
19,
2013
Jan
10,
2014
July
1,
2011
Oct
24,
2011
Dec
1,
2011
March
7,
2012
Feb
27,
2013
July
9,
2013
Oct 9,
2013
Jan
10,
2014
July
1,
2011
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.21
0.11
0.15
0.18
0
0
0
0
2,000
0
0
0.30
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.21
0.11
0.13
0.18
0
0
0
0
0
500
0
0
Dec 1,
2016
March 7,
2017
Feb 27,
2018
July 9,
2018
Sept 19,
2018
Jan 10,
2019
July 1,
2016
Oct 24,
2016
Dec 1,
2016
March 7,
2017
Feb 27,
2018
July 9,
2018
Oct 9,
2018
Jan 10,
2019
July 1,
125,000
50,000
50,000
John
Sanderson,
Director
100,000
100,000
25,000
50,000
400,000
Johann de
Bruin,
Director
200,000
100,000
125,000
Albert A.
Thiess, Jr.,
Director
180,000
100,000
25,000
125,000
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
Oct
24,
2011
Dec
1,
2011
March
7,
2012
Feb
27,
2013
July
9,
2013
Sept
19,
2013
Jan
10,
2014
March
7,
2012
Feb
27,
2013
Jan
10,
2014
May
23,
2012
Feb
27,
2013
July
9,
2013
Jan
10,
2014
July
1,
0.30
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.21
0.11
0.15
0.18
0.28
0.21
0.18
0.23
0.21
0.11
0.18
0
0
0
0
0
500
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
500
0
July 1,
2016
Oct 24,
2016
Dec 1,
2016
March 7,
2017
Feb 27,
2018
July 9,
2018
Sept 19,
2018
Jan 10,
2019
March 7,
2017
Feb 27,
2018
Jan 10,
2019
May 23,
2017
Feb 27,
2018
July 9,
2018
Jan 10,
2019
Kirk
McKinnon,
Former
NEO
675,000
575,000
650,000
1,420,000
975,000
800,000
170,000
225,000
2011
Oct
24,
2011
Dec
1,
2011
None.
None.
March
7,
2012
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
July
13,
2012
Feb
27,
2013
July
9,
2013
0.30
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.29
0.21
0.11
0.15
0
0
0
0
0
0
3,400
0
July 1,
2016
Oct 24,
2016
Dec 1,
2016
March 7,
2017
July 13,
2017
Feb 27,
2018
July 9,
2018
Sept 19,
2018
Sept
19,
2013
*Based on a closing price of $0.13 on June 30, 2014 and presuming all options are exercised.
64
Name
Option Awards as of June 30, 2014
No. of
Common
shares
Underlying
Unexercised
Common
shares
Purchase
Options
Exercisable
(#)
Additional
Consideration to be
Received Upon
Exercise or Material
Conditions required
to Exercise
Date
of
Grant
July
Option
Exercise
Price ($)
Option
Expiration
Date
1,750,000
825,000
800,000
Current Named Executive Officers, as a
group on June 30, 2014 (5 persons):
Richard Schler**; Craig Scherba, Peter
Liabotis, Robin Borley, Brent
Nykoliation.
2,565,000
675,000
2,725,000
65,000
275,000
2,175,000
July
1,
2011
Oct
24,
2011
Dec
1,
2011
March
7,
2012
July
13,
2012
Feb
27,
2013
July
9,
2013
Sept
19,
2013
Jan
10,
2014
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
Total NEO’s on June 30, 2014, as a group (5 persons)
12,465,000
July
1,
2011
Oct
24,
2011
Dec
1,
2011
March
7,
2012
May
23,
2012
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
650,000
125,000
275,000
700,000
180,000
All current Directors who are not NEO’s
or executive officers as a group on June
30, 2014 (5 persons) - V. Peter Harder,
July 1,
2016
Oct 24,
2016
Dec 1,
2016
March 7,
2017
July 13,
2017
Feb 27,
2018
July 9,
2018
Sept 19,
2018
Jan 10,
2019
July 1,
2016
Oct 24,
2016
Dec 1,
2016
March 7,
2017
May 23,
2017
0.30
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.29
0.21
0.11
0.15
0.18
0.30
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.23
John Sanderson, Johann de Bruin,
Albert A. Thiess, Jr., Quentin Yarie.
875,000
175,000
100,000
250,000
1,325,000
Total all current Directors who are not NEO’s or
executive officers as a group on June 30, 2014 (5
persons)
All Directors (8 persons) - V. Peter
Harder, John Sanderson, Richard
Schler, Craig Scherba, Robin Borley,
Johann de Bruin, Albert A. Thiess, Jr.,
Quentin Yarie.
1,600,000
550,000
675,000
2,565,000
675,000
180,000
2,350,000
525,000
300,000
250,000
2,600,000
Feb
27,
2013
July
9,
2013
Sept
19,
2013
Oct 9,
2013
Jan
10,
2014
July
1,
2011
Oct
24,
2011
Dec
1,
2011
March
7,
2012
July
13,
2012
May
23,
2012
Feb
27,
2013
July
9,
2013
Sept
19,
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
0.21
0.11
0.15
0.13
0.18
Feb 27,
2018
July 9,
2018
Sept 19,
2018
Oct 9,
2018
Jan 10,
2019
4,655,000
July 1,
2016
Oct 24,
2016
Dec 1,
2016
March 7,
2017
July 13,
2017
May 23,
2017
Feb 27,
2018
July 9,
2018
Sept 19,
2018
Oct 9,
2018
0.30
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.29
0.23
0.21
0.11
0.15
0.13
0.18
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
2013
Oct 9,
2013
Total All nominees for Directors on June 30, 2014 (8
persons)
Jan
10,
2014
12,270,000
All employees (excluding all Named
Executive Officers as they also serve as
executive officers and/or directors), plus
Kirk McKinnon, Former NEO as a group.
900,000
640,000
685,000
1,810,000
975,000
1,275,000
230,000
300,000
550,000
July
1,
2011
Oct
24,
2011
Dec
1,
2011
March
7,
2012
July
13,
2012
Feb
27,
2013
July
9,
2013
Sept
19,
2013
Jan
10,
2014
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
Total employees (excluding all NEO’s as they serve as
executive officers) as a group on June 30, 2014
7,365,000
July
1,
2011
Oct
24,
2011
0.30
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.29
0.21
0.11
0.15
0.18
Jan 10,
2019
July 1,
2016
Oct 24,
2016
Dec 1,
2016
March 7,
2017
July 13,
2017
Feb 27,
2018
July 9,
2018
Sept 19,
2018
Jan 10,
2019
July 1,
Outstanding Options - all parties
3,700,000
1,800,000
2,240,000
5,850,000
1,695,000
180,000
5,875,000
1,255,000
750,000
250,000
4,625,000
250,000
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
None.
Dec
1,
2011
March
7,
2012
July
13,
2012
May
23,
2012
Feb
27,
2013
July
9,
2013
Sept
19,
2013
Oct 9,
2013
Jan
10,
2014
Feb
6,
2014
0.30
0.20
0.21
0.28
0.29
0.23
0.21
0.11
0.15
0.13
0.18
0.18
2016
Oct 24,
2016
Dec 1,
2016
March 7,
2017
July 13,
2017
May 23,
2017
Feb 27,
2018
July 9,
2018
Sept 19,
2018
Oct 9,
2018
Jan 10,
2019
Feb 6,
2019
Total Options as of June 30, 2014 (all parties)
Mr. McKinnon resigned as Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board of Directors on
*
September 12, 2013.
** Mr. Schler was appointed Chief Executive Officer on September 19, 2013.
33,070,000
65
In addition, please note the following:
•          There are no associates of any such directors, executive officers, or nominees to that have
or are to receive options or any other person who received or is to receive 5 percent of such
options, warrants or rights
•          All of the stock options in the above noted table are convertible into common shares.
•          The exercise price of all of the stock options noted above were based on the closing price
the date before the granting of the stock option.
•          There are no cashless or other provisions aside from the right for the holder of the stock
option to exercise.
•          All NEO’s provide the Company services on an ongoing basis.
•          Messrs Harder, Sanderson, Yarie and Thiess provide director services on an ongoing
basis.
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT
The following table sets forth certain information regarding beneficial ownership of our common
shares as of July 22, 2015, by: (i) each person who is known by the Company to own beneficially
more than 5% of our common shares; (ii) each director of the Company; (iii) each of the Named
Executive Officers; and (iv) all directors and executive officers of the Company as a group.
The number and percentage of shares beneficially owned is determined in accordance with Rule
13d-3 under the Exchange Act, and the information is not necessarily indicative of beneficial
ownership for any other purpose. The Company believes that each individual or entity named
has sole investment and voting power with respect to the securities indicated as beneficially
owned by them, subject to community property laws, where applicable, except where otherwise
noted. The “Number of Common Shares Beneficially Owned” in calculated based on total shares
held plus warrants held (plus stock options entitled to exercise).
Name and Address of
Beneficial Owner
V. Peter Harder, Chairman of the
Board, Director
Number of Common
Shares Beneficially Owned
Percentage of Outstanding Common
Shares Beneficially Owned(1)
5538 Pattapiece Crescent
2,125,000
0.7%
Manotick, Ontario, Canada (2)
(15)
John Sanderson, Vice-Chairman
of the Board & Director
1721 – 27th Street
1,700,000
0.5%
West Vancouver, BC, Canada (3)
(14) (15)
Richard Schler, Chief Executive
Officer & Director
80 Greybeaver Trail
Toronto, Ontario, Canada (4) (15)
Craig Scherba, President, COO
& Director
10,860,000
3.4%
1480 Willowdown Road,
4,200,000
1.3%
Oakville, Ontario, Canada (5) (15)
Robin Borley, SVP Mine
Development & Director
Waterfall Country Estate,
Gauteng, South Africa (6) (15)
Peter Liabotis, Chief Financial
Officer & SVP
2261 Rockingham Drive,
Oakville, Ontario, Canada (7) (15)
Quentin Yarie, SVP Exploration
& Director
196 McAllister Road
North York, Ontario (8) (15)
Albert A. Thiess, Jr., Director
850,000
0.3%
4,031,000
1.3%
3,350,000
1.1%
8 Lawson’s Pond Court
725,000
Bluffton, SC, USA (9) (14) (15)
Brent Nykoliation, SVP
161 Fallingbrook Road
4,975,000
0.2%
1.6%
Toronto, Ontario, Canada (10) (15)
Dean Comand, Director
131 Garden Avenue
Ancaster, Ontario, Canada (11)
(14) (15)
Dalton Larson, Director
400,000
0.1%
3629 Canterbury Drive
1,300,000
0.4%
Surrey, BC, Canada (12) (15)
All directors and executive
officers as a group
(11 persons)
JPMorgan Asset Management
(UK) Limited
270 Park Ave
New York, NY 10017 (16)
VR Global Partners, LP
Intertrust Corporate Services
(Cayman) Ltd.
34,516,000
10.9%
33,393,600
9.7%
190 Elgin Ave.
40,509,570
11.6%
Georgetown, Grand Cayman,
KY1-9005 Cayman Islands
66
Sources – www.sedi.ca, U.S. regulatory filings, internal schedules and the Company’s registered
shareholder list.
(1)Denominator used for calculation is each individual’s or entity’s Unit Shares plus the Company’s
current outstanding common shares of 309,384,672 (assuming conversion of the special warrants).
(2)Total includes 350,000 common shares and 1,775,000 common shares purchase options exercisable
between $0.11 and $0.30 per share with expiry dates between July 1, 2016 and February 26, 2020.
(4)
(3)Total includes 250,000 common shares and 1,450,000 common shares purchase options exercisable
between $0.11 and $0.30 per share with expiry dates between July 1, 2016 and February 26, 2020.
Total include items held by “Sarmat Resources Inc.”, a related company, plus certain family members
holdings. Includes 4,460,000 common shares, 300,000 common share purchase warrants and
6,100,000 common shares purchase options exercisable between $0.11 and $0.30 per share with
expiry dates between July 1, 2016 and February 26, 2020.
Total includes 600,000 common shares, 300,000 common share purchase warrants and 3,300,000
common shares purchase options exercisable between $0.11 and $0.30 per share with expiry dates
between July 1, 2016 and February 26, 2020.
(5)
(7)
(6)Total includes 850,000 common shares purchase options exercisable between $0.20 and $0.28 per
share with expiry dates between March 7, 2017 and February 26, 2020.
Total includes 731,000 common shares, 300,000 common share purchase warrants and 3,000,000
common shares purchase options exercisable between $0.11 and $0.30 per share with expiry dates
between July 1, 2016 and February 26, 2020.
Total includes 825,000 common shares, 250,000 common share purchase warrants and 2,275,000
common shares purchase options exercisable between $0.11 and $0.30 per share with expiry dates
between July 1, 2016 and February 26, 2020.
(8)
(9)Total includes 100,000 common shares and 625,000 common shares purchase options exercisable
between $0.11 and $0.23 per share with expiry dates between May 23, 2017 and February 26, 2020.
Total includes 1,275,000 common shares, 300,000 common share purchase warrants and 3,400,000
common shares purchase options exercisable between $0.11 and $0.395 per share with expiry dates
between July 1, 2016 and February 26, 2020.
(10)
(11)Total includes 400,000 common shares purchase options exercisable at $0.20 per share with an
expiry date of February 26, 2020.
Total includes 1,000,000 common shares and 100,000 common share purchase warrants
exercisable at $0.16 per share with an expiry date of January 31, 2017 and 200,000 common shares
purchase options exercisable at $0.20 per share with an expiry date of February 26, 2020.
(12)
Members of the Audit Committee.
(14)
 67 
   
(15)Parties whose shareholdings are a part of the total of “All directors and executive officers as a group
(11 persons)”.
(16) Based on Schedule 13G filed on January 30, 2015.
Changes in Control
We are not aware of any arrangements that may result in a change in control of the Company.
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE
Since July 1, 2011, except as noted under the section entitled “Executive Compensation” and
below, none of the following parties, has any material interest, direct or indirect, in any
transaction with us or in any presently proposed transaction with us that has or will materially
affect us: (1) any of our directors or officers; (2) any person proposed as a nominee for election
as a director; (3) any person who beneficially owns, directly or indirectly, shares carrying more
than 10% of the voting rights attached to our outstanding common shares; (4) any of our
promoters; and (5) any relative or spouse of any of the foregoing persons who has the same
house as such person.
Parties are related if one party has the ability, directly or indirectly, to control the other party or
exercise significant influence over the other party in making operating and financial decisions.
Parties are also related if they are subject to common control or common significant influence.
Related parties may be individuals or corporate entities. A transaction is considered to be a
related party transaction when there is a transfer of resources or obligations between related
parties. Related party transactions that are in the normal course of business and have
commercial substance are measured at the exchange amount. The following directors were
independent under the independence standards of both the Toronto Stock Exchange and the
NYSE MKT during the past fiscal year: Albert A. Thiess, Jr., V. Peter Harder and John Sanderson.
Given the size of the Company, the only formal committee in place is an audit committee. The
following independent directors serve on the audit committee: Albert A. Thiess, Jr. (Chair), V.
Peter Harder and John Sanderson.
The following are the related party transactions for the nine month period ended March 31, 2015:
The Company incurred $74,200 (March 31, 2014: $90,000), in office administration and rent,
included in general and administrative expenses, from a public company related by common
management, Red Pine Exploration Inc. (TSX.V: “RPX”).
6,680,000 (March 31, 2014: 5,370,000) stock options were issued to related parties during the
period with an exercise price between $0.15 and $0.20 (March 31, 2014: between $0.11 and $0.18).
These stock options were valued at $438,035 (March 31, 2014: $513,364) using the Black-Scholes
pricing model and were issued to directors and officers of the Company and included in stock-
based compensation (Note 10).
The Company incurred $478,534 (March 31, 2014: $754,515) in expenses to directors and officers
or companies under their control.
The Company incurred $1,948,323 (March 31, 2014: $571,395) in charges from a mining and
engineering firm, DRA Minerals, for which one of the Company’s former directors serves as a
senior officer and a director which was included in mineral exploration expense.
During the year ended June 30, 2014, the Company entered into an agreement to option a 75%
interest in the Sagar Property to Honey Badger Exploration Inc. (TSX-V: “TUF”), a public
company related by common management.
The following are the related party balances as of March 31, 2015:
Related party balances of $29,218 (June 30, 2014: $54,764) were included in amounts receivable
and prepaid expenses and $70,990 (June 30, 2014: $33,019) related to rent, was included in
accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
During May 2014, the Company advanced a short-term loan to MacDonald Mines Exploration Ltd.
(TSX-V: “BMK”), a company related by way of common management, totaling $78,879 (June 30,
2014: $47,081). This loan is interest bearing at a rate of 5%. No amounts have been paid back up
to March 31, 2015. Accrued interest due totalled $3,292 (June 30, 2014: $285) as at March 31,
2015, and is included in the balance.
Of the $1,948,323 (June 30, 2014: $1,533,007) in charges from a mining and engineering firm for
which one of the Company’s former directors serves as a senior officer and director. $358,440
(June 30, 2014: $633,416) is included in accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
$75,723 (June 30, 2014: $264,922) was included within accounts payable and accrued liabilities as
a committed amount due to the former Chief Executive Officer of the Company.
68
The following are the related party transactions of our Company for the year ended June 30,
2014:
The Company incurred a total of $112,200 (June 30, 2013: $119,495) in office administration and
rent expense from a public company related by common management, Red Pine Exploration Inc
(TSX.V: “RPX”). (Source: www.sedi.ca as of September 4, 2014).
Name
Title at Energizer
Title at Red Pine
Shares Held in
RPX
% Ownership of
RPX
7,291,000
2.9%
Director, CEO
Director, CEO
Director, President & COO SVP - Chief Geologist
Richard
Schler**
Craig
Scherba
Peter LiabotisCFO
Brent
Nykoliation
Kirk
McKinnon*
Total
Mr. McKinnon resigned as Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board of Directors on
*
September 12, 2013.
** Mr. Schler was appointed Chief Executive Officer on September 19, 2013.
Former Director, CEO &
Chairman
Former Director, CEO &
Chairman
3.0%
8.2%
0.6%
0.9%
0.8%
20,609,452
1,590,000
2,270,000
1,870,952
CFO
Director
Senior VP
7,587,500
5,370,000 (June 30, 2013: 5,975,000) stock options were issued to related parties during the
period with exercise prices between $0.11 and $0.18 (June 30, 2013: between $0.21 and $0.29).
These stock options were valued at $513,364 (June 30, 2013: $1,178,813) using the Black-Scholes
pricing model and were issued to directors and officers of the Company and included in stock-
based compensation.
Date of Grant
Expiry Date
Exercise Price $0.110
Peter Harder
 25,000
John Sanderson  25,000
Richard Schler
09-Jul-13 19-Sep-1309-Oct-1310-Jan-14 
09-Jul-18 19-Sep-1809-Oct-1810-Jan-19
$0.130
TOTAL
 250,000  250,000  525,000
 400,000  475,000
 -
 170,000  200,000  -
 475,000  845,000
$0.150
 -
 50,000
$0.180
180,000  -
 150,000  -
 -
 -
Craig Scherba
Peter Liabotis
Robin Borley
Brent Nykoliation 175,000  75,000
 100,000  50,000
Quentin Yarie
Albert Thiess
 25,000
Johann de Bruin  -
Kirk McKinnon
Total
-
 -
 -
 -
 -
 -
 -
 170,000  225,000  -
1,020,000600,000
-
 -
500,000  680,000
 500,000  650,000
 300,000  300,000
 400,000  650,000
 425,000  575,000
 125,000  150,000
 125,000  125,000
 395,000
 
250,000 3,500,000 5,370,000
The Company incurred $1,190,585 (June 30, 2013: $995,877) in mineral exploration,
administrative, management and consulting fees to directors and officers and paid or accrued
directly to directors and officers or companies under their control.
The Company incurred $1,533,953 (June 30, 2013: $928,982) in charges from a mining and
engineering firm for which one of the Company’s directors serves as a senior officer and a
director which was included in mineral exploration expense.
During the year ended June 30, 2014 the Company entered into an agreement to option a 75%
interest in the Sagar Property to Honey Badger Exploration Inc. (TSX-V: “TUF”), a public
company related by common management (see Note 7).
The following are the related party balances for the year ended June 30, 2014:
Related party balances of $54,764 (June 30, 2013: $42,908) were included in accounts receivable
and prepaid expenses and $33,019 (June 30, 2013: $Nil) included in accounts payable and
accrued liabilities.
The Company advanced a short-term loan to RPX totaling $26,216 (June 30, 2013: $136,999). This
loan is interest bearing at a rate of 3%. Cdn$300,000 was originally loaned during January 2012
and represents the highest outstanding balance. Cdn$285,000 has been paid back up to June 30,
2013, all against the loan’s principal balance. Accrued interest totaled Cdn$11,216 as at June 30,
2014. During May 2014, the Company advanced a short-term loan to MacDonald Mines
Exploration Ltd. (TSX-V: “BMK”) totaling Cdn$50,000 (June 30, 2013: $Nil). This loan is interest
bearing at a rate of 5% and no amounts have been paid back up to June 30, 2014. Accrued
interest due totaled Cdn$285 as at June 30, 2014. The Company has advanced a short-term loan
to TUF totaling Cdn$25,000 (June 30, 2013: $Nil). This loan is interest bearing at a rate of 5% and
no amounts have been paid back up to June 30, 2014. Accrued interest due totaled Cdn$142 as
at June 30, 2014. All of the above noted loans are expected to be paid back in full within the next
12 months and totaled $94,512.
69
Of the $1,533,007 (June 30, 2013: $928,982) in charges from a mining and engineering firm for
which one of the Company’s directors serves as a senior officer and director, $633,418 (June 30,
2013: $6,867) is included in accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
$264,922 (June 30, 2013: $Nil) is included within accounts payable and accrued liabilities as a
committed amount due to the former Chief Executive Officer of the Company.
The following are the related party transactions for the year ended June 30, 2013:
The Company incurred a total of $119,495 (June 30, 2012: $74,550) office administration and rent
expense from a public company related by common management, Red Pine Exploration Inc
(TSX.V: “RPX”).
5,975,000 (June 30, 2012: 9,600,000) stock options were issued to related parties during the
period with exercise prices between $0.21 and $0.29 (June 30, 2012: between $0.20 and $0.30).
These stock options valued at $1,178,813 (June 30, 2012: $2,181,213) were issued to directors
and officers of the Company.
The Company incurred $995,877 (June 30, 2013: $717,886) in administrative, management and
consulting fees to directors and officers.
The Company incurred $995,877 (June 30, 2013: $1,137,725) in charges from a mining and
engineering firm for which one of the Company’s directors serves as a senior officer and a
director.
The following are the related party balances as at for the year ended June 30, 2013:
Related party balances of $42,908 (June 30, 2012: $34,319) in prepaid expenses.
The Company has advanced a short-term loan to RPX totaling $136,999 (June 30, 2012:
$258,416). This loan is interest bearing at a rate of 3% and is expected to be paid back in full
within the next 12 months. $300,000 was originally loaned during January 2012 and represents
the highest outstanding balance. $171,667 has been paid back on the loan since inception up to
June 30, 2013, all of it principal. Accrued interest due totals $8,666 as at June 30, 2013.
The following are the related party transactions for the year ended June 30, 2012:
The Company incurred a total of $74,550 (June 30, 2011: $59,410) in office administration and rent
expense from a company related by common management.
9,600,000 (June 30, 2011: 1,100,000) stock options were issued to related parties during the
period with exercise prices between $0.20 and $0.30. These stock options valued at $2,181,213
(June 30, 2011: $237,710) were issued to directors and officers of the Company.
The Company incurred $717,886 (June 30, 2011: $821,338) in administrative, management and
consulting fees to directors and officers.
The Company incurred $1,137,725 (June 30, 2011: $Nil) in charges from a mining and engineering
firm in which one of the Company’s directors serves as a senior officer and a director for.
The following are the related party balances for the year ended June 30, 2012:
Related party balances of $Nil (June 30, 2011: $168,000) were included in accounts payable and
accrued liabilities and $34,319 (June 30, 2011: $37,000) in prepaid expenses.
The Company has recorded a short-term loan to a related party totaling $258,416 (June 30, 2011:
$Nil). This loan is interest bearing and is expected to be paid back in full within the next 12
months.
TRANSFER AGENT AND REGISTRAR
The registrar and transfer agent for our common shares will be Continental Stock Transfer &
Trust, 17 Battery Place, New York, NY 10004.
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the common shares and warrants offered by this prospectus will be passed upon
for us by Dorsey & Whitney LLP.
70
EXPERTS
The auditor of the Company is MNP LLP, Chartered Accountants, of 50 Burnhamthorpe Road
West, Suite 900, Mississauga, ON L5B 3C2. MNP LLP, Chartered Accountants, is independent of
the Company within the meaning of the Rules of Professional Conduct of the Chartered
Professional Accountants of Ontario.
The Feasibility Study was prepared by DRA Projects (Pty) Limited.
To the best knowledge of the Company, at the date of this prospectus, none of the qualified
persons referenced above holds registered or beneficial interest, direct or indirect, in any
securities or other property of the Company or any of its associates or affiliates and no securities
or other property of the Company or any of its associates or affiliates is to be received by such
persons.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We are subject to the informational requirements of the Exchange Act and, accordingly, file
current and periodic reports, proxy statements and other information with the SEC. We have also
filed a registration statement on Form S-1 under the Securities Act, as amended, in connection
with this offering. This prospectus, which is part of the registration statement, does not contain
all of the information contained in the registration statement. For further information with respect
to us and the common shares offered hereby, reference is made to such registration statement,
including the exhibits thereto, which may be read, without charge, and copied at the public
reference facilities maintained by the SEC at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. The
public may obtain information on the operation of the public reference room by calling the SEC at
1-800-SEC-0330. The SEC maintains a site on the World Wide Web at http://www.sec.gov that
contains current and periodic reports, proxy statements and other information regarding
registrants that filed electronically with the SEC. Statements contained in this prospectus as to
the intent of any contract or other document referred to are not necessarily complete, and in each
instance reference is made to the copy of such contract or other document filed as an exhibit to
this registration statement, each such statement being qualified in all respects by such reference.
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Years Ended June 30, 2014 and 2013
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Consolidated Balance Sheets
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERIM PERIODS Ended March 31, 2015 and 2014
Consolidated Balance Sheets
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
71
Energizer Resources Inc.
30,201,497Common shares and 10,067,166 and Warrants Offered by Selling Security Holders
________________
PROSPECTUS
________________
_________, 2015
72
PART II
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
ITEM 13 – OTHER EXPENSES OF ISSUANCE AND DISTRIBUTION 
 
Securities and Exchange Commission Registration Fee
Legal Fees and Expenses
Amount
$ 413.19
$25,000
Accounting Fees and Expenses
Miscellaneous Expenses
Total
$10,000
$5,000
$40,413.19
ITEM 14 – INDEMNIFICATION OF DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
Minnesota corporation law provides that:
•
a corporation may indemnify any person who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to
any threatened, pending or completed action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative
or investigative, except an action by or in the right of the corporation, by reason of the fact that he is or
was a director, officer, employee or agent of the corporation, or is or was serving at the request of the
corporation as a director, officer, employee or agent of another corporation, partnership, joint venture,
trust or other enterprise, against expenses, including attorneys’ fees, judgments, fines and amounts
paid in settlement actually and reasonably incurred by him in connection with the action, suit or
proceeding if he acted in good faith and in a manner which he reasonably believed to be in or not
opposed to the best interests of the corporation, and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding,
had no reasonable cause to believe his conduct was unlawful;
a corporation may indemnify any person who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to
any threatened, pending or completed action or suit by or in the right of the corporation to procure a
judgment in its favor by reason of the fact that he is or was a director, officer, employee or agent of the
corporation, or is or was serving at the request of the corporation as a director, officer, employee or
agent of another corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust or other enterprise against expenses,
including amounts paid in settlement and attorneys’ fees actually and reasonably incurred by him in
connection with the defense or settlement of the action or suit if he acted in good faith and in a manner
which he reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the corporation.
Indemnification may not be made for any claim, issue or matter as to which such a person has been
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction, after exhaustion of all appeals therefrom, to be liable to
the corporation or for amounts paid in settlement to the corporation, unless and only to the extent that
the court in which the action or suit was brought or other court of competent jurisdiction determines
upon application that in view of all the circumstances of the case, the person is fairly and reasonably
entitled to indemnity for such expenses as the court deems proper; and
to the extent that a director, officer, employee or agent of a corporation has been successful on the
merits or otherwise in defense of any action, suit or proceeding, or in defense of any claim, issue or
matter therein, the corporation shall indemnify him against expenses, including attorneys’ fees, actually
and reasonably incurred by him in connection with the defense.
•
•
Our articles of incorporation require us to indemnify our directors and officers against all
damages incurred in connection with our business to the fullest extent provided or allowed by
law.
Our bylaws provide that we will advance all expenses incurred to any person who was or is a
party or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or completed action, suite or
proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative, by reason of the fact that he is
or was our director or officer, or is or was serving at our request as a director or executive officer
of another company, partnership, joint venture, trust or other enterprise, prior to the final
disposition of the proceeding, promptly following request. This advancement of expenses is to
be made upon receipt of an undertaking by or on behalf of such person to repay said amounts
should it be ultimately determined that the person was not entitled to be indemnified under our
bylaws or otherwise.
Our bylaws also provide that no advance shall be made by us to any officer in any action, suit or
proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative, if a determination is
reasonably and promptly made: (a) by the board of directors by a majority vote of a quorum
consisting of directors who were not parties to the proceeding; or (b) if such quorum is not
obtainable, or, even if obtainable, a quorum of disinterested directors so directs, by independent
legal counsel in a written opinion, that the facts known to the decision-making party at the time
such determination is made demonstrate clearly and convincingly that such person acted in bad
faith or in a manner that such person did not believe to be in or not opposed to our best interests.
II- 1
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to our
directors, officers or controlling persons pursuant to the foregoing provisions, or otherwise, we
have been advised that in the opinion of the Commission this indemnification is against public
policy as expressed in the Securities Act and is, therefore, unenforceable.
ITEM 15 – RECENT SALES OF UNREGISTERED SECURITIES
In the past three years, we have offered and sold the following securities in unregistered
transactions pursuant to exemptions under the Securities Act.
•
•
•
•
•
•
During July 2012, $105,000 was received through the exercise of 700,000 stock options at $0.15 per
share.
On July 13, 2012, we issued 1,695,000 stock options to directors, officers and consultants of the
Company.
During November 2012, we closed a brokered and non-brokered private placement raising $2,032,500.
We issued 5,807,142 common shares at $0.35 per share and 2,903,571 common share purchase
warrants at an exercise price of $0.50, expiring 24 months from the date of issue. We also issued
340,028 compensation common share purchase warrants at $0.35.
On February 27, 2013, we issued 5,900,000 stock options to directors, officers and consultants of the
Company.
During March 2013, we closed a private placement raising a total of $2,307,035 (Cdn$2,358,000). We
issued 12,350,000 shares of our common shares between $0.18 and $0.20 per share. In addition, we
issued 270,000 compensation warrants at Cdn$0.20.
On July 9, 2013, we issued 1,255,000 stock options to directors, officers and consultants at $0.11 per
share.
Between July 26, 2013 and August 1, 2013, we closed a private placement raising $813,212
(Cdn$837,500) and $1,230,000. We issued 16,950,001 common shares at prices of Cdn$0.125 and
$0.12 per share. We issued 402,000 compensation warrants at an exercise price of Cdn$0.125 and
150,000 compensation warrants at an exercise price of $0.12. The securities issued to non-U.S.
Persons were issued in reliance on the exemption provided by Regulation S. The offer and sale to U.S.
Persons were effected in reliance on the exemptions for sales of securities not involving a public
offering, as set forth in Rule 506 promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the
“Securities Act”) and in Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act, based on the following: (a) the investors
confirmed to us that they were “accredited investors,” as defined in Rule 501 of Regulation D
promulgated under the Securities Act and had such background, education and experience in financial
and business matters as to be able to evaluate the merits and risks of an investment in the securities;
(b) there was no public offering or general solicitation with respect to the offering; (c) the investors were
provided with certain disclosure materials and all other information requested with respect to our
Company; (d) the investors acknowledged that all securities being purchased were “restricted
securities” for purposes of the Securities Act, and agreed to transfer such securities only in a transaction
registered under the Securities Act or exempt from registration under the Securities Act; and (e) a
legend was placed on the certificates representing each such security stating that it was restricted and
could only be transferred if subsequently registered under the Securities Act or transferred in a
transaction exempt from registration under the Securities Act.
On September 19, 2013, we issued 750,000 stock options to directors, officers and consultants at $0.15
per share.
•On October 9, 2013, we issued 250,000 stock options to a director at $0.13 per share.
On December 18, 2013 we closed a non-brokered financing and raised $1,479,023 (Cdn$1,566,490).
We issued 11,189,215 common shares at Cdn$0.14 per share. We also issued 671,353 compensation
warrants at Cdn$0.14 per share.
•On January 10, 2014, we issued 4,625,000 stock options to directors and officers at $0.18 per share.
On January 15, 2014 and January 31, 2014, we closed a private placement raising a total of $6,906,008
(Cdn$7,486,088). The Company issued 62,384,067 common shares at Cdn$0.12 and 31,192,033
common share purchase warrants. We also issued 3,396,744 compensation warrants.
•On February 6, 2014, we issued 250,000 stock options to a consultant at $0.18 per share.
On June 23, 2014, we issued 2,500,000 shares of our common shares to Malagasy at $0.13 per share
for the Molo Graphite Project.
•On July 3 2014, we issued 4,800,000 stock options to directors and officers at $0.15 per share.
 II- 2
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•On September 18, 2014, 571,353 broker warrants were exercised at $0.126 for total proceeds of
$72,049.
On September 26, 2014, we issued 34,285,714 common shares at $0.14 per share raising $4,800,000.
The Offering consisted of brokered and non-brokered portions, with our company issuing 1,928,571 On
September 26, 2014, we issued 34,285,714 common shares at $0.14 per share raising $4,800,000. The
Offering consisted of brokered and non-brokered portions, with our company issuing 1,928,571
compensation common share purchase warrants. .
On December 30, 2014, we issued 4,900,000 common shares at $0.12 per share raising $588,000. We
also issued 147,000 compensation common share purchase warrants.
•On March 31, 2015, we issued 4,900,000 common shares at $0.12 per share raising $588,000.
On May 4, 2015, we issued 20,550,998 special warrants at Cdn$0.12 per special warrant for aggregate
gross proceeds of CDN$2,466,119.76. Each special warrant will be deemed to be exercised for no
additional consideration into one share of common shares and one-half of one common shares
purchase warrant. Each warrant will entitle the holder thereof to purchase one share of common shares
at a price of $0.14 at any time before 5:00 p.m. (Toronto time) on May 4, 2018.
On May 20, 2015, we issued 1,000,000 common shares pursuant to the terms of the Sale and Purchase
Agreement and Mineral Rights Agreement with Malagasy.
•
•
Except as noted above, each of the issuances above were effected in reliance upon the
exemption provided by Regulation S under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, for a
transaction not involving a public offering. We completed the offering of the shares pursuant to
Rule 903 of Regulation S of the Securities Act on the basis that the sale of the securities was
completed in an “offshore transaction”, as defined in Rule 902(h) of Regulation S. Each investor
represented to us that the investor was not a U.S. person, as defined in Regulation S, and was
not acquiring the shares for the account or benefit of a U.S. person. The securities contain a
legend restricting the sale of such securities in accordance with the Securities Act.
ITEM 16 – EXHIBITS
Exhibit Number & Description
3.1
3.2
Articles of Incorporation of Uranium Star Corp. (now known as Energizer Resources Inc.)
(Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the registrant’s current report on Form 8-K as filed with the
SEC on May 20, 2008)
Articles of Amendment to Articles of Incorporation of Uranium Star Corp. changing its name to
Energizer Resources Inc. (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the registrant’s current report on
Form 8-K filed with the SEC on July 16, 2010)
3.3 Articles of Amendment to Articles of Incorporation of Energizer Resources Inc.
3.4
3.5
Amended and Restated By-Laws of Energizer Resources Inc. (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit
3.2 to the registrant’s current report on Form 8-K as filed with the SEC on July 16, 2010)
Amendment to the By-Laws of Energizer Resources Inc. (Incorporated by reference to the registrant’s
current report on Form 8-K as filed with the SEC on October 16, 2013)
4.1 Subscription Agreement for Special Warrants (Canadian and Offshore Subscribers)*
4.2Form of Warrant to purchase common shares*
Amended and Restated Stock Option Plan (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the
registrant’s current report on Form 8-K as filed with the SEC on October 16, 2013)
Opinion of Dorsey & Whitney LLP
4.3
5.1
10.1
10.2
Property Agreement effective May 14, 2004 between Thornton J. Donaldson and Thornton J.
Donaldson, Trustee for Yukon Resources Corp. (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the
registrant’s Form SB-2 registration statement as filed with the SEC on September 14, 2004)
Letter of Intent dated March 10, 2006 with Apofas Ltd. (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 99.1 to
the registrant’s current report on Form 8-K as filed with the SEC on March 13, 2006)
10.3
10.4
Letter agreement effective May 12, 2006 between Yukon Resources Corp. and Virginia Mines Inc.
(Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 99.1 to the registrant’s current report on Form 8-K filed as with
the SEC on May 9, 2006)
Joint Venture Agreement dated August 22, 2007 between Uranium Star Corp. & Madagascar
Minerals and Resources Sarl (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the registrant’s Form 8-K
as filed with SEC on September 11, 2007)
II- 3
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
10.9
Joint Venture Agreement between Malagasy Minerals Limited and Energizer Resources Inc. dated
December 14, 2011 (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to the registrant’s Form 10-K/A as
filed on April 8, 2013)
Agreement to Purchase Interest In Claims between Honey Badger Exploration Inc. and Energizer
Resources Inc. dated February 28, 2014.(Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.7 to the registrant’s
Form 10-Q as filed on May 14, 2014)
Sale and Purchase Agreement between Malagasy Minerals Limited and Energizer Resources Inc.
dated April 16, 2014 (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.8 to the registrant’s Form 10-Q as filed
on May 14, 2014)
ERG Project Minerals Rights Agreement between Malagasy Minerals Limited and Energizer
Resources Inc. dated April 16, 2014 (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.9 to the registrant’s
Form 10-Q as filed on May 14, 2014)
Green Giant Project Joint Venture Agreement between Malagasy Minerals Limited and Energizer
Resources Inc. dated April 16, 2014 (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.9 to the registrant’s
Form 10-Q as filed on May 14, 2014)
Subsidiaries of the Registrant*
21
23.1
23.3
23.8 Consent of Dorsey & Whitney LLP (contained in Exhibit 5.1)
24.1
Powers of Attorney (contained on Signature Page)*
Consent of DRA Projects (pty) Limited
Consent of MNP LLP, Chartered Accountants
101
Interactive Data File (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 101 to the registrant’s Form 10-K as filed
on September 29, 2014 and the registrant’s Form 10-Q as filed on May 15, 2015)
*Previously filed
ITEM 17 – UNDERTAKINGS
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to
directors, officers and controlling persons of the Registrant pursuant to the foregoing
provisions, or otherwise, the Registrant has been advised that in the opinion of the Securities
and Exchange Commission such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the
Securities Act and is, therefore, unenforceable. In the event that a claim for indemnification
against such liabilities (other than the payment by the Registrant of expenses incurred or paid by
a director, officer or controlling person of the Registrant in the successful defense of any action,
suit or proceeding) is asserted by such director, officer or controlling person in connection with
the securities being registered, the Registrant will, unless in the opinion of its counsel the matter
has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of appropriate jurisdiction the
question whether such indemnification by it is against public policy as expressed in the
Securities Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
The undersigned Registrant hereby undertakes:
(1) To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment
to this registration statement:
(i) To include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act; II-5 4842-7642-
6788False6False
(ii) To reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of the
registration statement (or the most recent post-effective amendment thereof) which, individually
or in the aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information set forth in the
registration statement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or decrease in volume of
securities offered (if the total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed that which was
registered) and any deviation from the low or high end of the estimated maximum offering range
may be reflected in the form of prospectus filed with the Commission pursuant to Rule 424(b) if,
in the aggregate, the changes in volume and price represent no more than 20% change in the
maximum aggregate offering price set forth in the “Calculation of Registration Fee” table in the
effective registration statement;
(iii) To include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously
disclosed in the registration statement or any material change to such information in the
registration statement;
(2) That for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act, each such post-
effective amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities
offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial
bona fide offering thereof.
(3) To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities
being registered which remain unsold at the termination of the offering. (4) That, for the purpose
of determining liability under the Securities Act, to any purchaser:
(i) If the registrant is relying on Rule 430B:
(A) Each prospectus filed by the registrant pursuant to Rule 424(b)(3) shall be deemed to be part
of the registration statement as of the date the filed prospectus was deemed part of and included
in the registration statement; and
(B) Each prospectus required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424(b)(2), (b)(5), or (b)(7) as part of a
registration statement in reliance on Rule 430B relating to an offering made pursuant to Rule
415(a)(1)(i), (vii), or (x) for the purpose of providing the information required by Section 10(a) of
the Securities Act, shall be deemed to be part of and included in the registration statement as of
the earlier of the date such form of prospectus is first used after effectiveness or the date of the
first contract of sale of securities in the offering described in the prospectus. As provided in Rule
430B, for liability purposes of the issuer and any person that is at that date an underwriter, such
date shall be deemed to be a new effective date of the registration statement relating to the
securities in the registration statement to which that prospectus relates, and the offering of such
securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof. Provided,
however, that no statement made in a registration statement or prospectus that is part of the
registration statement or made in a document incorporated or deemed incorporated by reference
into the registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement will, as to a
purchaser with a time of contract of sale prior to such effective date, supersede or modify any
statement that was made in the registration statement or prospectus that was part of the
registration statement or made in any such document immediately prior to such effective date; or
(ii) If the registrant is subject to Rule 430C, each prospectus filed pursuant to Rule 424(b) as part
of a registration statement relating to an offering, other than registration statements relying on
Rule 430B or other than prospectuses filed in reliance on Rule 430A, shall be deemed to be part
of and included in the registration statement as of the date it is first used after effectiveness.
Provided, however, that no statement made in a registration statement or prospectus that is part
of the registration statement or made in a document incorporated or deemed incorporated by
reference into the registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement
will, as to a purchaser with a time of contract of sale prior to such first use, supersede or modify
any statement that was made in the registration statement or prospectus that was part of the
registration statement or made in any such document immediately prior to such date of first use.
(5) That, for the purpose of determining liability of the registrant under the Securities Act, to any
purchaser in the initial distribution of the securities, the undersigned registrant undertakes that in
a primary offering of securities of the undersigned registrant pursuant to this registration
statement, regardless of the underwriting method used to sell the securities to the purchaser, if
the securities are offered or sold to such purchaser by means of any of the following
communications, the undersigned registrant will be a seller to the purchaser and will be
considered to offer or sell such securities to such purchaser:
(i) any preliminary prospectus or prospectus of the undersigned registrant relating to the offering
required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424;
(ii) any free writing prospectus relating to the offering prepared by or on behalf of the
undersigned registrant or used or referred to by the undersigned registrant;
(iii) the portion of any other free writing prospectus relating to the offering containing material
information about the undersigned registrant or its securities provided by or on behalf of the
undersigned registrant; and
(iv) any other communication that is an offer in the offering made by the undersigned registrant
to the purchaser.
II- 4
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant certifies that it has
reasonable grounds to believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form S-3 and has
duly caused this registration statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto
duly authorized, in the City of Toronto, on the 28th of July, 2015.
Energizer Resources Inc.
By: /s/ Richard E. Schler 
Name: Richard E. Schler
Title: Chief Executive Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, this registration
statement has been signed by the following persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
/s/ Richard E. Schler
Richard Schler
Chief Executive Officer, Director
*
Craig Scherba
President & Chief Operating Officer, Director
July 28,
2015
July 28,
2015
*
V. Peter Harder
Chairman of the Board, Director
*
John Sanderson
Vice-Chairman, Director
Robin Borley
SVP, Mine Development, Director
*
Quentin Yarie
SVP, Exploration, Director
*
Dean Comand
Director
*
Dalton Larson
Director
*
Albert A. Thiess, Jr.
Director
July 28,
2015
July 28,
2015
July 28,
2015
July 28,
2015
July 28,
2015
July 28,
2015
/s/ Peter Liabotis
Peter Liabotis
Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial Officer, Principle
Accounting Officer)
July 28,
2015
*By: /s/ Peter Liabotis
Peter Liabotis, Attorney-
in-fact
II- 5
EXHIBIT INDEX
Exhibit Number & Description
July 28,
2015
3.1
3.2
Articles of Incorporation of Uranium Star Corp. (now known as Energizer Resources Inc.)
(Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the registrant’s current report on Form 8-K as filed with the
SEC on May 20, 2008)
Articles of Amendment to Articles of Incorporation of Uranium Star Corp. changing its name to
Energizer Resources Inc. (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the registrant’s current report on
Form 8-K filed with the SEC on July 16, 2010)
3.3 Articles of Amendment to Articles of Incorporation of Energizer Resources Inc.
3.4
3.5
Amended and Restated By-Laws of Energizer Resources Inc. (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit
3.2 to the registrant’s current report on Form 8-K as filed with the SEC on July 16, 2010)
Amendment to the By-Laws of Energizer Resources Inc. (Incorporated by reference to the registrant’s
current report on Form 8-K as filed with the SEC on October 16, 2013)
4.1 Subscription Agreement for Special Warrants (Canadian and Offshore Subscribers)*
 4.2Form of Warrant to purchase common shares*
Amended and Restated Stock Option Plan (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the
registrant’s current report on Form 8-K as filed with the SEC on October 16, 2013)
Opinion of Dorsey & Whitney LLP
4.3
5.1
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
10.9
Property Agreement effective May 14, 2004 between Thornton J. Donaldson and Thornton J.
Donaldson, Trustee for Yukon Resources Corp. (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the
registrant’s Form SB-2 registration statement as filed with the SEC on September 14, 2004)
Letter of Intent dated March 10, 2006 with Apofas Ltd. (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 99.1 to
the registrant’s current report on Form 8-K as filed with the SEC on March 13, 2006)
Letter agreement effective May 12, 2006 between Yukon Resources Corp. and Virginia Mines Inc.
(Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 99.1 to the registrant’s current report on Form 8-K filed as with
the SEC on May 9, 2006)
Joint Venture Agreement dated August 22, 2007 between Uranium Star Corp. & Madagascar
Minerals and Resources Sarl (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the registrant’s Form 8-K
as filed with SEC on September 11, 2007)
Joint Venture Agreement between Malagasy Minerals Limited and Energizer Resources Inc. dated
December 14, 2011 (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to the registrant’s Form 10-K/A as
filed on April 8, 2013)
Agreement to Purchase Interest In Claims between Honey Badger Exploration Inc. and Energizer
Resources Inc. dated February 28, 2014.(Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.7 to the registrant’s
Form 10-Q as filed on May 14, 2014)
Sale and Purchase Agreement between Malagasy Minerals Limited and Energizer Resources Inc.
dated April 16, 2014 (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.8 to the registrant’s Form 10-Q as filed
on May 14, 2014)
ERG Project Minerals Rights Agreement between Malagasy Minerals Limited and Energizer
Resources Inc. dated April 16, 2014 (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.9 to the registrant’s
Form 10-Q as filed on May 14, 2014)
Green Giant Project Joint Venture Agreement between Malagasy Minerals Limited and Energizer
Resources Inc. dated April 16, 2014 (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.9 to the registrant’s
Form 10-Q as filed on May 14, 2014)
Subsidiaries of the Registrant*
21
23.1
23.3
23.8 Consent of Dorsey & Whitney LLP (contained in Exhibit 5.1)
24.1
Powers of Attorney (contained on Signature Page)*
Consent of DRA Projects (pty) Limited
Consent of MNP LLP, Chartered Accountants
101
Interactive Data File (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 101 to the registrant’s Form 10-K as filed
on September 29, 2014 and the registrant’s Form 10-Q as filed on May 15, 2015)
*Previously filed
II- 6