
6-K 1 pr83115.htm PPL ADVANCES ITS PPL-003 TO AN IND pr83115.htm
UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C. 20549
Form 6-K
REPORT OF FOREIGN PRIVATE ISSUER PURSUANT TO RULE 13a-16 OR 15d-16
UNDER THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the month of  August 2015
Commission File Number 0-30314
PORTAGE BIOTECH INC.
(Translation of registrant’s name into English)
47 Avenue Rd., Suite 200, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5R 2G3
(Address of principal executive office)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant files or will file annual reports under cover Form
20-F or Form 40-F. 
Form 20-F ___X___ Form 40-F _______
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper as permitted by
Regulation S-T Rule 101(b)(1):  ______
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper as permitted by
Regulation S-T Rule 101(b)(7): ______
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant by furnishing the information contained in this Form
is also thereby furnishing the information to the Commission pursuant to Rule 12g3-2(b) under
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Yes _______ No___X____
 
If “Yes” is marked, indicate below the file number assigned to the registrant in connection with
Rule 12g3-2(b):
82- ______________.
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
 
Dated: August 31, 2015
 
 
PORTAGE BIOTECH INC.
By: /s/ Kam Shah
Kam Shah
Chief Financial Officer
NEWS RELEASE
 
PORTAGE’S PPL WILL ADVANCE ITS LEAD CANDIDATE PPL-003 TO AN IND FOR DRY
EYE DISEASE AND UVEITIS
 
 Toronto, Ontario, August 31, 2015 – Portage Biotech Inc. (“Portage” or “the Company”)) (OTC
Market: PTGEF, Canadian Securities Exchange: PBT.U), is pleased to announce that its wholly
owned subsidiary, Portage Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (PPL) will be advancing its lead candidate,
PPL-003, to an Investigational New Drug (IND) application for the topical treatment of dry eye
disease and uveitis.  PPL recently completed a study in a rat model of dry eye disease where
topical PPL-003 solution achieved highly significant efficacy and a more rapid onset of action
than 0.1% dexamethasone.
 
In addition PPL recently also completed an exploratory study of PPL-003 in a T-cell dependent
rabbit model of uveitis.  Topical treatment with PPL-003 for two weeks was well tolerated and
demonstrated reduced inflammation in the anterior chamber and the vitreous confirming that this
cell penetrating peptide therapeutic is able to penetrate into the eye and exhibit its anti-
inflammatory activity in eye tissues.  Previously PPL announced positive results in acute
endotoxin-induced models of anterior uveitis in mice and rabbits and excellent toleration in
normal rabbits dosed for 7 days.  These studies confirm the cell penetrating properties of PPL-
003 and its broad anti-inflammatory activity through inhibition of NFkB transcription factor
activation.
 
Dr. Jeffrey A. Jamison, whose company Ophthy-DS of Kalamazoo, MI (USA) conducted these
new studies, said. “PPL-003 is the only compound I have seen to work as well as the steroid."
Dr. Bruce H. Littman, C.E.O. of PPL, said “with these results PPL has high confidence in the
properties of PPL-003 as a topical treatment for dry eye and other inflammatory eye diseases.  To
our knowledge, PPL-003 is the only NFkB inhibitor for these indications and we believe that it
will differentiate favourably from existing drugs such as Allergan’s Restasis (topical cyclosporine
0.05%), the market leader for dry eye, as well as newer agents close to approval or in trials that
target only one inflammation mechanism. There is a high medical need as well as significant
market potential for safer and more effective treatments.”
 
About Portage:
 
Portage is engaged in researching and developing pharmaceutical and biotech products through
to clinical “proof of concept” with an initial focus on unmet medical need. Following proof of
concept, Portage will look to sell or license the products to large pharmaceutical companies for
further development and commercialization.
 
 
Portage  is  seeking  discovery  and  co-development  partners  in  areas  such  as  certain  inherited
diseases,  inflammatory  and  autoimmune  disease,  cancer,  infectious  disease,  neurology  and
psychiatry  developing  novel  targeted  therapies,  and  even  older  marketed  products  that  have
been found to have novel patentable characteristics that bring new value to patients.
 
 
Portage seeks to work with a wide range of partners, in all phases of development through in-
licensing or other types of alliances. The collaboration may include direct funding or investing
human capital from our extensive pool of talented scientists and physicians. Specifically, Portage
will invest sweat equity as well as, or instead of, capital. This internal pool of drug developers,
financiers, scientists and physicians will provide unique value-add for our partners including but
not  limited  to  mitigating  risks,  clinical  trial  design,  regulatory  expertise  and  maximizing  the
rewards.
 
 
Portage  also  has  another  subsidiary,  Biohaven  Pharmaceutical  Holding  Company  Limited
(Biohaven)  in  which  Portage  holds  54%  equity  interest.  Biohaven  is  a  privately-held
biopharmaceutical  company  engaged  in  the  identification  and  development  of  clinical  stage
neuroscience compounds targeting the glutamatergic system. Biohaven founders were among
the  first  researchers  at  Yale  University  to  discover  the  therapeutic  potential  of  the  NMDA
antagonist ketamine and other glutamate modulating agents in the treatment of neuropsychiatric
disorders.  Biohaven has a worldwide license from Yale University to use intellectual property
relating to the use of certain glutamate modulating agents in the treatment of neuropsychiatric
disorders.  The  company's  first  drug  candidate,  BHV-0223,  is  a  reformulated  glutamate
modulating  agent  being  developed  for  treatment-resistant  mood  and  anxiety  disorders.  BHV-
0223 is currently in Phase 1 of clinical trial after clearance of its IND by U.S. Food and Drug
Administration in August 2015.
 
For further information, contact Dr. Greg Bailey, the Chairman at gb@portagebiotech.com or Kam
Shah, Chief Financial Officer, at (416) 929-1806  or ks@portagebiotech.com or visit our website
at www.portagebiotech.com.
Forward-Looking Statements
 
This news release includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of the U.S. federal
and Canadian securities laws.  Any such statements reflect Portage's current views and
assumptions about future events and financial performance.  Portage cannot assure that future
events or performance will occur. Important risks and factors that could cause actual results or
events to differ materially from those indicated in our forward-looking statements.
 
Portage assumes no obligation and expressly disclaims any duty to update the information in this
News Release.