
.
SUNRISE MINERALS INC
MR  SAM  SAMPLE
123  SAMPLES  STREET
SAMPLETOWN  SS  X9X 9X9
9th Floor, 100 University Avenue
Toronto, Ontario M5J 2Y1
www.computershare.com
Security Class
123
Holder Account Number
C1234567890
X X X
Form of Proxy - Annual General and Special Meeting to be held on June 15, 2007
This Form of Proxy is solicited by and on behalf of Management.
Notes to proxy
1. Every holder has the right to appoint some other person or company of their choice, who need not be a holder, to attend and act on their behalf at the meeting. If you wish to
appoint a person or company other than the persons whose names are printed herein, please insert the name of your chosen proxyholder in the space provided (see reverse).
2. If  the  securities  are  registered  in  the  name  of  more  than  one  owner  (for  example,  joint  ownership,  trustees,  executors,  etc.),  then  all  those  registered  should  sign  this  proxy.  If  you
are  voting  on  behalf  of  a  corporation  or  another  individual  you  may  be  required  to  provide  documentation  evidencing  your  power  to  sign  this  proxy  with  signing  capacity  stated.
3. This  proxy  should  be  signed  in  the  exact  manner  as  the  name  appears  on  the  proxy.
4. If  this  proxy  is  not  dated,  it  will  be  deemed  to  bear  the  date  on  which  it  is  mailed  by  Management  to  the  holder.
5. The securities represented by this proxy will be voted as directed by the holder, however, if such a direction is not made in respect of any matter, this proxy will be voted as
recommended by Management.
6. The  securities  represented  by  this  proxy  will  be  voted  or  withheld  from  voting,  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  of  the  holder,  on  any  ballot  that  may  be  called  for  and,  if
the  holder  has  specified  a  choice  with  respect  to  any  matter  to  be  acted  on,  the  securities  will  be  voted  accordingly.
7. This  proxy  confers  discretionary  authority  in  respect  of  amendments  to  matters  identified  in  the  Notice  of  Meeting  or  other  matters  that  may  properly  come  before  the  meeting.
8. This  proxy  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  the  accompanying  documentation  provided  by  Management.
Proxies submitted must be received by 10:00 am, Eastern Time, on Wednesday, June 13, 2007.
Fold
Fold
VOTE USING THE TELEPHONE OR INTERNET 24 HOURS A DAY 7 DAYS A WEEK!
.
.
To Vote Using the Telephone
To Vote Using the Internet
• Call  the  number  listed  BELOW  from  a  touch  tone
telephone.
1-866-732-VOTE (8683) Toll Free
• Go  to  the  following  web  site:
www.investorvote.com
If you vote by telephone or the Internet, DO NOT mail back this proxy.
Voting by mail may  be  the  only  method  for  securities  held  in  the  name  of  a  corporation  or  securities  being  voted  on  behalf  of  another  individual.
Voting by mail or by Internet are  the  only  methods  by  which  a  holder  may  appoint  a  person  as  proxyholder  other  than  the  Management  nominees  named  on  the  reverse  of  this  proxy.
Instead  of  mailing  this  proxy,  you  may  choose  one  of  the  two  voting  methods  outlined  above  to  vote  this  proxy.
To vote by telephone or the Internet, you will need to provide your CONTROL NUMBER, HOLDER ACCOUNT NUMBER and ACCESS NUMBER listed below.
CONTROL NUMBER 123456
HOLDER  ACCOUNT NUMBER C1234567890
ACCESS NUMBER 12345
00GPLA
CPUQC01.E.INT/000001/i1234
.
MR  SAM  SAMPLE
Appointment of Proxyholder
The undersigned ("Registered Shareholder") of Sunrise Minerals Inc.
("the Company") hereby appoints: Ari  Sussman,  or  failing  him
Alessandra  Meineri,
C1234567890
XXX
123
OR
Print the name of the person you are
appointing if this person is someone
other than the Management
Nominees listed herein.
as  my/our  proxyholder  with  full  power  of  substitution  and  to  vote  in  accordance  with  the  following  direction  (or  if  no  directions  have  been  given,  as  the  proxyholder  sees  fit)  and
all  other  matters  that  may  properly  come  before  the Annual  General  and  Special  Meeting  of  Sunrise  Minerals  Inc.  to  be  held  at  Suite  2500  -  130  King  Street  West,  Toronto,
Ontario  on  June  15,  2007  at  10:00  am  (Eastern  Time)  and  at  any  adjournment  thereof.
VOTING RECOMMENDATIONS ARE INDICATED BY HIGHLIGHTED TEXT OVER THE BOXES.
1. Election of Directors
Withhold
Withhold
For
For
For
Withhold
01. Ari  Sussman
04. Alan  Taylor
02.  Damien  Reynolds
03.  Steven  Flechner
2. Appointment of Auditors
Appointment  of  Morgan  &  Company  as Auditors  of  the  Corporation  for  the  ensuing  year  and  authorizing  the  Directors  to  fix  their  remuneration.
3. Stock Option Plan
To  approve  the  Corporation’s  stock  option  plan.
4. Special Resolution
To  consider,  and  if  thought  fit,  approve  a  special  resolution  to  continue  the  Corporation  out  of  British  Columbia  and  into  Ontario.
5. Special Resolution
To  approve  the  management  agreement  entered  into  by  the  Corporation  with  Longview  Capital  Partners  Incorporated.
6. Consolidation of Common Shares
To  approve  the  consolidation  of  the  issued  and  outstanding  common  shares  of  the  Company  on  the  basis  of  one  (1)  new  common  share  for  five(  5)  old
common  shares.
7. Name Change
To  approve  the  change  of  the  Company’s  name  to  “Sunrise  Resources  Inc.”  or  such  other  name  as  the  board  of  directors,  in  their  discretion,  may
determine.
8. Transact Other Business
To  transact  such  other  business  as  may  properly  come  before  the  meeting  and  any  adjournment  thereof.
For
Withhold
Fold
For
Against
For
Against
For
Against
For
Against
For
Against
Fold
For
Against
Signature(s)
Authorized Signature(s) - This section must be
completed for your instructions to be executed.
I/We  authorize  you  to  act  in  accordance  with  my/our  instructions  set  out  above.  I/We
hereby  revoke  any  proxy  previously  given  with  respect  to  the  Meeting.  If no voting
instructions are indicated above, this Proxy will be voted as recommended by
Management.
Interim Financial Statements
Mark  this  box  if  you  would  like  to  receive  interim  financial  statements  and
accompanying  Management’s  Discussion  and Analysis  by  mail.
If  you  are  not  mailing  back  your  proxy,  you  may  register  online  to  receive  the  above  financial  report(s)  by  mail  at  www.computershare.com/mailinglist.
Annual Report 
Mark  this  box  if  you  would  like  to  receive  the Annual  Report
and  accompanying  Management’s  Discussion  and Analysis  by
mail.
.
Date
MM / DD / YY
9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9
0 0 1 1 1 1
9 X X
A R 1
L A L Q
00GPMB