
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting
and Explanatory Memorandum

Odin Energy Limited ACN 124 491 416

Date of Meeting: 30‘" August 2016

Time of Meeting: 10.30 AM (Western Standard Time)

Place of Meeting: Suite 4, 16 0rd Street, West Perth, WA 6005

This Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting, Explanatory Memorandum and Independent Expert’s
Report should be read in their entirety. l1 Shareholders are in doubt as to how they should vote, they
should seek advice from their accountant, solicitor or other professional adviser Without delay.

The Independent Expert, RSM Corporate Australia Pty Ltd, has concluded that the proposed
acquisition ot gridComm Pte Ltd is fair and reasonable to the Non»Associated Shareholders.


Notice of Meeting
Notice  is  given  that  an  Extraordinary  General  Meeting  of  shareholders  of  Odin  Energy  Limited  ACN 
124 491 416 (Company) will be held at Suite 4, 16 Ord Street, West Perth on 30th August at 10.30 am 
(WST).
Terms  used  in  this  Notice  of  Meeting  are  defined  in  section 14  of  the  accompanying  Explanatory 
Memorandum.
The  Explanatory  Memorandum  and  the  Proxy  Form  accompanying  this  Notice  of  Meeting  are 
incorporated in and comprise part of this Notice of Meeting.
A  copy  of  this  Notice  and  the  Explanatory  Memorandum  and  Independent  Expert's  Report  which 
accompany 
Investments 
Commission (ASIC) in accordance with section 218 of the Corporations Act.
the  Australian  Securities  and
this  Notice  has  been
lodged  with
Agenda
The agenda for the meeting is as follows:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
Opening of meeting;
Resolution 1 – Consolidation of Capital;
Resolution 2 – Approval of Acquisition of Austasia: Change of Activities;
Resolution 3 – Creation of New Class of Securities: Performance Shares;
Resolution  4  –  Approval  of  the  Issue  of  Shares  and  Performance  Shares  to  Austasia 
Shareholders;
Resolution 5 – Approval of the issue of Shares and Performance Shares to  Michael Holt and 
Get2Volume Pte Ltd;
Resolution 6 - Approval to Issue Offer Shares under the Prospectus;
Resolution 7 - Approval of Participation of Directors in Capital Raising – Roland Berzins
Resolution 8 - Approval of Participation of Directors in Capital Raising – David Ballantyne;
Resolution 9 - Approval of Participation of Directors in Capital Raising – Alex Bajada;
Resolution 10 – Approval of the Austasia Notes becoming Convertible;
Resolution 11 – Change of Company Name;
Resolution 12 – Approval for the Issue of Advisor Options;
Resolution 13 – Approval of ESOP
15.
Other business; and
16.
Close of meeting.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 1 of 74
Notice of Meeting
1.
Resolution 1 – Consolidation of Capital
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolution, as an Ordinary Resolution, with or 
without amendment:
“That, subject to the passing of the Conditional Resolutions, for the purposes of section 254H 
of  the  Corporations  Act,  Listing  Rule  7.20  and  the  Constitution  and  for  all  other  purposes, 
approval  is  given  for  the  issued  capital  of  the  Company  to  be  consolidated  on  the  basis  that 
every thirty five Shares be consolidated into one Share, with the Consolidation taking effect on 
a  date  announced  to  ASX  in  accordance  with  the  Listing  Rules  and  with  any  fractional 
entitlements being rounded  up to the  nearest whole number on the terms  and conditions set 
out in the Explanatory Memorandum.
2.
Resolution 2 – Approval of Acquisition of Austasia: Change of Activities
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolution, as an Ordinary Resolution, with or 
without amendment:
“That,  subject  to  the  passing  of  the  Conditional  Resolutions,  for  the  purposes  of  Listing  Rule 
11.1.2, Listing Rule 10.1  and for all other purposes, approval is given for the Company to:
(a)
(b)
undertake  the  Acquisition  the  terms  and  conditions  of  which  are  summarised  in  the 
Explanatory Memorandum; and
change  the  nature  and  scale  of  the  Company’s  activities  on  completion  of  the 
Acquisition as described in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
3.
Resolution 3 – Creation of New Class of Securities: Performance Shares
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolution, as an Ordinary Resolution, with or 
without amendment:
“That,  subject  to  the  passing  of  the  Conditional  Resolutions,  for  the  purposes  of  section 
246B(1) and 246C(5) of the Corporations Act, the Constitution and for all other purposes, the 
Directors are authorised to issue the Performance Shares on the terms and conditions set out 
in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
4.
Resolution  4  –  Approval  of  the  Issue  of  Shares  and  Performance  Shares  to 
Austasia Shareholders
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolution, as an Ordinary Resolution, with or 
without amendment:
“That,  subject  to  the  passing  of  the  Conditional  Resolutions,  for  the  purposes  of  Listing  Rule 
7.1, Listing Rule 10.11 and for all other purposes, the Company is authorised to issue and allot 
on  a  post  Consolidation  basis  85,363,965  Shares  and  110,002,349  Performance  Shares  to 
Austasia Industrial Pty Ltd (Austasia) Shareholders or their nominees, in consideration for the 
transfer to the Company by the  Austasia  Shareholders of the Austasia Shares held by them, 
pursuant  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  Securities  Sale  Agreement  (SSA),  the  details  of 
which are summarised in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 2 of 74
Notice of Meeting
5.
Resolution  5  -  Approval  of  the  Issue  of  Shares  and  Performance  Shares  to 
Michael Holt and Get2Volume Pte Ltd
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution, with 
or without amendment:
“That,  subject  to  the  passing  of  the  Conditional  Resolutions,  for  the  purposes  of  Chapter  2E 
and item 7 of section 611 of the Corporations Act  and for all other purposes, the Company is 
authorised to:
(a)
(b)
issue and allot a total of 22,565,489 Acquisition Shares on a post Consolidation basis 
to Michael Holt and Get2Volume Pte Ltd UEN 200606764Z (Get2Volume), a company 
controlled  by  Michael  Holt,  or  their  nominees,  on  the  terms  and  conditions  set  out  in 
the  Explanatory  Memorandum,  in  consideration  for  the  transfer  to  the  Company  by 
Michael  Holt  and  Get2Volume  of  the  Austasia  Shares  held  by  them,  pursuant  to  the 
terms and conditions of the SSA; and
issue  and  allot  a  total  of  62,875,548  Performance  Shares  on  a  post  Consolidation 
basis to Michael Holt and Get2Volume, a company controlled by Michael Holt, on the 
terms and conditions set out in the Explanatory Memorandum and issue and allot up to 
62,875,548 Shares on a post Consolidation basis to Michael Holt and Get2Volume on 
the subsequent conversion of the Performance Shares into Shares,
and, as a consequence, that shareholders of the Company approve Michael Holt, Get2Volume 
and  their  associates,  acquiring  a  Relevant  Interest  in  up  to  85,441,037  Shares  on  a  post 
Consolidation basis .”
6.
Resolution 6 - Approval to Issue Offer Shares under the Prospectus
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution, with or 
without amendment:
“That, subject to the passing of  the Conditional Resolutions, for the purposes of  Listing Rule 
7.1 and for all other purposes,  the Company is authorised to  issue between 30,000,000 and 
40,000,000  Offer  Shares  at  an  issue  price  of  $0.20  per  Offer  Share,  to  raise  a  minimum  of 
$6,000,000 and up to $8,000,000 pursuant to the Capital Raising, on the terms and conditions 
set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
7.
Resolution 7 - Approval of Participation of Roland Berzins in the Capital Raising
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution, with 
or without amendment:
“That,  subject  to  the  passing  of  the  Conditional  Resolutions,  for  the  purposes  of  Listing  Rule 
10.11,  section  195(4)  and  Chapter  2E  of  the  Corporations  Act  and  for  all  other  purposes, 
approval  is  given  for  the  Company  to  issue  to  Roland  Berzins  (or  his  nominee)  up  to  an 
aggregate maximum of 250,000 Offer Shares (on a post Consolidation basis), which represent 
a value of up to $50,000, on the same terms and conditions as other participants of the Capital 
Raising and on the terms and conditions set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 3 of 74
Notice of Meeting
8.
Resolution  8  -  Approval  of  Participation  of  David  Ballantyne  in  the  Capital 
Raising
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution, with 
or without amendment:
“That,  subject  to  the  passing  of  the  Conditional  Resolutions,  for  the  purposes  of  Listing  Rule 
10.11,  section  195(4)  and  Chapter  2E  of  the  Corporations  Act  and  for  all  other  purposes, 
approval  is  given  for  the  Company  to  issue  to  David  Ballantyne  (or  his  nominee)  up  to  an 
aggregate maximum of 250,000 Capital Raising Shares (on a post Consolidation basis), which 
represent a value of up to $50,000, on the same terms and conditions as other participants of 
the Capital Raising and on the terms and conditions set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
9.
Resolution 9 - Approval of Participation of Alex Bajada in the Capital Raising
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution, with 
or without amendment:
“That,  subject  to  the  passing  of  the  Conditional  Resolutions,  for  the  purposes  of  Listing  Rule 
10.11,  section  195(4)  and  Chapter  2E  of  the  Corporations  Act  and  for  all  other  purposes, 
approval is given for the Company to issue to Alex Bajada (or his nominee) up to an aggregate 
maximum of 250,000 Capital Raising Shares (on a post Consolidation basis), which represent 
a value of up to $50,000, on the same terms and conditions as other participants of the Capital 
Raising and on the terms and conditions set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
10.
Resolution  10  -  Approval  of  the  Issue  of  Conversion  Shares  to  Austasia 
Noteholders
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution, with 
or without amendment:
“That, subject to the passing of the Conditional Resolutions, for the purpose of Listing Rule 7.1 
and  for  all  other  purposes,  the  Company  is  authorised  to  issue  up  to  9,000,000  Conversion 
Shares on conversion of the Austasia Notes with a face value of $900,000, on the terms and 
conditions set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
11.
Resolution 11 - Change of Company Name
To  consider  and,  if  thought  fit,  pass  the  following  resolution  as  a  Special  Resolution,  with  or 
without amendment:
“That, subject to the passing of the Conditional Resolutions and the consent of ASIC, for the 
purposes of section 157(1) of the Corporations Act and for all other purposes, the name of the 
Company  be  changed  to  “gridComm  Limited”  with  effect  from  the  date  on  which  the  ASIC 
alters the details of the Company’s registration to reflect the change of name.”
12.
Resolution 12 - Approval for the Issue of Advisor Options
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolution, as an Ordinary Resolution, with or 
without amendment:
“That,  for  the  purposes  of  Listing  Rule  7.1  and  for  all  other  purposes,  the  Company  is 
authorised  to  issue  15,000,000  Options  (on  a  post-Consolidation  basis)  to  advisors  and  lead 
managers of the Company (or their nominees) (Advisor Options) on the terms and conditions 
set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 4 of 74
Notice of Meeting
13.
Resolution 13 - Approval of ESOP
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution, with 
or without amendment:
“That, the Employee Share and Option Plan (ESOP), which is summarised in the attached 
Explanatory Memorandum, be approved and that for the purposes of Exception 9(b) of Listing 
Rule 7.2 and for all other purposes, the issue of securities under the ESOP within three (3) 
years from the date of this resolution be an exception to Listing Rules 7.1 and 7.1A.”
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 5 of 74
Notice of Meeting
Notes and Voting Exclusion Statements
Notes: 

A  detailed  summary  of 
Memorandum.
the  Resolutions
is  contained  within
the  Explanatory

Further details regarding the SSA and the Acquisition are set out in the accompanying 
Explanatory  Memorandum  and  Independent  Expert’s  Report  which  the  Directors 
recommend  Shareholders  read  in  full  before  making  any  decision  in  relation  to  the 
Resolutions.
Voting Exclusions: 
The Company will disregard any votes cast by the following people: 

with  respect  to  Resolution  2,  a  person  who  might  obtain  a  benefit,  except  a  benefit 
solely in capacity of a Shareholder, if Resolution 2 is passed and any associate of that 
person (or those persons);





with  respect  to  Resolutions  4,  6,  10  and  12,  a  person  who  may  participate  in  the 
proposed issue and a person who might obtain a benefit, except a benefit solely in the 
capacity of a Shareholder, if the resolution is passed, and any associate of that person 
(or those persons);
with respect to Resolution 6 regarding the Capital Raising the proposed allottees of any 
Offer  Shares  are  not  as  yet  known  or  identified.    In  these  circumstances  (and  in 
accordance  with  the  note  set  out  in  ASX  Listing  Rule  14.11.1  relating  to  ASX  Listing 
Rules  7.1  and  7.1A),  for  a  person’s  vote  to  be  excluded,  it  must  be  known  that  that 
person will participate in the proposed issue.  Where it is not known who will participate 
in the proposed  issue (as is the case in respect of the  Capital Raising), Shareholders 
must consider the proposal on the basis that they may or may not get a benefit and that 
it is possible that their holding will be diluted.  In accordance with Listing Rule 14.11.1, 
there  is  no  reason  to  exclude  the  votes,  and  the  votes  will  not  be  excluded,  of  such 
Shareholders;
with respect to  Resolution  5, Michael Holt, Get2Volume and any  associate  of Michael 
Holt or Get2Volume;
with  respect  to  Resolutions  7,  8  and  9,  a  person  who  is  to  receive  the  relevant 
securities and any associate of that person (or those persons);
with respect to Resolution  13, a Director (except one who is  ineligible to participate in 
any employee incentive scheme in relation to the Company) and any associate of such 
a Director; and
However, the Company need not disregard a vote if: 

it is cast by a person as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in accordance with 
the directions on the proxy form; or

it  is  cast  by  the  person  chairing  the  meeting  as  proxy  for  a  person  who  is  entitled  to 
vote in accordance with the direction on the proxy form to vote as the proxy decides.
Key Management Personnel voting exclusion statement 
A vote on Resolution 13 must not be cast by: 

any member of Key Management Personnel of the Company or if the Company is part 
of a consolidated entity, of the entity; or
a Closely Related Party of such a member,
 
who  is  appointed  as  a  Shareholder’s  proxy,  on  the  basis  of  that  appointment,  where  the 
Shareholder does not specify in writing the way the proxy is to vote on the resolution. 
However,  the  Company  need  not  disregard  a  vote  if  it  is  cast  by  the  person  chairing  the 
Meeting  as  proxy  for  a  person  who  is  entitled  to  vote,  where  the  Shareholder  does  not 
specify in writing the way the proxy is to vote on the resolution, if the appointment of proxy 
expressly  authorises  the  chair  to  exercise  the  proxy  even  if  the  resolution  is  connected
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 6 of 74
Notice of Meeting
directly or indirectly with the remuneration of a member of the Key Management Personnel 
of the Company or if the Company is part of a consolidated entity, of the entity.
14.
General business
To  consider  any  other  business  as  may  be  lawfully  put  forward  in  accordance  with  the 
Constitution.
By order of the board 
 
 
 
Roland Berzins 
 
Company Secretary 
21st July 2016
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 7 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
1.
Introduction
The following information is provided to Shareholders of the Company  in connection  with the 
business to be considered at an Extraordinary General Meeting of Shareholders to be held at 
Suite 4, 16 Ord Street, West Perth on 30th August at 10.30 am (WST).
The Notice of Meeting, which is also enclosed, sets out details of proposals concerning the 13 
Resolutions to be put to Shareholders.
The  Directors  recommend  Shareholders  read  the  accompanying  Notice  of  Meeting  and  this 
Explanatory  Memorandum  and  the  accompanying  Independent  Expert's  Report  in  full  before 
making any decision in relation to the Resolutions.
Unless otherwise defined, terms used in this Explanatory Memorandum are defined in Section 
14 Interpretation.
Summary
technology  business.
The Company proposes to change the nature of its activities to become an Internet of Things 
(IoT) 
  The  Directors,  gridComm  Shareholders  and  Austasia 
Shareholders  discussed,  examined  and  negotiated  a  set  of  transactions  to  effect  this 
transformation (together, the Transaction).
There are several components to the Transaction:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Pursuant  to  the  gridComm  SSA,  the  gridComm  Shareholders  sell  94%  of  the  issued 
capital of gridComm to Austasia in consideration for issued capital of Austasia;
Pursuant to the SSA, the Company acquires all the issued capital in Austasia from the 
Austasia Shareholders for a consideration comprising  85,363,965 Shares issued at a 
deemed issue price of $0.20 per Share and 110,002,349 Performance Shares, both on 
a  post  Consolidation  basis.  Austasia  will  become  a  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of  the 
Company and will hold 94% of the issue capital of gridComm;
the Company changes its name to “gridComm Limited”;
the  Company  undertakes  the  Capital  Raising,  being  a  public  offer  to  raise  between 
$6,000,0000  and  $8,000,000, 
issue  of  between  30,000,000  and 
40,000,000 Shares at $0.20 per Share;
through
the
the  Company  converts  the  Austasia  Notes  to  up  to  9,000,000  Shares  on  a  post 
Consolidation basis;
(f)
the Company applies the funds raised from Capital Raising to:
(1)
market, distribute and develop the gridComm suite of products and solutions;
(2)
pay the costs of the Transaction; and
(3)
provide funding for working capital of the Company; and
(g)
the Company issue up to a further 15,000,000 Advisor Options to various parties who 
have provided services to the Company.
The  Transaction  will  only  proceed  if  all  of  the  Conditional  Resolutions  are  passed  by 
Shareholders  at  the  Meeting  and  the  Company  receives  valid  applications  for  at  least  the 
minimum subscription under the Capital Raising ($6 million).  The parties have entered into the
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 8 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
SSA and the gridComm SSA which, together, will give effect to the Acquisition and the terms 
of which are summarised in Schedule 2.
The Transaction will result in a company with the potential capability and scalability to deliver 
strong  returns  to  stakeholders.    The  Transaction  is  essentially  a  listing  mechanism  for 
gridComm with the Company acting as the listing vehicle.  The Company will change its name 
to "gridComm Limited".
gridComm,  is  a  Singapore  based  technology  company  providing  reliable  and  robust  narrow-
band  powerline  communications  (PLC)  solutions  that  enable  the  transformation  of  traditional 
power grid into a smart grid and hybrid narrow-band PLC.
The  gridComm  technology  connects  to  existing  networks  over  a  city’s  power  lines  and  then 
uses this network to connect the city’s street lights, saving cities millions of dollars in electricity 
and maintenance costs. This network becomes the back bone for smart city implementations, 
connecting sensors through a city in internet of things implementations.
At  the  date  of  this  Notice,  the  Directors  of  the  Company  are  Mr  Alex  Bajada,  Mr  Roland 
Berzins  and  Mr  David  Ballantyne.    Mr  Alex  Bajada,  Mr  Roland  Berzins  and  Mr  David 
Ballantyne  recommend  that  Shareholders  vote  in  favour  of  all  of  the  Resolutions,  other  than 
Resolutions  2  and  7  to  9  in  respect  of  which  those  directors  have  a  personal  interest  and, 
accordingly, make no recommendation.
2.
Background to applicable Listing Rules and provisions of the Corporations Act
2.1
Introduction
There  are  a  number  of  approvals  and  requirements  under  the  Listing  Rules  and  the 
Corporations Act that are applicable to the Resolutions set out in the Notice.  To avoid lengthy 
duplication throughout the Explanatory Memorandum, set out in this Section 2 is a summary of 
the  applicable  provisions  that  will  be  referred  to  throughout  the  Notice  and  Explanatory 
Memorandum.
2.2
Listing Rule 7.1 - Issues exceeding 15% of capital
Listing  Rule  7.1  prohibits  a  listed  company  from  issuing  in  any  12  month  period  new  Equity 
Securities equivalent in number to more than 15% of the total number of ordinary securities on 
issue at the beginning of the twelve month period (15% Capacity) without the prior approval of 
Shareholders  unless  the  issue  otherwise  comes  within  one  of  the  exceptions  to  Listing  Rule 
7.1.
2.3
Listing Rule 7.2 - Exceptions to Listing Rule 7.1
Exception 9 of Listing Rule 7.2 allows the Company to issue Equity Securities without specific 
shareholder approval and without reducing the 15% capacity under Listing Rule 7.1 or the 10% 
capacity  under  Listing  Rule  7.1A,  where  shareholders  of  the  Company  have  approved  the 
issue  of  securities  under  an  employee  incentive  scheme  (like  the  ESOP)  as  an  exception  to 
Listing Rules 7.1 and 7.1A, within three  years prior to the issue of the securities.  Resolution 
13 is being put to shareholders for this purpose and will allow the Company to utilise Exception 
9 of Listing Rule 7.2 for three years from the date of the Resolution being passed.
Exception  14  of  Listing  Rule  7.2  provides  that  where  shareholder  approval  is  being  obtained 
for the purposes of Listing Rule 10.11, approval is not required under Listing Rule 7.1.
Exception 16 of Listing Rule 7.2 states that, where shareholder approval is being obtained for 
the  purposes  of  section  611  (item  7)  of  the  Corporations  Act,  a  company  is  not  required  to 
obtain shareholder approval pursuant to Listing Rule 7.1.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 9 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
2.4
Listing Rule 10.1 – Acquisition of a substantial asset from a Related Party
Listing Rule 10.1 states that an entity must ensure that neither it, nor any of its child entities, 
acquires  a  substantial  asset  from,  or  disposes  a  substantial  asset  to,  relevantly,  a  Related 
Party  of  the  entity  or  one  of its associates  without the prior  approval of the  entity’s ordinary 
shareholders.
For  the  purposes  of  Listing  Rule  10.1,  an  asset  is  substantial  if  its  value,  or  the  value  of  the 
consideration for it is, or in ASX’s opinion is, 5% or more of the equity interests of the entity as 
set out in the latest accounts given to ASX under the Listing Rules (being for the financial year 
ended 31 December 2015).
The  equity  interests  of  the  Company  as  defined  by  the  Listing  Rules  (being  for  the  financial 
year  ended  31  December  2015)  were  ($3,875,835)  and,  accordingly,  the  value  of  the 
consideration  payable  for  the  Acquisition  is  more  than  5%  of  the  equity  interests  of  the 
Company.  On  that  basis,  the  Acquisition  will  result  in  the  acquisition  by  the  Company  of  a 
substantial asset.
For  the  purposes  of  Listing  Rule  10.1,  a  Related  Party  of  an  entity  includes,  relevantly, 
directors of a public company and an entity controlled by directors of a public company.
2.5
Listing Rule 10.11 - Acquisition of securities in the company
Listing Rule 10.11 states that a company must not issue or agree to issue equity securities to 
any of the following persons without the approval of holders of ordinary securities:
(a)
a Related Party; and
(b)
a  person  whose  relationship  with  the  company  or  a  Related  Party  is,  in  the  ASX’s 
opinion, such that approval should be obtained.
A Related Party includes a director, an entity controlled by a director and spouses, parents and 
children of a director.  A Related Party also includes any person who came within any of these 
abovementioned  classifications  in  the  preceding  six  months  or  in  respect  of  which  there  are 
reasonable grounds to believe that that person will fall within such a classification in the future.
If Shareholder approval is obtained under Listing Rule 10.11, further approval is not required 
under Listing Rule 7.1 (see Listing Rule 7.2, Exception 14).
2.6
Listing Rule 9 - Restricted Securities
All  Austasia  Shareholders  should  expect  that  the  ASX,  as  a  condition  of  re-commencing  the 
quotation  of  the  securities  of  the  Company,  may  require  that  all  or  at  least  a  portion  of  the 
Acquisition Shares and Performance Shares issued to them (pursuant to the implementation of 
any  of  the  Resolutions)  be  placed  in  escrow  for  a  period  of  either  12  or  24  months  (Escrow 
Period).
The  Company  intends  to  make  submissions  with  respect  to  the  securities  to  be  classified  as 
restricted securities. However, the number of restricted securities and length of restriction will 
ultimately be determined by the ASX.
Each vendor who holds restricted securities will be required to execute, or appoint an attorney 
to execute, an escrow agreement with the Company on the terms and conditions prescribed in 
the  Listing  Rules.    The  effect  of  such  an  arrangement  is  that  the  holder(s)  of  restricted 
securities will not be permitted to transfer, encumber or otherwise deal with their title in any of 
those  restricted  securities  until  the  expiry  of  the  Escrow  Period.    All  other  rights  (eg,  voting, 
dividends  etc)  in  respect  of  those  restricted  securities  will  remain  unaffected  throughout  the 
Escrow Period.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 10 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
2.7
Listing Rule 11.1
ASX  Listing  Rule  11.1  provides  that  where  an  entity  proposes  to  make  a  significant  change, 
either directly or indirectly, to the nature or scale of its activities, it must provide full details to 
ASX as soon as practicable before making the change and comply with the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
provide  to  ASX  information  regarding  the  change  and  its  effect  on  future  potential 
earnings and any further information that ASX requests;
if  ASX  requires,  obtain  the  approval  of  holders  of  its  shares  and  comply  with  any 
requirements of ASX in relation to the Notice of Meeting; and
if ASX requires, meet the requirements of Chapters 1 and 2 of the ASX Listing Rules 
as if the company were applying for admission to the Official List of ASX.
Upon  receiving  details  of  the  Acquisition,  ASX  have  formed  the  view  that  the  Acquisition 
produces  a  significant  change  to  the  nature  and  scale  of  the  Company's  activities  and  as 
such, the Company is required to:
(a)
obtain Shareholder approval; and
(b)
re-comply  with  the  admission  requirements  set  out  in  Chapters  1  and  2  of  the  ASX 
Listing Rules.
For  this  reason,  the  Company  is  seeking  Shareholder  approval  pursuant  to  Resolution  2  for 
the Company to change the nature and scale of its activities under ASX Listing Rule 11.1.2.
2.8
Application made for waiver of Listing Rules
Condition  2  of  Listing  Rule  2.1  specifies  that  the  issue  or  sale  price  of  all  the  securities  for 
which  a  company  seeks  quotation  must  be  at  least  20  cents  (20  cent  rule).    Similarly, 
condition 11 of Listing Rule 1.1 provides that any options on issue must be exercisable for at 
least 20 cents.
Under Guidance Note 12 of the ASX Listing Rules, a Company may be granted relief from the 
20 cent rule by ASX in certain circumstances.  This includes where:
(a)
the  issue  price  or  sale  price  for  any  securities  being  issued  or  sold  as  part  of,  or  in 
conjunction with, the transaction:
(1)
is not less than two (2) cents each; and
(2)
is specifically approved by security holders as part of the approval(s) obtained 
under Listing Rule 11.1.2; and
(b)
ASX  is  otherwise  satisfied  that  the  entity’s  proposed  capital  structure  after  the 
transaction will satisfy Listing Rules 1.1 Condition 1 and 12.5, being that the Company 
has an appropriate structure for a listing entity.
It is generally accepted that the issue price for the purposes of the 20 cent rule is the price at 
which an associated capital raising is undertaken when a re-compliance listing is in progress.
Listing  Rule  6.1  provides  that  the  terms  that  apply  to  each  class  of  equity  securities  in  a 
company  must,  in  ASX's  opinion,  be  appropriate  and  equitable.    Under  Listing  Rule  6.2,  a 
company may only have one class of ordinary securities unless ASX approval is given to the 
terms  of  an  additional  class.    Guidance  Note  19  sets  out  certain  requirements  in  respect  of 
performance shares.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 11 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
The Company applied to the ASX for the following waivers and approvals:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
approval from ASX for the purposes of Listing Rules 6.1, 6.2 and 12.5 to the terms of 
the Performance Shares on the basis such terms are appropriate and equitable;
confirmation from ASX for the purposes of Listing Rule 6.1 as the Performance Shares 
will  be  a  different  class  of  ordinary  shares  to  the  currently  quoted  ordinary  shares  of 
the Company;
waiver of the application of condition 2 of Listing Rule 2.1 and condition 11 of Listing 
Rule  1.1  with  respect 
the  admission 
requirements  outlined  in  Chapters  1  and  2  of  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  to  allow  the 
Company to:
the  Company’s  re-compliance  with
to
(1)
issue Shares in respect of the Transaction at a price not less than $0.02 each;
(2)
issue the Advisor Options at an exercise price not less than $0.02 each; and
(3)
issue the Performance Shares which have no exercise price; and
in-principle advice that, pursuant to Listing Rules 1.1 and 12.5, the capital structure of 
the Company upon completion of the Transaction is appropriate for a listed entity;
waiver  of  the  application  of  Listing  Rule  10.13.3  in  respect  of  Resolution  4,  to  permit 
this Notice of Meeting to specify a date by which the Acquisition Shares will be issued 
(if the requisite shareholder approvals are obtained) which is more than 1 month after 
the date of the meeting.
ASX has approved the matters detailed in (a), (b), (c)(3), (d) and (e). However it has declined 
the Company’s application in regard to (c)(1) and (c)(2). Accordingly, Shares in respect of the 
Transaction  will  be  issued  at  20  cents  per  share  and  the  Advisor  Options,  the  subject  of 
resolution 12, will be issued with an exercise price of 22 cents.
2.9
Chapter 2E of the Corporations Act
Chapter 2E of the Corporations Act prohibits a public company from giving a financial benefit 
to a Related Party of the public company unless providing the benefit falls within a prescribed 
exception  to  the  general  prohibition.    Relevantly,  there  is  an  exception  if  the  company  first 
obtains the approval of its shareholders in a general meeting in circumstances where certain 
requirements  specified  in  Chapter  2E  in  relation  to  the  convening  of  that  meeting  have  been 
met (Shareholder Approval Exception).
A  Related  Party  is  defined  widely  in  section  228  of  the  Corporations  Act  and  includes, 
relevantly, a director (or proposed director) of a public company, any entity that controls (or is 
reasonably likely to control) a public company, and any entity that is controlled by a person or 
entity  which  is  otherwise  a  Related  Party,  or  there  are  reasonable  grounds  to  believe  that  a 
person/entity is likely to become a Related Party of the public company.
A  financial  benefit  for  the  purposes  of  the  Corporations  Act  has  a  very  wide  meaning.    It 
includes  the  public  company  paying  money  or  issuing  securities  to  the  Related  Party.    In 
determining  whether  or  not  a  financial  benefit  is  being  given,  it  is  necessary  to  look  to  the 
economic  and  commercial  substance  and  effect  of  what  the  public  company  is  doing  (rather 
than  just  the  legal  form).    Any  consideration  which  is  given  for  the  financial  benefit  is  to  be 
disregarded, even if it is full or adequate.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 12 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
2.10  Chapter  6,  section  611  (item  7)  of  the  Corporations  Act  -  Exceptions  to  prohibited
acquisitions
Section  606  of  the  Corporations  Act  prohibits  a  person  from  acquiring  a  relevant  interest  in 
issued voting shares in a listed company if the acquisition would result in that person’s voting 
power in the company increasing:
(a)
from 20% or below to more than 20%; or
(b)
from a starting point that is above 20% and below 90%.
However,  there  are  certain  specified  exceptions  to  the  takeover  prohibition  contained  in  the 
Corporations  Act.    In  particular,  under  section  611  (item  7)  of  the  Corporations  Act  an 
acquisition will not contravene the takeover prohibition if shareholders approve the acquisition 
by passing a resolution at a general meeting, where:
(a)
(b)
no  votes  were  cast  in  favour  of  the  resolution  by  the  person  proposing  to  make  the 
acquisition or their associates; and
shareholders  were  given  all  information  known  to  the  acquirer  or  the  company  that 
was material to the decision on how to vote.
ASIC  Regulatory  Guide  74:  Acquisitions  Approved  by  Members  also  specifies  certain 
additional  requirements  where  a  Company  seeks  an  acquisition  to  be  exempt  under  section 
611 (item 7) of the Corporations Act.
2.11
Independent Expert’s Report
The Directors of the Company have commissioned the Independent Expert to prepare a report 
on  the  question  of  whether  the  Acquisition  is  fair  and  reasonable  to  the  Shareholders  not 
associated with the proposal. That report accompanies the Notice.
Shareholders are asked to note that that the Independent Expert’s Report has been prepared 
by the Independent Expert and the Company does not accept or assume any responsibility for 
the  accuracy  or  completeness  of  the  Independent  Expert’s  Report,  other  than  factual 
information  provided  by  the  Company  to  the  Independent  Expert  for  the  purposes  of  the 
Independent Expert’s Report.
The  Independent  Expert  has  concluded  that  the  terms  of  the  Acquisition  are  fair  and 
reasonable to the Non-Associated Shareholders of the Company.  Summaries of the findings 
are contained below and further details are contained in the Independent Expert’s Report.
(a)
Fairness
The Independent Expert concluded the following in respect of the valuation of a Share 
in  the  Company  prior  to  the  proposed  Acquisition  and  of  a  Share  in  the  Company  
immediately  following  completion  of  the  Acquisition  for  the  purpose  of  assessing  the 
fairness of the Acquisition:
Value  of  the  Company  prior  to  the  proposed 
Acquisition – (controlling interest)
Low 
Value  
($)
0.023
High 
Value 
($)
0.039
Value of the Company  post completion of the 
Acquisition – (minority interest)
0.027
0.030
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 13 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
After  considering  the  information  summarised  above  and  set  out  in  more  detail  in 
Section  10  of  the  Independent  Expert’s  Report,  the  Independent  Expert  formed  the 
view  that  the  proposed  Acquisition  is  fair  to  Shareholders  as  at  the  date  of  the 
Independent Expert’s Report.
(b)
Reasonableness: Key Advantages and Disadvantages of Proposed Transaction
The table below summarises the advantages and disadvantages of the Acquisition, as 
identified by the Independent Expert.
Advantage
The proposed transaction is fair.
Disadvantage
The  Company  will  be  changing  the  nature  and 
scale  of  its  activities,  becoming  a  company  in 
the  technology  and  IOT  industries  with  a  focus 
on  enabling  communications  across  existing 
power  grid  systems,  which  may  not  be 
consistent  with 
all 
Shareholders.
objectives
the
of
The  Company  will  be  exposed  to  a  new, 
growing technology and IOT industries.
the  necessary 
The  Company  will  have 
working  capital  to  continue  operations  and 
to  assist  with 
the  commercialisation  of 
gridComm’s  technology  and  growth  of  the 
Company.
The  Proposed  Transaction  will  result  in  the 
issue of Shares and Performance Shares to the 
gridComm  Shareholders,  Austasia  Noteholders 
and new investors, which will have a significant 
dilutive  effect  on 
the  holdings  of  existing 
Shareholders.
The activities of gridComm have a different risk 
and  reward  profile  than  the  Company  had 
historically.  gridComm  is  a  start-up  technology 
company  with  minimal  income  and  a  focus  on 
an unknown and unproven market that is at risk 
of  competition,  regulatory  change  or  simply  not 
materialising.  This  new  risk  profile  may  not  suit 
all Shareholders.
The  Company’s  ability  to  raise  funds  and 
attract strategic investors may be improved.
The  Acquisition  may    increase  liquidity  in 
the Shares
After  considering  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  the  Acquisition  summarised  above 
and set out in more detail in Section 11.0 of the Independent Expert’s Report, the Independent 
Expert  formed  the  view  that  the  Acquisition  is  fair  and  reasonable  to  Shareholders  as  at  the 
date of the Independent Expert’s Report.
Shareholders  are  urged  to  read  and  consider  the  Independent  Expert’s  Report  which 
accompanies  the  Notice,  prior  to  making  a  decision  as  to  how  to  vote  on  Resolution  2  and 
Resolution 5.
The above is a summary only, for further details of the assessment made by the Independent 
Expert  in  determining  the  fairness  and  reasonableness  of  the  Acquisition  please  refer  to  the 
Independent Expert’s Report accompanying the Notice.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 14 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
3.
Resolution 1 – Consolidation of Capital
3.1
General
Resolution 1 seeks Shareholder approval to consolidate the number of Shares on issue on a 1 
for 35 basis (Consolidation).
The purpose of the Consolidation is to implement a more appropriate capital structure for the 
Company going forward and to enable the Company to satisfy Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing 
Rules  and  obtain  approval  from  ASX  for  the  re-instatement  of  the  Shares  on  ASX  should 
Shareholder approval be obtained for the Conditional Resolutions.
The Consolidation will also reduce the number of Shares on issue, to correspondingly increase 
the  imputed  value  of  each  Share,  to  make  investment  in  the  Company's  securities  more 
attractive to institutional and other investors and to position the Company for long term growth.
This Resolution is conditional on each of the Conditional Resolutions being approved.
3.2
Legal Requirements
Section 254H of the Corporations Act  provides that a company may, by resolution passed in a 
general meeting, convert all or any of its shares into a larger or smaller number.
Listing  Rule  7.20  provides  that  if  an  entity  proposes  to  reorganise  its  capital,  it  must  advise 
shareholders of certain matters, which are set out below.
3.3
Fractional entitlements
Not  all  Shareholders  will  hold  that  number  of  Shares  which  can  be  evenly  divided  by  35. 
Where a fractional entitlement occurs, as a result of holdings not being evenly divisible by 35, 
the Company will round that fraction up to the nearest whole number.
3.4
Taxation
Security  holders  are  advised  to  seek  their  own  tax  advice  on  the  effect  of  the  Consolidation 
and  the  Company,  Directors  and  their  advisers  do  not  accept  any  responsibility  for  the 
individual  taxation  implications  arising  from  the  Consolidation  or  the  other  Conditional 
Resolutions.
3.5
Holding statements
From the date of the Consolidation, all  holding statements for Shares  will cease to have any 
effect,  except  as  evidence  of  entitlement  to  a  certain  number  of  securities  on  a  post-
Consolidation basis.
After  the  Consolidation  becomes  effective,  the  Company  will  arrange  for  new  holding 
statements for Shares to be issued to holders of those securities.
It  is  the  responsibility  of  each  security  holder  to  check  the  number  of  securities  held  prior  to 
disposal.
3.6
Effect on capital structure
The effect which the Consolidation will have on the capital structure of the Company is set out 
in the table in Schedule 3.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 15 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
3.7
Indicative timetable
If  Resolution  1  and  all  the  other  Conditional  Resolutions  are  passed,  the  Consolidation  of 
capital is proposed to take effect in accordance with the timetable below:
Indicative timetable
Record date to determine eligibility to vote at the Meeting
28th August 2016
Meeting  –  Announcement  of  results  including  Shareholders  approving  the 
Consolidation
30th August 2016
Last day of ASX trading for Shares on a pre-consolidated basis
31st August 2016
Trading in Consolidated Shares will commence on deferred settlement basis
1st September 2016
Last day for  Company to register transfers on the pre-Consolidation basis
2nd September 2016
First day for Company to register Shares on a post Consolidation basis
3rd September 2016
First  day  for  Company  to  issue  holding  statements  for  Shares  on  a 
Consolidated basis
Dispatch of new holding statements for Consolidated Shares
9th September 2016
Deferred settlement trading ends
Normal T + 2 trading in Consolidated Shares start on ASX
12th September 2016
Settlement  of  trades  conducted  on  a  deferred  settlement  basis  and  first 
settlement of trades conducted on the normal T + 2 basis
13th September 2016
This timetable is indicative only and subject to change without notice.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 16 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
4.
Resolution 2 - Approval of Acquisition of Austasia: Change of Activities
4.1
General
As  has  been  advised  to  the  market,  the  Company  has  entered  the  SSA  pursuant  to  which  it 
has  agreed  to  acquire  100%  of  Austasia  Shares,  subject  to  the  satisfaction  of  various 
conditions,  including  Shareholder  approval  of  the  Acquisition.    It  is  anticipated  that  the 
acquisition  of  Austasia  will  be  completed  in  or  around  October  2016.  Completion  of  the 
Acquisition will be conditional upon, and contemporaneous with, the acquisition by Austasia of 
94% of the issued capital in gridComm pursuant to the gridComm SSA.
Resolution 2 seeks Shareholder approval to the Acquisition and for a change to the nature and 
scale of the Company’s activities, subject to the passing of the Conditional Resolutions.
In light of the significance of the change to the Company’s activities, ASX has advised that the 
Company  must  re-comply  with  Chapters  1  and  2  of  the  Listing  Rules  (as  required  by  Listing 
Rule  11.1.3).    In  accordance  with  ASX  Guidance  Note  12,  the  Company’s  shares  will  be 
suspended  from  the  beginning  of  the  Trading  Day  on  which  the  Meeting  is  held  until  the 
requirements of Listing Rules 1 and 2 have been met.
The Austasia Shareholders include:
(a)
(b)
(c)
Spartan Nominees Pty Ltd (ACN 099 822 081) as trustee for the Spartan Super Fund, 
which is an entity controlled by Alex Bajada, a director of the Company;
GCP Capital Pty Ltd (ACN 161 764 647), which is an entity controlled by Alex Bajada, 
a director of the Company;
Sandgroper  Pty  Ltd  (ACN  065  049  032)  as  trustee  for  the  Modillion  Discretionary 
Trust, which is an entity controlled by David Ballantyne, a director of the Company;
(d)
Roland Berzins, a director of the Company, and his wife Carol Berzins; and
(e)
Sealblue  Investments  Pty  Ltd  (ACN  133  164  726),  which  is  an  entity  controlled  by 
Roland Berzins, a director of the Company.
Accordingly, each of the above Austasia Shareholders are related parties of the Company.
As a result of the above, and the matters noted in section 2.4, the Acquisition will result in the 
acquisition  by  the  Company  of  a  substantial  asset  from  (in  part)  related  parties  and  the 
Company is therefore required to seek Shareholder approval for the purposes of Listing Rule 
10.1.
As  required  by  Listing  Rule  10.10.2,  the  Directors  of  the  Company  have  commissioned  the 
Independent Expert to prepare a report on the question of whether the Acquisition is fair and 
reasonable  to  the  Shareholders  not  associated  with  the  proposal.    That  report  accompanies 
the  Notice  and  concludes  that  the  Acquisition  is  fair  and  reasonable  to  Shareholders  of  the 
Company.
4.2
Rationale for the proposed Acquisition
Due to market conditions in the commodities and exploration sector, the Directors believe that 
current market conditions made it very difficult to raise funds to continue to explore the oil and 
gas  tenements  it  held.  Hence  the  Company  has  been  evaluating  investment  opportunities 
outside  the  oil  and  gas  sector  for  the  benefit  of  Shareholders.  During  April  the  Company 
completed the disposal of its wholly owned subsidiary, Kilgore Exploration Inc, which held the 
oil and gas assets.This disposal was approved by shareholders at a general meeting held on 
13 January 2016.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 17 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
The Board identified an opportunity with gridComm and the gridComm Solution developed for 
the IoT. gridComm were in need of additional capital to accelerate their commercialisation and 
strategy  and  the  Company  entered  into  an  agreement  to  acquire  94%  of  the  capital  in 
gridComm  via  a  special  purpose  vehicle,  Austasia,  which  will  be  wholly  owned  by  the 
Company.
The Directors moved to proceed with the Acquisition based on:
(a)
the level of investment the founders have made in the company to date;
(b)
the management team in place and their backgrounds;
(c)
the opportunity and markets that the gridCom Solution can fit into going forward;
(d)
the technology is already being commercialised and is scalable;
(e)
the focus to grow its Asian customer base from head office in Singapore;
(f)
(g)
the  encouraging  signs  of  forming  relationships  with  large  organisations  reviewing  the 
technology; and
the  fact  that  it  is  already  generating  revenue  with  potential  for  further  revenue 
opportunities and growth.
4.3
Key Advantages and Disadvantages of the Acquisition
The  Directors  are  of  the  view  that  the  following  non-exhaustive  list  of  advantages  may  be 
relevant to a Shareholder’s decision on how to vote on each Conditional Resolution:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
the  Acquisition  represents  a  significant  opportunity  for  the  Company  to  increase  the 
scale of its  activities  which should  increase the number and size  of the  investor pool 
that may invest in the Company’s Shares;
the  Acquisition  provides  an  opportunity  for  the  Company  to  diversify  its  interests  to 
include gridComm and the gridComm Solution;
the Acquisition provides the Company with the opportunity to increase the value of the 
Company;
the  Company  may  be  able  to  attract  key  cornerstone  investors  as  a  result  of  the 
Acquisition  which  may  aid  in  the  development  and  growth  strategy  of  the  gridComm 
business; and
the  Acquisition  provides  the  Company  with  a  greater  opportunity  to  realise  revenue 
over a short time frame relative to the Company’s previous oil and gas assets; and
The  Company  will,  via  Austasia,  hold  94%  of  the  issued  capital  in  gridComm  and, 
accordingly,  gridComm  will  not  be  a  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of  the  Company.  The 
Company  will  examine  its  ability  to  compulsorily  acquire  the  remaining  shares  in 
gridComm under the laws of Singapore, however there is no guarantee that it will  be 
able to do so.
The  Directors  are  of  the  view  that  the  following  non-exhaustive  list  of  disadvantages  may  be 
relevant to a Shareholder’s decision on how to vote on each Conditional Resolution:
(a)
the  Company  will  be  changing  the  nature  and  scale  of  its  activities  to  become  a 
company  focused  on  IoT  technology,  as  referred  to  above,  which  may  not  be 
consistent with the objectives of all Shareholders;
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 18 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
(b)
(c)
the  Acquisition  and  the  Capital  Raising  will  result  in  the  issue  of  Shares  and 
Performance Shares to the Austasia Shareholders and new investors, which will have 
a dilutionary effect on the holdings of Shareholders;
on completion of the Transaction, the Austasia Shareholders will hold up to 60.78% of 
the total issued Share capital of the Company.  This level of shareholding will give the 
Austasia Shareholders  significant  influence over the  Company and they may be able 
to influence the outcomes of resolutions sought at meetings of the Company, including 
the ability to block special resolutions. It may also reduce the chance of the Company 
receiving  a  future  takeover  offer  due  to  the  large  stake  held  by  the  Austasia 
Shareholders; and
(d)
there  are  inherent  risks  associated  with  the  change  in  nature  of  the  Company’s 
activities. Some of these risks are summarised in Section 4.13 below.
4.4
About gridComm
gridComm is a smart city-focused company that creates a network over a city’s power lines to 
enable  street  light  control  and  sensor  data  communications  with  its  power  line  networking 
solution.
gridComm  was  incorporated  in  Singapore  in  2012.  The  management  team  came  from  
Semitech  with Asia-focused smart grid device capability. gridComm owns the technology and 
provides  the  chips  that  enable  communications  across  existing  power  grid  systems  by 
connecting utilities to power consumers.
gridComm  has  developed  intelligent  machine-to-machine  communication  on  the  evolving 
power generation and distribution grid to establish greater efficiency and productivity in energy 
delivery to the  world’s increasingly integrated and demanding economy.  gridComm provides 
the components that  enable communications over the power grid,  Initially gridComm is using 
its technology for “connected streetlights” but its chips can be used to enable “smart grid” and 
“smart home” communications.
The SLMS developed by gridComm enables smart streetlights to be controlled and monitored 
based on environmental conditions, as well as to send information about their functionality to 
the city's command centre, enabling predictive maintenance.
The SLMS allows cities to monitor power consumption and the streetlights' working conditions, 
both in real time and historically, and to program the lights to dim at specific times. The SLMS 
analyses  each  lamp's  operational  status—on,  off  or  a  dimming  level—as  well  as  the  power 
consumption based on kilowatt per hour, voltage and current. The system also includes each 
lamp's  GPS  location,  which  a  worker  enters  into  the  system  during  the  PLC  Smart  Light 
Controller  module's  installation,  and  can  present  that  location  on  a  map  to  partners  of  the 
SLMS software.
By connecting street lights gridComm creates a network over a city’s power lines enabling the 
connectivity  of  other  IOT  sensors  to    monitor,  for  example,  traffic  flow,  weather  conditions, 
pollution levels and CO2 emissions.
gridComm is in production of its street light management systems which are deployed and in 
trials throughout Asia.
4.5
gridComm Business Model
City  infrastructure  is  undergoing  major  disruption  and  gridComm  has  a  communications 
solution  that  is  currently  operating  in  parts  of  Asia  enabling  smart  grid  solutions  with  higher 
data rates performance and reliability but at lower installation costs.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 19 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
gridComm’s customers are street light manufacturers that integrate the gridComm solution into 
their  product  which  they  sell  to  cities,  and  utilities.  gridComm  markets  via  established 
distribution  channels  across  Asia  and  also  sells  direct  via  internal  sales  and  engineering 
market experts.
gridComm  sells  full  street  light  control  systems  as  well  as  PLC  modules  (GC9100)  and 
semiconductor  devices  (GC2200)  with  network  software  as  “plug  and  play”  smart  grid 
communications solution. gridComm’s revenue is up to $100/street light (initial install) and up 
to $5 per month /street light recurring SaaS revenue and achieves average gross margin of up 
to  35%  on  up  to  $3.00  per  unit  GC220.  Device  sales  revenue  is  up  to  $9.00  per  unit  for 
GC8100 module sales, and up to $40 or 45% margin on its street light controllers.
gridComm  has  a  robust  and  diverse  business  model  combining  recurring  Software  as  a 
Service  (SaaS)  analytics  software,  gridComm  networking  infrastructure  and  recurring  shared 
energy cost savings by providing:
(a)
(b)
(c)
Power  Line  Communication  Solution  –  upon  installation  via    Value  Added  Resellers 
(VAR);
SaaS Licensing – street light control analytics; per month per street light licensing; and
Shared energy cost saving – following large deployments via energy and maintenance 
cost reductions.
Further,  gridComm  is  paid  for  the  networking  infrastructure;  it  then  provides  the  control  and 
analytics  software  to  enable  further  streetlight  control  efficiency  and  works  with  street  light 
makers to provide street lights at zero capital cost to cities in exchange for the savings made 
by  the  city  in  its  electricity  costs.  This  model  would  attract  those  cities  that  cannot  afford 
connected street lights gridComm provides access to their partners and VAR’s and are paid 
the resulting electricity cost savings.
Overview of the “Internet of Things”
The Internet of Things or “IoT”, is the network of physical objects  or  "things"  embedded  with 
electronics,  software,  sensors,  and  connectivity  to  enable  objects  to  collect  and  exchange 
data.    The  Internet  of  Things  allows  objects  to  be  sensed  and  controlled  remotely  across 
existing  network  infrastructure,  creating  opportunities  for  more  direct  integration  between  the 
physical  world  and  computer-based  systems,  and  resulting  in  improved  efficiency,  accuracy 
and  economic  benefit.    Each  thing  is  uniquely  identifiable  through  its  embedded  computing 
system  but  is  able  to  interoperate  within  the  existing  Internet  infrastructure.    According  to 
Cisco, it is estimated that the IoT will consist of almost 50 billion objects by 2020.1
Typically, IoT is expected to offer advanced connectivity of devices, systems, and services that 
goes  beyond  machine-to-machine  communications  (M2M)  and  covers  a  variety  of  protocols, 
domains, and applications.  The interconnection of these embedded devices (including smart 
objects), is expected to usher in automation in nearly all fields, while also enabling advanced 
applications like a Smart Grid, and expanding to the areas such as Smart city.
Things,  in  the  IoT,  can  refer  to  a  wide  variety  of  devices  such  as  environmental  sensors, 
biochip  transponders  on  farm  animals,  automobiles  with  built-in  sensors,  or  field  operation 
devices that assist fire-fighters in search and rescue.   These devices collect useful data  with 
the help of various existing technologies and then autonomously flow the data between other 
devices.  Current market examples include smart thermostat systems and washer/dryers that 
use Wi-Fi for remote monitoring.
1 Cisco Internet Business Solutions Group (2011) The Internet of Things How the Next Evolution of the 
Internet Is Changing Everything. Retrieved from Cisco Internet Business Solutions Group website 
<http://www.cisco.com/web/about/ac79/docs/innov/IoT_IBSG_0411FINAL.pdf> [15 January 2016]. 
 
 
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 20 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
Besides  the  plethora  of  new  application  areas  for  Internet  connected  automation  to  expand 
into,  IoT  is  also  expected  to  generate  large  amounts  of  data  from  diverse  locations  that  is 
aggregated very quickly, thereby increasing the need to better index, store and process such 
data
4.6
Current Contracts and Growth
There  are  currently  304  million  total  public  streetlights  in  the  world.  This  number  will  grow  to 
352 million total streetlights by 2025. (Source: Northeast Group, Global LED and Smart Street 
Lighting: Market Forecast).
Public lighting is 30% of a city’s electricity budget, and potential savings of up to 40% can be 
made  using  SLMS  (as  demonstrated  in  gridComm  deployments).  Extension  of  SLMS  will 
include outdoor Radio Frequency sensor network systems.
Smart grid deployment is a significant and fast growing market with 700 million nodes (smart 
meters,  LED  street  lights,  connected  appliances)  being  deployed  over  the  next  5  years  with 
market growth for such components seen  to  be  up to $3B (Source: Northeast  Group, Global 
LED and Smart Street Lighting: Market Forecast).
gridComm  has  secured  orders  from  a  number  of  customers  in  China,  Singapore,  Indonesia 
and Russia.
The  Indonesian  city  of  Jakarta  is  in  the  second  phase  of  a multiple  implementing  the  SLMS. 
The  first  phases  implementing  of  smart  streetlights  will  be  able  to  dim  lights  based  on 
environmental  conditions,  as  well  as  send  information  about  their  functionality  to  the  city's 
command data centre, enabling predictive maintenance. This data can be tailored according to 
the needs of each individual street or block.
Jakarta  contains  250,000  streetlights  that  may  be  eventually  integrated  into  the  system.  It 
began  with  a  trial  of  100  lights  during  the  first  quarter  of  2015.  Once  that  system  proved  to 
work  well,  the  city  launched  a  wider  deployment,  starting  with  10,000  lights  in  a  single 
neighbourhood, several thousand of which have been equipped to date.
Field  trials  are  being  conducted  in  Makassar,  Surabaya  and  Semarang  cities,  gridComm 
partnered with LED lighting provider PT Siklon Energy Nusantara (Siklon) which installed the 
Internet of Things technology.
gridComm products are used now on the China State Grid by companies including Lang Fang 
Gao Shan (China, meters), AEM (China, street lights) and include LED light makers and smart 
meter customers such as Siklon with whom gridComm has a contract with the city of Jakarta to 
provide connectivity for 50,000 street lights.  Other deployments include:
(a)
(b)
Shenzhen  AEM  Lights  Controller  -  supply  AEM  with  GC2200  OFDMA  chip  to  enable 
PLC  communications  in  the  power  lines  for  Street  Lights  control  and  deployment  in 
Foshan and Shenzhen roads,
Oriental Pearl - Partnered with Shanghai Meshall Lights PLC to rig the Oriental Pearl 
TV Tower with a remote controlled lighting system. Because it was a broadcast tower 
sensitive  to  transmissions,  wireless  communications  control  was  not  possible 
gridComm’s system allowed client to control lighting by utilising the existing electrical 
wiring to the lights.
(c)
CAEXPO centre - an iconic trade centre in Nanning - installed 100 smart LED and HID 
street lights and another 20,000 in the pipeline for Guangxi.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 21 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
4.7
Key Elements of the Acquisition
(a)
Consideration
In  consideration  for  acquiring  all  of  the  Austasia  Shares,  the  Company  will  issue 
85,363,965  Acquisition  Shares and  110,002,349 Performance Shares  to the Austasia 
Shareholders on a post Consolidation basis.
(b)
Conditions of the Acquisition
Completion of the Acquisition is subject to a number of conditions precedent being met 
by  both  the  Company  and  Austasia.    The  conditions  precedent  include  the  following 
key conditions:
(1)
(2)
(3)
the  Company  and  the  Austasia  Shareholders  each  being  satisfied  in  their 
absolute discretion with the results of their own due diligence;
all necessary regulatory approvals being obtained to enable the completion of 
the Acquisition;
all  necessary  Shareholder  approvals  being  obtained  by  the  Company  in 
respect of the Acquisition;
(4)
the Company undertaking the Capital Raising; and
(5)
the Company completing the Consolidation; and
(6)
post-Consolidation  the  number  of  Shares  not  exceeding  16,100,000    and  the 
number of Preference Shares not exceeding 7,000.
4.8
Change of activities
As identified above, ASX has advised that the Acquisition produces an effect on the Company 
which amounts to a significant change in the nature and scale of its current business activities.
Pursuant  to  Chapter  11  of  the  ASX  Listing  Rules,  ASX  has  advised  the  Company  that  the 
Company must:
(a)
obtain Shareholder approval for the purposes of Listing Rule 11.1.2; and
(b)
re-comply  with  Chapters  1  and  2  of  the  ASX  Listing  Rules,  pursuant  to  Listing  Rule 
11.1.3.
In accordance with Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules, the Company is required to satisfy a 
number of conditions.  As such, subject to Shareholders passing the Conditional Resolutions, 
in order to meet the requirements of Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules and be re-admitted 
to  the  Official  List,  the  Company  intends  to  lodge  the  Prospectus,  pursuant  to  which  the 
Company  will  undertake  the  Capital  Raising  to  raise  a  minimum  of  $6  million  and  up  to  $8 
million.    Further  details  of  the  Capital  Raising  are  outlined  in  section  7  of  this  Explanatory 
Memorandum.
The Company’s Shares will be placed in trading halt from the commencement of trading on the 
date following the despatch of the Notice of Meeting, pending the outcome of the Meeting and 
the Company’s re-compliance with Chapters 1 and 2 of the ASX Listing Rules. The Company’s 
Shares will remain suspended from Official Quotation until the ASX approves the Company’s 
re-compliance with Chapters 1 and 2 of the ASX Listing Rules.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 22 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
In relation to the change to the Company’s nature and scale of activities, upon re-complying 
with  Chapters  1  and  2  of  the  Listing  Rules  the  Company’s  primary  focus  will  be  an  IoT 
technology  business  that  is  intent  on  commercialising  and  realising  value  from its  developed 
technology.
4.9
Financial effect of the transaction on the Company
(a)
Assets, equity, annual profit
Details  of  the  estimated  effect  that  the  Acquisition  will  have  on  the  Company’s  total 
assets,  total  equity  interests,  annual  revenue/annual  expenditure  and  annual  profit 
before tax and extraordinary items following completion of the Acquisition are set out in 
Schedule 7.
The Pro Forma Financial Information in  Schedule 7 has been prepared for illustrative 
purposes and has been prepared in accordance with the measurement and recognition 
criteria  of  Australian  Accounting  Standards  and  the  significant  accounting  policies  of 
the Company and Austasia, as if the Acquisition occurred on 31 December 2015.
The  accounting  policies  comply  with  Australian  Accounting  Standards  and 
Interpretations  issued  by  the  Australian  Accounting  Standards  Board.  They  also 
comply with International Financial Reporting Standards.  The Financial Information is 
presented  in  an  abbreviated  form  insofar  as  it  does  not  include  all  the  disclosures, 
statements,  comparative  information  and  notes  required  in  annual  general  purpose 
financial report prepared in accordance with Australian Accounting Standards and the 
Corporations Act.
The Company’s financial statements as at and for the years ended 30 June 2013, 2014 
and 2015 and as at and for the 6 months ended 31 December 2015 have been audited 
by Greenwich & Co (formerly Somes Cooke). An unqualified audit opinion, but with an 
emphasis of matter in regard to going concern, was issued in respect of these periods 
by Greenwich & Co (formerly Somes Cooke).
The  historical  financial  information  of  the  merged  group  provided  in  Schedule  7 
comprises a Pro forma consolidated statement of financial position as at 31 December 
2015, which is based upon:
(1)
(2)
the  Company’s  audited  statement  of  financial  position  as  at  31  December 
2015;
gridComm’s  audited  statement  of  financial  position  as  at  31  December  2015; 
and
(3)
relevant pro-forma adjustments required to present the merged group.
The information in Schedule 7 is presented on a pro-forma basis only, and as a result it 
is  likely  that  this  information  will  differ  from  the  actual  financial  information  for  the 
merged group as at completion of the proposed acquisition.
(b)
Issued capital
Schedule 3 sets out the current issued share capital of the Company, together with the 
capital structure, assuming the Transaction completes.
In  summary,  if  the  Acquisition  is  completed  and  all  Shares  are  issued  in  accordance 
with Resolutions 4, 5 and 6 of this Notice, the Austasia Shareholders would hold a total 
of  60.78%  of  the  issued  Shares,  assuming  that  the  Austasia  Shareholders  do  not
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 23 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
subscribe for any Shares pursuant to the Capital Raising and assuming the minimum 
Capital Raising of $6 million.
that  neither
The existing Shareholders of the Company would hold a total of 11.45% of the issued 
Shares,  assuming 
the  Austasia  Shareholders  nor  any  existing 
Shareholders subscribe for any Shares pursuant to the Capital Raising and assuming 
the minimum Capital Raising of $6 million.  Assuming only new investors subscribe for 
Shares pursuant to the Capital Raising and that the Capital Raising is for the minimum 
of  $6  million,  those  new  investors  would  hold  21.36%  of  the  issued  Shares  on 
completion of the Transaction.
This  information  excludes  any  Performance  Shares  and  Advisor  Options  held  and 
assumes such securities are not converted into Shares.
The  spread  of  the  shareholding  among  the  Austasia  Shareholders  is  identified  in 
Schedule 1.
4.10  Board Composition
The Company’s Board is currently comprised of three (3) directors:
(a)
Alex Bajada;
(b)
Roland Berzins; and
(c)
David Ballantyne,
and will remain the same following the Acquisition.
4.11  Key Management
Following the Acquisition, the key management of the Company will initially comprise:
(a)
Michael Holt - CEO
Mike  graduated  in  1985  with  a  BSEE  with  Honours.  In  1998  he  received  a  MSc 
Electrical  Engineering  degree  with  Honours  and  in  1993  received  an  MBA  with 
Honours focusing on marketing and finance; all from the University of California, Irvine.
Mike has 27 years of management experience in the high technology industry. In 2006 
he  founded  technology  incubator  and  advisory  firm  Get2Volume  in  Singapore. 
Get2Volume has helped 15 technology companies grow revenue, win customers, raise 
money and be acquired.
Prior to founding Get2Volume, Mike spent 15 years at Texas Instruments and Silicon 
Systems in various leadership positions including product line manager for TI’s $200m 
storage DSP division (managing a world-wide team of 130 employees).
Mike has been the CEO of eMicro a semiconductor company, growing its revenue and 
profitability  and  consolidating  the  company  with  Cirrus  Logic.  He  has  been  CEO  of 
high-tech  start-ups  raising  $70m  in  funding.  He  is  Vice  President  and  co-founder  of 
Singapore  Semiconductor  Industry  Association  (SSIA)  and  an  “Entrepreneur-in-
Residence” at INSEAD. Mike holds two patents.
Mike’s high-technology and related company growth experience includes:
•  NRF TIS incubation manager for Get2Volume (www. get2volume.com).
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 24 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
•  Semitech  semiconductor
led  buyout 
restructuring,  move  to  Singapore,  growth  and  exit  (M/A  process).  Chosen  as 
EEtimes 2011 top 5 startups.
(Singapore,  Australia,  California),
•  ConnectHealth  (Singapore),  with  co-founder  Hari  Ramachandran,  incubated
Connec-tHeath from concept, funding, revenue and growth.
•  Plunify (Singapore), NUS NEC Company focused on semiconductor tools. Focus
on growth.
•  Novelics (US & Singapore), involvement in market growth to exit. Led sale of the
company to Mentor Graphics in 2011 ($10M exit value).
•  JamTech (US & Singapore), funding market expansion, operations.
•  Transdimensions  as  VP  Marketing  and  Operations  grew  the  business  from  $4m 
to $20m in annual sales in the first twelve month of his appointmet. Acquired by 
Oxford Semiconductors.
(b)
Tuck Long Nge – Vice-President Sales
Tuck Long is Co-founder of gridComm and is currently VP Sales.
Tuck  Long  brings  more  than  18  years  semiconductor  sales  experience  with  world-
class  multi-national  corporations  and  start-ups  covering  Asia  Pacific  and  focusing  in 
Smart Grid, con-sumer electronics and embedded devices. He is a Smart grid systems 
and  semiconductor  expert  acquiring  his  experience  at  Silicon  Systems,  TI,  Teridian 
and Semitech.
In  his  previous  careers,  Tuck  Long  had  created  several  strategic  and  successful 
design-wins  with  the  China  State  Grid,  China  Telecoms,  Lenovo,  Seagate,  Hewlett 
Packard, Hitachi and others. Tuck Long started his career as a wafer fab engineer at 
ST Micro and held senior sales roles at Semitech Semiconductor, Symwave, Teridian 
Semiconductor Corporation, Ox-ford Semiconductor and Wind River Systems.
(c)
Arthur Goh - VP Engineering
Arthur  brings  20+  years  of  experience  in  design  and  development  of  embedded 
systems and in software architecture.
Arthur started his career as a Software Engineering lecturer at Ngee Ann Polytechnic 
in  Singapore  and  later  worked  in  HP  and  GE  as  key  software  engineer.  He  is  an 
experienced  trainer  and  technical  writer  and  architected  gridComm  GC-Net  adaptive 
networking software and the Street Light Management Software.
4.12  Timetable
The timetable in Schedule 4 outlines the expected timing for completion of the Acquisition and 
the Capital Raising, subject to compliance with all regulatory and statutory requirements.
The Company notes that the dates outlined in the timetable in Schedule 4 are indicative only 
and subject to a number of factors which are outside the control of the Company and as such 
may change without notice.
4.13  Risks
The business activities of the Company are and will continue to be subject to normal business 
risks and uncertainties and there may be many factors that could affect the future performance
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 25 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
of  the  Company.    Some  of  these  risks  and  uncertainties  may  be  mitigated  by  the  use  of 
safeguards, appropriate systems and contingencies.  However, some risks may be outside the 
control of the Company and not able to be mitigated.  Additionally, there are also a number of 
risk factors that are specific to the Company.
The  following  is  a  summary  of  some  of  the  key  specific  risks  relating  to  the  Acquisition  and 
business of the Company after completion of the Transaction.
(a)
Limited trading history of gridComm
gridComm  is an early stage company with limited trading history and, at such an early 
stage of its development, there are significant uncertainties associated with forecasting 
future revenues and expenses of the company.
Since  incorporating  on  7  September  2012,  gridComm’s  activities  have  principally 
involved funding the development of its software, product testing and marketing. The 
funds  were  allocated  to  Research  &  Development  expenses,  wages,  legal  fees  and 
other associated administration costs.
As  with  many  early  stage  companies,  gridComm  has  incurred  losses  since  its 
inception.  The  cumulative  losses  up  to  31  December  2015  are  approximately  $1.3 
million
There  have  been  no  forecast  financial  projections  undertaken  as  part  of  this 
Prospectus.
(b)
Reinstatement to the Official List
The Acquisition is subject to a number of conditions precedent. If these conditions are 
not satisfied  or  waived  by  the relevant due  date, the  Acquisition may not  proceed,  in 
which case the Company will need to evaluate its future strategy.
In addition, one of the conditions precedents is that all necessary regulatory approvals 
pursuant  to  the  Listing  Rules  are  met.  The  acquisition  of  gridComm  constitutes  a 
significant  change  in  the  nature  and  scale  of  the  Company’s  activities  and  the 
Company needs to comply with Chapters 1 and 2 of the ASX Listing Rules as if it were 
seeking admission to the official list of the ASX.
There is a risk that the Company may not be able to meet the requirements of the ASX 
for  re-quotation  of  its  Shares  and  Options  on  the  ASX,  which  would  result  in  the 
investors’ funds being returned, and the  Acquisition not being completed. Should this 
occur, the Shares and Options will not be able to be traded on the ASX until such time 
as those requirements can be met, if at all.
(c)
Competition and New Technologies
The  industries  in  which  gridComm  and  the  Company  are  involved  are  subject  to 
increasing domestic and global competition which is fast-paced and fast-changing.
While the Company  intends to undertake all reasonable due diligence in  its business 
decisions  and  operations,  the  Company  will  have  no  influence  or  control  over  the 
activities  or  actions  of  its  competitors,  whose  activities  or  actions  may  positively  or 
negatively affect the operating and financial performance of the Company.
There  is  a  risk  that  the  Company  will  not  be  able  to  compete  in  the  competitive 
industries  in  which  it,  gridComm  operates.  gridComm  will  (and  after  the  Acquisition, 
the Company  will) be competing against a number of significant global IT companies 
and other entities for customers, growth, and revenue.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 26 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
In  addition,  the  emergence  of  new  competitors  in  the  market,  or  technological 
developments  providing  an  alternative  to  gridComm  products  and  services,  could 
adversely  impact  gridComm  market  share  and  the  Company's  financial  position  and 
financial  performance.  Existing  and  new  providers  of  services  platforms  may  expand 
their market share and revenue, which could also impact adversely on the Company's 
financial position and financial performance.
(d)
Development and Marketing Risks
Following  completion  of  the  Capital  Raising,  the  Company  will  focus  on  growing 
gridComm’s business and fully commercialising the gridComm Solution by prioritising 
funds towards further product enhancement, sales and marketing.
The Company’s focus will be to generate sales in the Asian Pacific and International 
markets.    It  is  proposed  that  the  Company  will  achieve  this  through  advanced  sales 
plans  and  solid  partner  sales  relationships,  as  well  as  a  maturing  ambassadorial 
program.
The  Company  also  intends  to  market  to  industry  specific  markets  by  working  with 
industry groups, catalyst clients in specific markets and integration to complementary 
products for co-sales and marketing.
By its nature, there is no guarantee that the Company’s marketing campaign will be 
successful  and  there  is  no  guarantee  of  whether  the  Company  will  generate  any 
revenue or profits.
The  Company  may  encounter  difficulty  in  bringing  the  gridComm  Solution  to  the 
market and creating market awareness of the brand.
Following completion of the Capital Raising, the Company intends to seek to advance 
the gridComm Solution by focusing initially on marketing.
Any  failure  to  expand  the  usage  of  gridComm’s  Solution  would  have  an  adverse 
impact on the Company’s financial position and financial performance
(e)
Operational and Commercialisation Risks
There  can  be  no  assurance  that  the  Company’s  business  will  be  profitable  and/or 
commercially  viable.  The  Company  may  not  achieve  either  short  or  long  term 
profitability and may suffer losses.
There is the risk that the gridComm Solution may not be commercially successful and 
may  not  function,  operate  or  integrate  as  intended,  including  with  respect  to  its 
capacity to service customers. gridComm’s technologies are complex; they may have 
errors or defects that users identify after they begin using them. There is a risk that the 
gridComm  Solution  may  not  be  scalable  in  that  the  software  or  hardware  may  not 
support large numbers of users as the Company's business grows and the number of 
users of the gridComm Solution increases.
This  may  lead  to  the  Company’s  financial  position  and  financial  performance  being 
adversely  affected  and  the  Company’s  reputation  suffering  amongst  users  and 
customers as well as potential claims for redress.
(f)
Intellectual Property Rights
Following  Completion  of  the  Acquisition,  the  Company  will  have  acquired  the 
gridComm  Solution,  which  includes  the  application  of  two  patents  which  are  in  the 
process of being granted:
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 27 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
(1)
(2)
Singapore Patent Application No.: 10201503002V 
Date of Filing: 16 April 2015 
Title: FORMATION AND MAINTENANCE OF A COMMUNICATION 
NETWORK 
Applicant: GRIDCOMM PTE LTD
Singapore Patent Application No.: 10201500769U 
Date of Filing: 30 January 2015 
Title: A DISCOVERY METHOD FOR A POWER LINE COMMUNICATION 
NETWORK 
Applicant: GRIDCOMM PTE LTD
The  Company  will  endeavour  to  hold  patents  and  trademarks  over  its  hardware  and 
software  and  seek  to  protect  its  potential  intellectual  property.  However  due  to  the 
legal  standards  relating  to  the  validity,  enforceability  and  scope  of  protection  of 
intellectual  property  rights  are  not  guaranteed.  In  particular,  when  the  Company’s 
product range is introduced to different jurisdictions, protection may not be available in 
any or every country in which the Company may operate.
In  any  event,  the  Company  may  not  be  able  to  prevent  third  parties  from  infringing 
upon or misappropriating its intellectual property. The Company cannot be certain that 
unauthorised  use  or  access  of  intellectual  property  relevant  to  the  Company's, 
business  will  not  be  undertaken  by  third  parties  to  the  detriment  of  the  Company,  its 
operations and business. In addition, there can be no guarantee that unauthorised use 
or  copying  of  the  software,  data  or  specialised  technology  will  not  be  compromised. 
Any  unauthorised  use,  access  or  copying  of  the  intellectual  property  could  impact 
adversely on the Company, its operations and business.
Further, there is a risk that the Company’s business may be alleged to have infringed 
intellectual  property  rights  of  third  parties.  The  Company  is  not  aware  of  any  such 
allegations.
(g)
Reliance on Key Personnel
The  responsibility  of  overseeing  the  day  to  day  operations  and  the  strategic 
management  of  the  Company  depends  substantially  on  its  proposed  key  personnel 
(being  Mr  Michael  Holt  and  the  Directors).  Loss  of  key  personnel  could  adversely 
affect the Company’s performance and its financial position.
The  Company's  ability  to  effectively  execute  its  growth  strategies  therefore  depends 
significantly  upon  the  ability  to  recruit  key  personnel  and  the  performance  and 
expertise  of  such  personnel,  including  those  with  valuable  technological  skills, 
marketing experience and specialist knowledge of the Company's business model and 
markets, respectively. The inability to recruit key personnel or the departure of certain 
key employees, including Mr Michael Holt and any delay in his replacement or indeed 
any  failure  to  adequately  replace  him,  is  likely  to  hinder  the  Company's  ability  (post 
Completion) to achieve its strategic growth objectives and financial performance goals. 
In  addition,  in  order  for  the  Company  to  achieve  its  growth  objectives  it  will  likely  be 
required to engage the services of other key management personnel with appropriate 
experience.
There is no guarantee that the Company will be able to attract and retain appropriately 
qualified  personnel  in  these  areas.  Any  failure  to  do  so  is  likely  to  also  hinder  the 
Company's ability to achieve its strategic growth objectives.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 28 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
(h)
Relationships with suppliers
The  Company  relies  on  sourcing  products  from  various  suppliers  and  any  material 
adverse change in the Company’s relationships with its suppliers, its terms of trade, or 
the  ability  of  key  suppliers  to  service  orders  could  have  an  adverse  impact  on  the 
Company’s prospects.
It is important to note, however, that the Company’s business revolves largely around 
the  supply  of  software  and  modules,  and  does  not  heavily  rely  upon  the  supply  of 
other products.
In  areas  where  supply  of  components  is  necessary,  gridComm  will  attempt,  where 
possible, to have a number of suppliers for components.
(i)
Faults with products/services
The Company's products are complex. Damage to or failure of key systems may result 
in  disruptions  to  the  Company's  ability  to  operate  the  gridComm  Solution  and  other 
services and could affect the Company's performance and financial position
(j)
Regulatory Environment
Presently, the Company’s active operations are based in Asia Pacific, and as recently 
announced  in  the  Russian  Republic,  and  are  subject  to  those  jurisdictions.  The 
Company  will  examine  expanding its operations  into  other markets such as Australia 
which may expose it to regulatory and jurisdictional risks.
The Company’s operations  may  become  subject  to  regulatory  requirements,  such  as 
licensing  and  reporting  obligations,  which  would  increase  the  costs  and  resources 
associated with regulatory compliance.  Any such increase in the costs and resources 
associated  with  regulatory  compliance could impact upon the Company’s profitability 
and viability.
(k)
Additional Requirements for Capital
Additional funding beyond that proposed to be raised pursuant to the Capital Raising 
may  be  required  for  the  continued  development  of  the  gridComm’s  business  model. 
This  additional  capital  may  also  be  used  to  take  advantage  of  opportunities  for 
acquisitions, 
to  meet  any 
unanticipated liabilities or expenses which the Company may incur.
joint  ventures  or  other  business  opportunities,  or
The  Company  may  seek  to  raise  further  funds  through  equity  or  debt  financing,  joint 
ventures, partnerships, alliances or other means.  Failure to obtain sufficient financing 
for  the  Company’s  activities  and  future  projects  may  have  an  adverse  effect  on  the 
Company’s financial position and financial performance.  There can be no assurance 
that additional finance will be available when needed or, if available, the terms of the 
financing  might  not  be  favourable  to  the  Company  and  might  involve  substantial 
dilution to Shareholders.
(l)
Foreign Exchange Risks
Exchange rates are beyond the control of the Company.
The Company’s revenues, costs and expenses are currently all derived in US Dollars 
dollars  and  there  may  be  foreign  exchange  risk  under  the  current  business  trading 
model.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 29 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
As the Company’s intention is to expand its operations in future in foreign jurisdictions, 
the Company could be exposed to foreign exchange risks.
(m)
Reliance on External Technology
The  Company  does  rely  on  the  capacity  of  external  technology  utilized  by  the 
gridComm products under  licence to  provide ongoing support for the delivery of their 
software solutions.
gridComm have developed or acquired their own software which is used in conjunction 
with off the shelf software under licence from third parties to enable the functionality of 
its product offerings.  Such third party software may be subject to external factors such 
as  depreciation  of  operating  systems,  libraries,  components,  third  party  interfaces, 
drivers,  patches,  compatibility,  version  conflict,  obsolescence  or  other  related  issues.  
In addition, the third party software may require updating and maintenance.
These  external  factors may  also  affect  the  ability  of  gridComm  to  effectively  upgrade 
and maintain its software.  Furthermore, licensing and commercial conditions imposed 
by  third  party  software  companies  may  be  unsustainable  or  impracticable  for 
gridComm  causing  a  need  to  rely  on  other  solutions  or  develop  these  in  house.  
Should  gridComm  have  such  issues,  these  may  affect  their  ability  to  successfully 
provide their products.
The  Company  recognizes  the  risk  in  these  areas  and  will  undertake  all  necessary 
controls and monitoring of these facilities to ensure that any variation or cancellation of 
these technologies can be replaced in due course.
(n)
Security Breaches / Hackers
A  malicious  attack  on  the  Company,  from  external  or  internal  sources  could  put  the 
integrity  and  privacy  of  customers'  data  and  business  systems  used  to  run  the 
gridComm  Solution  at  risk.  The  impact  of  control  breaches,  loss  or  leakage  of 
customer or business data could include costs for rebates, potential service disruption, 
litigation  and  brand  damage  resulting  in  adverse  effects  to  the  Company  which  may 
affect the Company's financial position and performance.
Hackers  could  render  the  Company's  website  unavailable.    While  the  Company  will 
take  reasonable  precautions,  the  Company  may  be  a  target  for  hackers.    Actual  or 
perceived  security  vulnerabilities  in  the  Company's  services  or  any  breach  of  its 
security controls and authorised access to a customer's data could harm the business 
and the Company's operating results.
The  Company  follows  best  practice  in  relation  to  security  policies,  procedures, 
automated  and  manual  protections,  encryption  systems  and  staff  screening  to 
minimise this risk.
(o)
Privacy
The environment in  which  the Company operates is subject to complex and evolving 
foreign  policies,  laws  and  regulations  regarding  privacy,  data  protection,  content 
regulation,  intellectual  property,  competition,  distribution  of  electronic  contracts  and 
other  communications,    consumer  protection,  taxation,  online  payment  services  and 
advertising and marketing standards.
The  Company  collects,  stores  and  processes  highly  sensitive,  highly  regulated  and 
confidential information. The provision of secure and reliable information storage and 
processing services is integral to the businesses and operations of the Company.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 30 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
Whilst  the  Company  follows  best  practice  in  relation  to  security  policies,  procedures, 
automated  and  manual  protections,  encryption  systems  and  staff  screening  to 
minimise risks, there is no guarantee that the implementation of such precautions will 
be sufficient to prevent data security breaches and information being compromised or   
misused.
A  malicious  attack  on  the  Company's  systems,  processes  or  people  from  external  or 
internal sources could put the integrity and privacy of client data and business systems 
used to run  the Company  at risk. The impact of loss or leakage of client or business 
data  could  include  potential  service  disruption,  litigation,  liability  to  third  parties, 
penalties imposed by government agencies under applicable laws and brand damage 
resulting  in  reduced  or  falling  revenues.  These  potential  losses  or  liabilities  will  be 
different for each jurisdiction in which the Company operates.
There is also currently an increased exposure to organisations that process personal 
information in the course of their commercial activities, in particular relating to liability 
arising from security incidents.
4.14  Other information
(a)
Conditionality of Resolutions
The Conditional  Resolutions are each conditional upon the passing of each other, so 
that each will not have effect unless and until all of the others are passed.
As  such,  if  any  of  the  Conditional  Resolutions  are  not  passed,  then  all  of  the 
Conditional Resolutions will be taken to have been not approved by Shareholders.
(b)
Plans for the Company if the Resolutions are passed
In the event that all of the Conditional Resolutions are approved by Shareholders and 
the  Acquisition  completes,  the  Company  will  comprise  the  combined  business 
operations  of  Odin  and  gridComm.    As  such,  the  Company  will  move  forward  with 
plans to grow gridComm’s business and fully commercialise the gridComm Solution by 
prioritising funds towards further product enhancement, sales and marketing.
(c)
Plans for the Company if the Resolutions are not passed:
In  the  event  that  the  Conditional  Resolutions  are  not  approved  and  the  Acquisition 
does  not  take  place,  the  Company  will  attempt  to  find  another  project  that  meets 
shareholder expectations.
4.15  Director Recommendation
For  the  reasons  set  out  above,  including  the  conclusion  of  the  Independent  Expert,  the 
Directors  consider  that  the  Acquisition  is  in  the  best  interests  of  the  Company.  However,  as 
noted in section  4.1, the Directors have a  personal  interest in Resolution 2 and, accordingly, 
make no recommendation in relation to the Resolution.
5.
Resolution 3 – Creation of New Class of Securities: Performance Shares
5.1
General
This  Resolution  seeks  Shareholder  approval  for  the  Company  to  be  authorised  to  issue 
Performance Shares under the Acquisition.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 31 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
A  company  which  proposes  to  issue  new  shares  not  having  the  same  right  as  its  existing 
classes of shares is taken to vary the rights of the existing shareholders unless the constitution 
of that company already provides for such an issue.
Section  246B  of  the  Corporations  Act  provides  that  the  rights  attaching  to  a  class  of  shares 
cannot be varied without:
(a)
(b)
a special resolution passed at a meeting of the members holding shares in that class; 
or
the written consent of the members who are entitled to at least 75% of the votes that 
may be cast in respect of the shares in that class.
The Company currently  has fully  paid ordinary shares on issue, as  well as 7,000 convertible 
preference shares. Accordingly, the Company seeks approval from Shareholders for the issue 
of a total of 110,002,349 Performance Shares being:
(a)
33,417,449 Class A Performance Shares;
(b)
33,417,450 Class B Performance Shares; and
(c)
33,417,450 Class C Performance Shares,
(d)
3,250,000 Class D Performance Shares;
(e)
3,250,000 Class E Performance Shares; and
(f)
3,250,000 Class F Performance Shares,
to the Austasia Shareholders.
Each  Performance  Share,  if  certain  milestones  are  achieved,  will  convert  into  one  fully  paid 
ordinary share in the Company. Full terms and conditions of the Performance Shares are set 
out in Schedule 5 of this Explanatory Memorandum.
This Resolution is conditional on each of the Conditional Resolutions being approved.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 32 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
6.
Resolutions 4 and 5: Approval of the Issue of Acquisition Shares and 
Performance Shares
6.1
Introduction
As outlined in section 4.7(a), the consideration for the Acquisition consists of the:
(a)
Acquisition Shares to be issued to all of the Austasia Shareholders; and
(b)
Performance Shares to be issued to certain Austasia Shareholders.
A summary of the terms of the SSA is set out in Schedule 2 of this Explanatory Memorandum.
6.2
Acquisition Shares
Resolutions  4  and  5  propose  the  issue  and  allotment  of  a  total  of  85,363,965  Acquisition 
Shares to Austasia Shareholders pursuant to the SSA.
As  noted  in  section  4.1,  the  Austasia  Shareholders  include  the  following  parties  who  are 
related  parties  of  the  Company  and  who  together  will  be  issued  an  aggregate  of  2,740,809 
Acquisition Shares:
(a)
(b)
(c)
Spartan Nominees Pty Ltd (ACN 099 822 081) as trustee for The Spartan Super Fund 
which is an entity controlled by Alex Bajada, a director of the Company;
GCP Capital Pty Ltd (ACN 161 764 647, which is an entity controlled by Alex Bajada, a 
director of the Company;
Sandgroper Pty Ltd (ACN 065 049 032) ATF The Modillion Discretionary Trust, which 
is an entity controlled by David Ballantyne, a director of the Company;
(d)
Roland Berzins, a director of the Company, and his wife Carol Berzins; and
(e)
Sealblue Investments Pty Ltd (ACN 133 164 726, which is an entity controlled by 
Roland Berzins, a director of the Company.
Accordingly, Resolution 4 seeks approval for the issue of 85,363,965 Acquisition Shares to the 
Austasia Shareholders (or their nominees) pursuant to  both Listing Rule 7.1 and Listing Rule 
10.11.
Michael Holt is an Austasia Shareholder and controls Get2Volume, which is also an Austasia 
Shareholder. Accordingly, Michael Holt and Get2Volume are presently considered Associates 
of each other.
As the issue of the Austasia Shares and Performance Shares may result in a person having a 
voting power in the Company of more than 20%, Resolution 5 seeks approval for the issue of a 
total  of  22,565,489  Shares  to  Michael  Holt  and  Get2Volume  for  the  purposes  of  section  611 
(item  7)  of  the  Corporations  Act.  These  securities  are  included  in,  and  not  additional  to,  the 
total number of Acquisition Shares for which approval is sought pursuant to Resolution 4.
Details of the number of Acquisition Shares to be issued to each Austasia Shareholder are set 
out in Schedule 1.
6.3
Performance Shares
Pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  SSA,  the  Company  will  also  issue  110,002,349  Performance 
Shares  to  the  Austasia  Shareholders.  Resolution  4  seeks  approval  for  the  issue  of
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 33 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
110,002,349 Performance Shares  to the  Austasia  Shareholders (or their nominees) pursuant 
to Listing Rule 7.1.
The  SSA  contemplates  the  Performance  Shares  being  issued  as  six  classes  of  performance 
shares:  Class  A  Performance  Shares,  Class  B  Performance  Shares,  Class  C  Performance 
Shares, Class D Performance Shares, Class E Performance Shares and Class F Performance 
Shares.
Details of the number of Performance Shares to be issued to each Austasia Shareholder is set 
out in Schedule 1. No Performance Shares are to be issued to related parties of the Company.
Resolution 5 seeks approval for the issue of 62,875,548 Performance Shares to Michael Holt 
and Get2Volume, for the purposes of section 611 (item 7) of the Corporations Act.
6.4
Listing Rule 7.1
The issue of the Acquisition Shares and Performance Shares to the Austasia Shareholders will 
exceed  the  15%  Capacity  under  Listing  Rule  7.1.    Accordingly,  the  Directors  are  seeking 
Shareholder  approval  pursuant  to  Resolution  4  to  the  issue  of  Acquisition  Shares  and 
Performance Shares to the Austasia Shareholders.
In accordance with Listing Rule 7.3, the Company advises as follows:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
the maximum number of Acquisition Shares to be issued to the Austasia Shareholders 
(or their nominees) pursuant to Resolution 4 is 85,363,965 Acquisition Shares;
the maximum number of Performance Shares to  be  issued to  Austasia Shareholders 
(or their nominees) pursuant to Resolution 4 is 110,002,349 Performance Shares;
the  Acquisition  Shares  and  Performance  Shares  will  be  allotted  and  issued  on 
completion  of  the  Acquisition,  but  in  any  event  will  be  issued  to  the  Austasia 
Shareholders (or their nominees) within 3 months of the date of the Meeting;
the Acquisition Shares and Performance Shares will not be issued for cash and will not 
raise any funds as the  Acquisition Shares and  Performance Shares are  to be  issued 
as  consideration  for  the  acquisition  of  the  Austasia  Shares.    That  said,  the  deemed 
issue price of the Acquisition Shares and Performance Shares is $0.20 per Share; and
(e)
on issue, the Acquisition Shares will rank equally with all Shares on issue at that time; 
and
(f)
the material terms of the Performance Shares are set out in Schedule 5.
Other  than  as  set  out  in  section  6.5  below,  the  recipients  of  the  Acquisition  Shares  and 
Performance Shares are not related parties of the Company.
6.5
Listing Rule 10.13
In  accordance  with  Listing  Rule  10.13,  the  Company  provides  the  following  additional 
information in relation to the Acquisition Shares to related parties of the Company:
(a)
the related parties to whom Acquisition Shares will be issued are:
Spartan Nominees Pty Ltd (ACN 099 822 081) as trustee for the Spartan Super 
Fund which is an entity controlled by Alex Bajada, a director of the Company;
GCP Capital Pty Ltd (ACN 161 764 647,  which is an  entity controlled  by  Alex 
Bajada, a director of the Company;
(1)
(2)
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 34 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
(3)
Sandgroper  Pty  Ltd  (ACN  065  049  032)  as  trustee  for  the  Modillion 
Discretionary Trust, which is an entity controlled by David Ballantyne, a director 
of the Company;
(4)
Roland Berzins, a director of the Company, and his wife Carol Berzins; and
(5)
Sealblue Investments Pty Ltd (ACN 133 164 726, which is an entity controlled 
by Roland Berzins, a director of the Company;
(b)
a maximum of 2,740,809 Acquisition Shares will be issued to those related parties;
(c)
ASX  has  granted  a  waiver  of  the  requirements  of  Listing  Rule  10.13.3.  Ordinarily, 
Listing  Rule  10.13.3  would  require  the  Company  to  specify  a  date  by  which  the 
Acquisition  Shares  would  be  issued  to  related  parties,  with  that  date  being  no  more 
than 1 month after the date of the Meeting. However, based on the conditions  of the 
waiver  granted  by  ASX,  the  allotment  of  the  Acquisition  Shares  to  the  parties  in 
paragraph (a) above  will be required to occur simultaneously  with the allotment of all 
other Acquisition Shares, with all allotments to occur within 3 months after the date of 
the meeting;
(d)
The  issue  price  ($0.20  per  Acquisition  Share)  and  terms  are  the  same  as  for  the 
Acquisition Shares to be issued to the Non-Associated Shareholders; and
(e)
No funds will be raised by the issue of the Acquisition Shares.
6.6
Section 611 of the Corporations Act
The issue of the Acquisition Shares to Michael Holt and Get2Volume pursuant to Resolution 5 
will be prohibited by section 606 of the Corporations Act unless a relevant exception applies, 
as  Michael  Holt  and  Get2Volume  currently  have  no  voting  power  in  the  Company  and  may 
increase their voting power in the Company to more than 20%.
The  initial  acquisition  of  the  Performance  Shares  pursuant  to  Resolution  5  will  not  result  in 
Michael Holt or Get2Volume (as the case may be) acquiring a relevant interest in issued voting 
shares in the Company.  However, on issue of any Shares on conversion of the Performance 
Shares  (following  satisfaction  of  the  applicable  performance  milestones),  the  holder  will 
acquire a relevant interest in those Shares.  Accordingly, as Michael Holt and Get2Volume will 
in  aggregate  have  voting  power  of  more  than  20%  in  the  Company  after  completion  of  the 
Acquisition,  any  increase  in  their  voting  power  would  be  prohibited  by  section  606  of  the 
Corporations Act unless a relevant exception applies.
Section 611 (item 7) of the Corporations Act exempts an acquisition agreed to by a resolution 
passed  at  a  general  meeting  on  which  no  votes  were  cast  in  favour  of  the  resolution  by  the 
person proposing to make the acquisition or their associates.
As a consequence of Michael Holt controlling Get2Volume, Michael Holt and Get2Volume are 
presently regarded as Associates of each other. The Company  notes however that this does 
not  necessarily  mean  that  Michael  Holt  and  Get2Volume  will  always  be  regarded  as 
Associates.
Accordingly,  Resolution  5  seeks  approval  for  the  issue  of  Acquisition  Shares  to  Michael  Holt 
and  Get2Volume  as  well  as  for  the  issue  of  Shares  to  Michael  Holt  and  Get2Volume  upon 
conversion of the Performance Shares into Shares for the purposes of, amongst other things, 
section 611 (item 7) of the Corporations Act.
This Explanatory Memorandum has been prepared to provide sufficient detail for Shareholders 
of the Company to appropriately consider Resolution 5 and should be read in conjunction with 
the Independent Expert’s Report.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 35 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
If  Shareholders  pass  the  Conditional  Resolutions  this  will  have  the  effect  of,  amongst  other 
things:
(a)
the Company changing its activities within the meaning of Listing Rule 11.1;
(b)
(c)
the Company issuing the Acquisition Shares, including to those Austasia Shareholders 
who are related parties of the Company; and
Mr Michael Holt and Get2Volume (and their associates) potentially gaining a relevant 
interest in Shares in the Company in excess of 20%.
For the purposes of section 611 (item 7(b)), the Company advises that:
(a)
Section 611 (item 7(b)(i)): The identity of the person proposing to make the acquisition 
and their Associates
In respect of Resolution 5, the identity of the person proposing to make the acquisition 
is Michael Holt and Get2Volume (or their nominees).
Michael Holt and Get2Volume are presently regarded as Associates of each other.
Neither  Michael  Holt  or  Get2Volume  currently  hold  any  Equity  Securities  in  the 
Company.
(b)
Section 611 (item 7(b)(ii)): The maximum extent of the increase in that person’s Voting 
Power in the company that would result from the acquisition
Neither  Michael  Holt,  nor  Get2Volume,  nor  their  Associates  currently  have  a  relevant 
interest or any voting power in the Company
In summary, in respect of Michael Holt and Get2Volume:
(1)
(2)
the maximum extent of the increase in Michael Holt and Get2Volume’s relevant 
interest  and  voting  power  in  the  Company  that  would  result  from  the  issue  of 
the  Acquisition  Shares  to  Michael  Holt  and  Get2Volume  or  their  nominees 
(assuming  the  Acquisition  is  completed  and  all  Shares  are  issued  in 
accordance with Resolutions 4, 5 and 6 of this Notice, but that no other Shares 
are  issued)  is  16.07%.    This  assumes  that  Michael  Holt  and  Get2Volume  do 
not  subscribe  for  any  Offer  Shares  under  the  Capital  Raising.    It  further 
assumes  the  minimum  Capital  of  $6million.  Michael  Holt  and  Get2Volume  do 
not intend to subscribe for any Offer Shares, and further, would not be able to 
subscribe  for  any  Offer  Shares  under  the  Capital  Raising  without  additional 
Shareholder approval first being obtained; and
the maximum extent of the increase in Michael Holt and Get2Volume’s relevant 
interest  and  voting  power  in  the  Company  that  would  result  from  the  full 
conversion of all of the Performance Shares and the Advisor options (assuming 
the  Acquisition  is  completed  and  all  Shares  are  issued  in  accordance  with 
Resolutions  4,  5  and  6  of  this  Notice,  but  that  no  other  Shares  are  issued)  is 
16.12%, bringing the total relevant interest and voting power to 32.19%.  This 
assumes  that  Michael  Holt  and  Get2Volume  do  not  subscribe  for  any  Offer 
Shares under the Capital Raising.  Michael Holt and Get2Volume do not intend 
to subscribe for any Offer Shares, and further, would not be able to subscribe 
for any Offer Shares under the Capital Raising  without additional Shareholder 
approval first being obtained.
It  is  noted  that  under  the  proposed  timetable,  the  Acquisition  Shares  will  be  issued 
prior to the issue of the Offer Shares.  Accordingly, for a very short period of time, the
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 36 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
maximum relevant interest and voting power in the Company that would result from the 
issue  of  the  Acquisition  Shares  to  Michael  Holt  and  Get2Volume  (assuming  the 
Acquisition  is  completed,  however,  no  other  Shares  are  issued)  would  be  20.43%.  
This  would  only  be  the  position  until  the  Offer  Shares  were  issued  in  which  case  the 
maximum relevant interest and voting power in the Company that would result from the 
issue  of  the  Acquisition  Shares  Michael  Holt  and  Get2Volume  would  be  as  set  out 
above.
(c)
Section 611 (item 7(b)(iii)):  The Voting Power that the person would have as a result 
of the acquisition
As  provided  in  paragraph  (b)  above,  Michael  Holt  and  Get2Volume  could  have  a 
maximum Voting Power of up to approximately  16.07% as a result of the issue of the 
Acquisition Shares (assuming the Acquisition is completed and all Shares are issued in 
accordance  with  Resolutions  4,  5  and  6  of  this  Notice,  but  that  no  other  Shares  are 
issued).    This  also  assumes  that  the  Michael  Holt  and  Get2Volume  do  not  subscribe 
for any Offer Shares under the Capital Raising.  Michael Holt and Get2Volume do not 
intend  to  subscribe  for  any  Offer  Shares,  and  further,  would  not  be  able  to  subscribe 
for any Offer Shares under the Capital Raising without additional Shareholder approval 
first  being  obtained.    In  the  event  that  there  was  full  conversion  of  all  of  the 
Performance  Shares  issued  to  Michael  Holt  and  Get2Volume  (assuming 
the 
Acquisition is completed and all Shares are issued in accordance with Resolutions 4, 5 
and  6  of  this  Notice,  but  that  Michael  Holt  and  Get2Volume  do  not  subscribe  for  any 
Offer  Shares  and  no  other  Shares  are  issued),  Michael  Holt  and  Get2Volume  could 
have a maximum Voting Power of up to approximately 32.19%.
(d)
Section  611  (items  7(b)(iv)  and  7(b)(v)):    The maximum  extent  of  the  increase  in  the 
Voting Power of each of that person’s Associates that would result from the acquisition 
and the Voting Power that each of that person’s Associates would have as a result of 
the acquisition
In respect of Resolution 5, no associates of Michael Holt and Get2Volume hold Shares 
or  a  relevant  interest  in  the  Company,  other  than  a  relevant  interest  arising  from  the 
issue of Shares to Michael Holt and Get2Volume pursuant to the Acquisition.
In accordance with ASIC RG 74.25, the Company advises that:
(a)
Reasons for the proposed acquisition
The reasons for the Transaction are set out above at section 4.2.
(b)
When the proposed acquisition is to occur
Completion of the Acquisition will occur five business days after satisfaction or waiver 
of the conditions precedent to the Acquisition, at which time the Acquisition Shares and 
the Performance Shares will be issued.
The  Performance  Shares  may  convert  into  Shares  at  any  time  between  the  date  of 
issue and up to 60 months from the Re-admission Date, in accordance with the terms 
set out in Schedule 5.
(c)
Material terms of the proposed acquisition
The material terms of the Performance Shares are set out in Schedule 5.  The material 
terms  of  the  Acquisition  are  set  out  in  Schedule  2.    The  Acquisition  Shares  will  rank 
equally with all Shares on issue at the time of issue.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 37 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
(d)
Details of any other relevant agreement between the acquirer and the Company that is 
conditional or depends on members’ approval of the proposed acquisition
Each of the Resolutions in this Notice of Meeting are interconditional and, accordingly, 
the Acquisition is dependent on this Resolution  being approved.
(e)
Acquirer’s intentions regarding the future of  the  target  entity  if  members  approve  the 
acquisition
Each of Michael Holt and Get2Volume has advised the Company that it:
(1)
has no current intention to make any significant change to the existing business 
of the Company;
(2)
has no current intention to inject further capital into the Company;
(3)
intends that the Board will be in accordance with that detailed in section 4.10;
(4)
(5)
has no current intention to change the employment of any existing employees 
of gridComm and the Company;
does  not  intend  for  any  property  be  transferred  between  the  Company  and 
either the Michael Holt and Get2Volume or any person Associated  with  either 
of them; and
(6)
has no current intention to redeploy any of the Company's fixed assets.
(f)
Intention  of  the  acquirer  to  significantly  change  the  financial  or  dividend  distribution 
policies of the entity
Each of Michael Holt and Get2Volume has advised the Company that it has no current 
intention to change the Company's financial or dividend policies.
(g)
The  interests  that  any  Director  has  in  the  acquisition  or  any  relevant  agreement 
disclosed above.
As set out in section 4.1, several of the Austasia Shareholders are entities associated 
with (variously) Roland Berzins, Alex Bajada and David Ballantyne. As the Resolutions 
in  this  Notice  of  Meeting  are  inter-conditional,  the  Acquisition  is  dependent  on  this 
Resolution  5  being  approved.  Other  than  as  disclosed,  and  as  Shareholders  in  the 
Company, neither Mr Roland Berzins, Mr Alex Bajada nor Mr David Ballantyne has an 
interest  in  the  outcome  of  the  Acquisition.    Details  of  the  Shares  and  Options  of  the 
Directors and their associates as at the date of this Notice are as follows:
Director
Number  of  Shares 
(pre-
Consolidation)
Number  of  Shares 
(post-
Consolidation)
Number 
Options
of
Alex Bajada
28,386,668
Roland Berzins
2,083,333
David Ballantyne
2,400,000
811,048
59,524
68,571
Nil
Nil
Nil
(h)
Intended Directors if members approve the acquisition
On  completion  of  the  Acquisition,  the  board  of  the  Company  will  be  as  set  out  in 
section 4.10.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 38 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
6.7
Independent Expert’s Report
As set out in section 2.11, the Directors of the Company have commissioned the Independent 
Expert to prepare a report on the question of whether the Acquisition is fair and reasonable to 
the Shareholders not associated with the proposal.  That report accompanies the Notice.
After  considering  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  the  Acquisition  summarised  above 
and set out in more detail in section 11 of the Independent Expert’s Report, the Independent 
Expert  formed  the  view  that  the  Acquisition,  including,  relevantly,  the  potential  impact  on 
voting power the subject of this Resolution,  is fair and reasonable to Shareholders as at the 
date of the Independent Expert’s Report.
Shareholders  are  urged  to  read  and  consider  the  Independent  Expert’s  Report  which 
accompanies the Notice, prior to making a decision as to how to vote on Resolution 5.
6.8
Directors’ Recommendation
Based  on  the  information  available,  including  the  information  contained  in  this  Explanatory 
Memorandum  and  the  Independent  Expert’s  Report  and  the  advantages  and  disadvantages 
outlined in this Explanatory Memorandum and the Independent Expert’s Report, the Directors 
recommend  that  Shareholders  vote  in  favour  of  Resolution  5  -  Approval  of  the  issue  of 
Acquisition Shares and Performance Shares to Michael Holt and Get2Volume, for the following 
reasons:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
they consider that the Acquisition is in the best interests of the Company.  A detailed 
explanation  of  the  rationale  for  the  Acquisition  is  set  out  in  section  4.2  and  the 
advantages and disadvantages of the Acquisition are set out in section 4.3;
completion  of the  Acquisition is conditional upon the  passing  of all  of the Conditional 
Resolutions;
the  issue  of  Acquisition  Shares  and  Performance  Shares  is  the  consideration  for  the 
Company acquiring all of the Austasia Shares; and
RSM Corporate Australia Pty Ltd, in the Independent Expert's Report, has concluded 
that the Acquisition is fair and reasonable to the Non-Associated Shareholders.
In  summary,  the  Directors  consider  that  the  rationale  for  and  benefits  of  the  Acquisition 
outweigh  any  disadvantages  of  the  Acquisition,  and  other  reasons  why  they  would  consider 
voting against Resolution 5.
As the Directors have a personal interest in the outcome of Resolution 4, the Directors make 
no recommendation in respect of that Resolution.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 39 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
7.
Resolution 6 - Approval to issue Offer Shares under the Prospectus
7.1
General
Resolution 6 seeks Shareholder approval for the Company to undertake the Capital Raising by 
way of an offer to the public of between 30,000,000 and 40,000,000 Shares at an issue price 
of  $0.20  each  to  raise  between  $6  million  and  $8  million.    Shareholder  approval  is  required 
pursuant  to  Listing  Rule  7.1  before  the  Company  can  issue  the  Offer  Shares,  which  is  the 
subject of Resolution 6.
The specific details of the Capital Raising will be described in the Prospectus.  However, it is 
noted that the Capital Raising will not be undertaken if the Conditional Resolutions are not all 
passed and that no Offer Shares will be issued if the Acquisition does not complete.
7.2
Re-Compliance with Chapters 1 and 2
As previously identified, the Company will seek to re-comply with the requirements of Chapters 
1  and  2  of  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  for  admission  to  the  Official  List,  pending  approval  of  the 
Resolutions by Shareholders.  In re-complying with Chapters 1 and 2 of the ASX Listing Rules, 
Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 3 requires a company to issue and lodge a prospectus with ASIC.  
The  Prospectus  issued  by  the  Company  is  therefore  a  re-compliance  Prospectus  for  the 
purposes of Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules.
Listing Rule 2.1 outlines the conditions that must be satisfied for quotation of the main class of 
securities  of  an  entity  seeking  admission  to  the  Official  List.    Condition  2  specifies  that  the 
issue or sale price of the securities be at least 20 cents (20 Cent Rule).  Similarly, Condition 
11 of Listing Rule  1.1 provides that  any options on issue must be exercisable for at  least  20 
cents. As noted in section 2.8, the Company sought a waiver of the 20 Cent Rule, to permit an 
issue  price  and  exercise  price  of  10  cents.  However  this  waiver  was  not  granted  and 
accordingly the Offer Shares are being issued at 20 cents, and the options are exercisable at 
22 cents.
7.3
Listing Rule 7.1
In  accordance  with  Listing  Rule  7.3,  the  following  additional  information  is  provided  for  the 
purposes of Resolution 6:
(a)
up to 40,000,000 Offer Shares will be issued and allotted pursuant to the Prospectus;
(b)
(c)
(d)
the Offer Shares will be issued and allotted on completion of the Capital Raising but in 
any event no later than three months after the date of the Meeting (or such later date 
to the extent permitted by an ASX waiver or modification of the ASX Listing Rules)l
the issue  price of each  Offer Share  is  $0.20.  The Capital Raising  will raise  up  to $8 
million;
the allottees will be subscribers to the Capital Raising and the identity of the allottees 
is not known at this point in time;
(e)
the Offer Shares are fully paid ordinary shares;
(f)
on issue, the Offer Shares will rank equally with all Shares then on issue; and
(g)
the funds raised pursuant to the Capital Raising are intended to be applied to:
(1)
market, distribute and develop the gridComm suite of products and solutions;
(2)
pay the costs of the Transaction; and
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 40 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
(3)
provide funding for the working capital of the Company.
However, in the event that circumstances change or other beneficial opportunities arise, the 
Directors  reserve  the  right  to  vary  the  proposed  use  of  funds  to  maximise  the  benefit  to 
Shareholders. Further details on the use of funds is set out in Schedule 9.
7.4
Directors’ Recommendation
The Directors recommend that Shareholders vote in favour of Resolution 6.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 41 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
8.
Resolution 7, 8 and 9 - Approval of Directors Participating in the Capital Raising
8.1
General
It is proposed that each of the Directors will participate in the Capital Raising by subscribing for 
Shares  up  to  an  aggregate  maximum  total  of  250,000  Capital  Raising  Shares  (on  a  post 
Consolidation  basis)  (Director  Capital  Raising  Shares).  The  number  of  Director  Capital 
Raising  Shares  are  included  in  the  number  of  Offer  Shares  the  subject  of  Resolution  6.  If 
Resolutions 7, 8 or 9 are not passed, the Director Capital Raising Shares, the subject of those 
Resolutions, will instead be issued to unrelated third parties as part of the Offer Shares.
8.2
Listing Rule 10.11
Listing Rule 10.11 provides that a company must not (subject to specific exceptions) issue or 
agree to issue equity securities to a Related Party without the approval of shareholders. Each 
of  the  Directors  is  a  Related  Party  of  the  Company  by  virtue  of  being  a  director.  Therefore 
shareholder  approval  is  required  under  Listing  Rule  10.11  for  their  respective  participation  in 
the Capital Raising and the issue of the Director Capital Raising Shares to them. Each of the 
Directors'  participation  must  be  separately  approved  by  Shareholders  in  accordance  with 
Listing Rule 10.11.
Resolutions  7  to  9  seek  Shareholder  approval  under  Listing  Rule  10.11  for  the  issue  of  the 
Director Capital Raising Shares to the Directors. If approval is given under Listing Rule 10.11, 
the  Company  is  entitled  to  rely  on  Exception  14  of  Listing  Rule  7.2  as  an  exception  to  any 
requirement  for  shareholder  approval  under  Listing  Rule  7.1.  Accordingly,  shareholder 
approval is not required under Listing Rule 7.1.
Shareholder  approval  of  the  issue  of  the  Director  Capital  Raising  Shares  means  that  the 
Company will not use the Company's 15% Capital Raising capacity under the Listing Rule 7.1.
These Resolutions are conditional on each of the Conditional Resolutions being approved.
8.3
Chapter 2E of the Corporations Act
The  Company  is  seeking  separate  Shareholder  approval  under  Chapter  2E  of  the 
Corporations Act to each of the Directors’ participation in the Capital Raising.
Chapter  2E  of  the  Corporations  Act  prohibits  the  Company  from  giving  a  financial  benefit  to 
related parties of the Company unless either:
(a)
the  giving  of  the  financial  benefit  falls  within  one  of  the  nominated  exceptions  to  the 
relevant provisions of the Corporations Act; or
(b)
prior shareholder approval has been obtained for the giving of the financial benefit.
Any Director Capital Raising Shares  issued to  a Director  will constitute a financial  benefit for 
the purposes of Chapter 2E of the Corporations Act. The Director Capital Raising Shares will 
be issued at the same price as the other Capital Raising Shares. The board believes that the 
“arms’  length”  exception  in  section  210  of  the  Corporations  Act  to  the  requirement  to  seek 
Shareholder approval under Chapter 2E of the Corporations Act is available to the Company.  
However,  as  the  Company  is  already  required  to  seek  Shareholder  approval  to  the  issue  of 
any Director Capital Raising Shares to the Directors under the Listing Rules, the Company has 
decided to also seek Shareholder approval under Chapter 2E of the Corporations Act.
8.4
Specific information required by Listing Rule 10.13
For  the  purpose  of  Listing  Rule  10.13,  the  following  information  is  provided  in  relation  to  the 
issue of Director Capital Raising Shares under Resolutions 7 to 9:
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 42 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
(a)
The maximum number of Shares to be issued to the Directors (or their nominee(s)) is:
(1)
(2)
(3)
Up  to  250,000  Director  Capital  Raising  Shares  to  Mr  Roland  Berzins  (or  his 
nominee(s)) (on a post Consolidation basis);
up  to  250,000  Director  Capital  Raising  Shares  to  Mr  David  Ballantyne  (or  his 
nominee(s)) (on a post Consolidation basis); and
up  to  250,000  Director  Capital  Raising  Shares  to  Mr  Alex  Bajada  (or  his 
nominee(s)) (on a post Consolidation basis).
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
ASX has granted a waiver of the requirements of Listing Rule 10.13.3. Ordinarily, 
Listing Rule 10.13.3 would require the Company to specify a date by which the 
Director Capital Raising Shares would be issued to related parties, with that date being 
no more than 1 month after the date of the Meeting. However, based on the conditions 
of the waiver granted by ASX, the Director Capital Raising Shares will be issued at the 
same time as the other Capital Raising Shares, with all allotments to occur within 3 
months after the date of the meeting.
The Director Capital Raising Shares will be issued at an issue price of $0.20 each. It 
will  be  issued  at  the  same  price  and  on  the  same  terms  and  conditions  as  those 
Capital Raising Shares issued to other participants in the Capital Raising. A maximum 
of $150,000 will be raised from the issue of the Director Capital Raising Shares.
The Director Capital Raising Shares will be fully paid ordinary shares of the Company 
and rank equally in all respect with the Company's existing Shares on issue.
The funds raised from the issue of Director Capital Raising Shares will be aggregated 
with,  and  used  for  the  same  purpose  as,  the  funds  raised  from  the  Capital  Raising 
(and in accordance with Section 7.3).
8.5
Chapter 2E of the Corporations Act
In accordance with the requirements of Chapter 2E of the Corporations Act, and in particular, 
section  219  of  the  Corporations  Act,  the  following  information  is  provided  to  Shareholders  to 
enable  them  to  assess  the  proposed  participation  of  the  Directors  in  the  Capital  Raising  and 
the potential issue of Director Capital Raising Shares to each of them:
(a)
Each  of  the  Directors  is  a  Related  Party  of  the  Company  to  whom  approval  of 
Resolution 7 (in the case of Mr Roland Berzins), Resolution 8 (in the case of Mr David 
Ballantyne)  and  Resolution  9  (in  the  case  of  Mr  Alex  Bajada)  would  permit  financial 
benefits to be given.
(b)
The  nature  of  the  financial  benefit  to  be  given  to  a  Director  (or  their  nominee)  is  the 
issue of, and subscription for:
(1)
(2)
(3)
up  to  250,000  Director  Capital  Raising  Shares  to  Mr  Roland  Berzins  (or  his 
nominee(s)) (on a post Consolidation basis) which represents a value of up to 
$50,000 in accordance with Resolution 7;
up  to  250,000  Director  Capital  Raising  Shares  to  Mr  David  Ballantyne  (or  his 
nominee(s)) (on a post Consolidation basis) which represents a value of up to 
$50,000 in accordance with Resolution 8; and
up  to  250,000  Director  Capital  Raising  Shares  to  Mr  Alex  Bajada  (or  his 
nominee(s)) (on a post Consolidation basis) which represents a value of up to 
$50,000 in accordance with Resolution 9.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 43 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
(c)
The highest, lowest and last trading prices (pre Consolidation) of the Shares during the 
12 months prior to the last practicable day for finalising this Explanatory Memorandum 
(being 18 July 2016) are set out below:
Description  Date
Share Price
High
Low
Last
15 December 2015
17 September 2015
18 July 2016
$0.043
$0.001
$0.010
(d)
As  at  21  July  2016,  being  the  last  practicable  date  before  finalising  this  Explanatory 
Memorandum,  the  Directors  each  had  the  following  relevant  interests  in  pre 
Consolidation Shares of the Company:
Name of Directors
Securities  in  the 
Company 
(pre-
Consolidation)
Interest 
Company (%)
in
the
Securities  in  the 
Company 
(post-
Consolidation)
Roland Berzins
2,083,333
David Ballantyne
2,400,000
Alex Bajada
28,386,668
0.37%
0.43%
5.04%
59,524
68,572
811,048
(e)
The  issue  of  Director  Capital  Raising  Shares  to  the  Directors  will  have  a  dilutionary 
impact on the percentage interests of existing Shareholders.  Based on the number of 
Shares  on  issue  as  at  21  July  2016,  being  the  last  practicable  date  before  finalising 
this Explanatory Memorandum, set out below is a scenario of the dilutionary impact on 
existing Shareholders of the issue of Director Capital Raising Shares to the Directors, 
assuming the following:
(1)
the Acquisitions have been completed with the issue of Acquisition Shares;
(2)
the Conversion Shares (Resolution 10) are issued to Austasia Noteholders;
(3)
(4)
the minimum number of Capital Raising Shares have been issued in respect of 
the Capital Raising; and
the  maximum  number  of  Director  Capital  Raising  Shares  are  issued  to  each 
Director.
Dilution as a result of Resolution 7 (on a post Consolidation basis):
Number of Shares
Shares  on  Issue  (as  at  the  date  of  this  Notice  of  Meeting) 
and no additional securities have been issued
16,076,845
Add:
New Total
124,363,965
140,440,810
Resolution: Director Capital Raising Shares to be issued to 
Mr Roland Berzins
250,000
Dilution Effect
0.18%
Dilution as a result of Resolution 8 (on a post Consolidation basis):
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 44 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
Number of Shares
Shares  on  Issue  (as  at  the  date  of  this  Notice  of 
Meeting) and no additional securities have been issued
16,076,845
Add:
New Total
124,363,965
140,440,810
Resolution: Director Capital Raising Shares to be issued 
to Mr David Ballantyne
250,000
Dilution Effect
0.18%
Dilution as a result of Resolution 9 (on a post Consolidation basis):
Number of Shares
Shares  on  Issue  (as  at  the  date  of  this  Notice  of 
Meeting) and no additional securities have been issued
16,076,845
Add:
New Total
124,363,965
140,440,810
Resolution: Director Capital Raising Shares to be issued 
to Mr Alex Bajada
250,000
Dilution Effect
0.18%
(f)
(g)
(h)
Any funds raised from the issue of the Director Capital Raising Shares to the Directors 
will be applied in the same manner as the other funds raised in the Capital Raising.
There are no significant opportunity costs to the Company, taxation consequences or 
benefits foregone in issuing the Director Capital Raising Shares to the Directors on the 
terms proposed.
The Directors are not aware of any information other than that set out in the Notice or 
this Explanatory Memorandum that is reasonably required by Shareholders in order for 
them  to  decide  whether  or  not  it  is  in  the  Company’s  interest  to  pass  Resolution  7, 
Resolution 8 or Resolution 9.
8.6
Directors' recommendation
The Directors will not make a recommendation in relation to these Resolutions as they may participate 
in the Capital Raising and be issued Director Capital Raising Shares.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 45 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
9.
Resolution 10 - Approval of the Issue of Conversion Shares to Austasia 
Noteholders
9.1
Background
Austasia has raised, or will raise, up to $900,000 by the issue of convertible notes with a face 
value  of  $1.00  each.  The  Company  understands  that  the  funds  raised  have  been,  or  will  be, 
loaned  to  gridComm  to  provide  funding  for  its  operations  pending  completion  of  the 
Transaction.
The terms of the Austasia Notes provide that if the Transaction completes, the Austasia Notes 
are convertible into Shares at a conversion price of 50% of the issue price of the Offer Shares 
(ie $0.10).
Accordingly,  upon  conversion  of  the  Austasia  Notes,  the  Company  will  issue  to  the  Austasia 
Noteholders (or their nominees) up to 9,000,000 Conversion Shares at a deemed issue price 
of  $0.10  each  upon  conversion  of  the  outstanding  balance  of  the  Austasia  Notes  (excluding 
accrued interest).
None of the Noteholders are Related Parties of the Company.
9.2
Key Terms of Austasia Notes
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Status: Unlisted and convertible into Shares. Each Converting Note will rank equally 
in all respects with other Converting Notes.
Face value: Each Converting Note has a face value of $1.00. The total face value of 
the Converting Notes is $900,000.
Transfer: The Converting Notes cannot be sold, assigned or transferred.
Maturity Date: 10 March 2017.
Interest Rate: Each Converting Note is interest bearing at a rate of 10% per annum.
Security: The Converting Notes are unsecured.
(g)
Events of default: Each of the following is an event of default:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
the  Company  failing  to  make  any  payment  due  in  accordance  with  the  terms 
and conditions of the Converting Notes;
the  Company  failing  to  perform  any  of  the  terms  and  covenants  of  the 
Converting Notes and such default, if remediable, is not remedied for 30 days 
after notice from Noteholders requiring such default to be remedied;
any  of 
misleading; or
the  Company's  representations  and  warranties  being
false  or
(iv)
the Company suffering an insolvency event.
Upon  an  event  of  default  occurring,  a  Noteholder  may  declare  the  Converting  Notes 
(held  by  them)  due  and  payable  (which  will  be  payable  by  the  Company  within  20 
Business Days of receiving such a declaration). The total amount due and payable is 
the face value of the Converting Notes held by that Noteholder (Total Amount).
(h)
Conversion: Each Converting Note is convertible into Shares (Conversion Shares) at 
the  conversion  price  which  is  $0.10  for  each  Conversion  Share  issued  upon  the
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 46 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
conversion  of  the  Converting  Notes  (on  a  post  Consolidation  basis)  (Conversion 
Price).
(i)
Mandatory Conversion Event: Upon:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
the  Company  receiving  valid  Application  Forms  for  the  Shares  offered  under 
the Public Offer equivalent to, or in excess of, the Minimum Offer Subscription;
ASX  giving  the  Company  conditional  approval  for  the  Company  to  be  re-
admitted to the Official List; and
the Board, acting reasonably and in good faith, resolving that the Company is 
able to satisfy the conditions attached to ASX's approval for the Company to be 
readmitted to the Official List,
(Mandatory  Conversion  Event),  the  Company  must  convert  all  of  the  Converting 
Notes  by  delivering  a  conversion  notice  to  the  Noteholders  within  5  Business  Days 
after the Mandatory Conversion Event has occurred.
Conversion Right: If the Mandatory Conversion Event has not occurred, the Company 
may convert all the Converting Notes no more than 10  Business Days, and at least 3 
Business Days, before the Maturity Date.
Early Redemption: The Company can elect to redeem the Converting Notes, on any 
date that falls 3 months after their issue date, by paying the Total Amount.
Repayment: If the Company has not converted or redeemed the Converting Notes by 
the Maturity Date, and there has been no event of default, the Company must pay the 
Total Amount by the Maturity Date.
Number  of  Shares  issued  upon  Conversion:  The  number  of  Conversion  Shares 
issued upon the conversion of the Converting Notes will be calculated by dividing the 
total  face  value  of  the  Converting  Notes  by  the  Conversion  Price  of  the  Converting 
Notes.
Conversion  Shares  subject  to  escrow  restrictions:  Some  or  all  of  the  Conversion 
Shares may be subject to escrow as determined by ASX.
Issue of Shares upon conversion of the Converting Notes: All Conversion Shares 
issued  upon  the  conversion  of  the  Converting  Notes  will  rank  equally  in  all  respects 
with all other Shares on issue as at the issue date of the Conversion Shares.
Breach of section 606 of the Corporations Act:  If the conversion of the Converting 
Notes  will result in a Noteholder contravening section 606(1) of the Corporations Act, 
the conversion of the Converting Notes will be deferred and the Company will convene 
a meeting to seek Shareholder approval for the conversion of the Converting Notes. If 
such  Shareholder  approval  is  not  obtained,  the  Company  will  pay  the  Noteholder  an 
amount  equal  to  the  aggregate  face  value  of  the  Converting  Notes  the  conversion  of 
which will result in a contravention of section 606(1) of the Corporations Act.
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(p)
9.3
Regulatory Requirements
Under  Resolution  10,  the  Company  is  seeking  shareholder  approval  to  issue  Conversion 
Shares through the conversion of the Austasia Notes.
The effect of Resolution 10 will be to allow the Conversion Shares to be issued without using 
the Company's 15% annual placement capacity.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 47 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
9.4
Listing Rule 7.3
Pursuant to and in accordance with the Listing Rule 7.3, the following information is provided 
in relation to the Austasia:
There  are  no  new  Austasia  Notes  issued  under  Resolution  10.  If  Resolution  10  is 
approved the maximum number of  Conversion  Shares which  will be issued upon the 
conversion of the Austasia Notes is 9,000,000 Shares (on a post consolidation basis).
The Conversion Shares will be issued no later than three months after the date of this 
Meeting (or such later date to the extent permitted by any ASX waiver or modification 
of the Listing Rules).
Each Austasia Note has a face value of $1.00. Each Austasia Note is convertible at a 
Conversion Price of A$0.10 for each Conversion Share.
The  terms  of  the  Austasia  Notes  are  described  in  Section  9.2  above.  All  Conversion 
Shares  issued  upon  the  conversion  of  the  Austasia  Notes  will  be  fully  paid  ordinary 
shares in the capital of the Company and will rank equally with the existing Shares on 
issue.
As the issue of Conversion Shares will be in satisfaction  of the amounts owing under 
the  Austasia  Notes,  there  will  be  no  new  funds  raised  from  the  conversion  of  the 
Austasia Notes.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Dilution as a result of Resolution 10 (on a post Consolidation basis):
Number of Shares
Shares  on  Issue  (as  at  the  date  of  this  Notice  of 
Meeting) and no additional securities have been issued
16,076,845
Resolution 10: Conversion Shares to be issued
New Total
Dilution Effect
9.5
Directors’ Resolution
9,000,000
25,076,845
35.89%
The Directors unanimously recommend that Shareholders vote in favour of Resolution 10.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 48 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
10.
Resolution 11 - Change of Company Name
Section  157  of  the  Corporations  Act  requires  the  Company  to  pass  a  Special  Resolution  in 
order  to  adopt  a  new  name.    The  Directors  have  recommended  to  the  Shareholders  that, 
subject  to  their  approval,  the  passing  of  the  Conditional  Resolutions  and  completing  the 
Acquisition,  the  name  of  the  Company  be  changed  to  "gridComm  Limited".    As  a  Special 
Resolution, this Resolution must be passed by at least 75% of the votes cast by Shareholders 
entitled to vote on this Resolution.
The  Directors  believe  that  the  name  of  the  Company  needs  to  change  as  a  result  of  the 
Company's proposed change in business activities as a result of completing the Acquisition.
The Directors unanimously recommend that Shareholders vote in favour of the name change 
to reflect the proposed future direction of the business of the Company.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 49 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
11.
Resolution 12 - Approval for the Issue of Advisor Options
11.1  Background
Resolution 12 seeks Shareholder approval to issue up to 15,000,000 Advisor Options to any 
corporate advisors, brokers or underwriters to the Capital Raising in full or part consideration 
for services provided to the Company in respect of the Capital Raising or prior capital raisings. 
The ability to issue Advisor Options in full or part payment for such services provides the 
Company with flexibility to ensure its cash resources are being deployed in the best possible 
way.
11.2  Listing Rule 7.1
For the purposes of Listing Rule 7.3, the Company advises that:
(a)
the maximum number of securities to be issued is 15,000,000 Advisor Options;
(b)
(c)
(d)
the Advisory Options will each have an exercise price of $0.22 and an expiry date of 
31 December 2018. Each Advisory Option will have an issue price of $0.0001 each.
the Advisor Options will be issued within three months of the date of the Meeting (or 
such later date to the extent permitted by an ASX waiver or modification of the ASX 
Listing Rules);
the Advisor Options will be issued in full or part consideration for services provided to 
the Company in respect of the Capital Raising or prior capital raisings and as such, 
there will not be any funds raised from the issue of the Advisor Shares;
(e)
the full terms and conditions of the Advisor Options are set out in Schedule 6; and
(f)
the Advisor Options will be issued to corporate advisors, brokers or underwriters to the 
Capital Raising or to prior capital raisings undertaken by the Company and will not be 
issued to any Related Parties of the Company.
11.3  Directors Recommendation
The Directors recommend shareholders vote in favour of this Resolution 12.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 50 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
12.
Resolution 13 - Approval of ESOP
12.1
Introduction
The  Company  proposes  to  adopt  an  employee  share  and  option  plan  (ESOP)  pursuant  to 
which issued capital of the Company may be made available to directors, senior management 
and staff as a form of longer term equity incentive.
Pursuant to Resolution 13, the Company is seeking Shareholder approval to adopt the ESOP 
and  approval  for  any  potential  future  issue  of  securities  under  the  Company’s  ESOP  as  an 
exception under Listing Rule 7.2, Exception 9(b) to Listing Rules 7.1 and 7.1A.
While  the  Company  does  not  have  a  formal  employee  share  and  option  plan,  the  Company 
has previously issued Shares and Options to directors and employees. The number of Options 
issued,  the  strike  price  of  Options  issued  and  all  other  relevant  terms  have  been  set  having 
regard to the person’s position in the Company and level of experience.
Over  the  past  three  years,  the  Company  has  issued  no  shares  or  options  to  directors  and 
employees,  other  than  shares  issued  and  paid  for  in  rights  issue  offers  either  pursuant  to 
entitlements or from shortfall applications (with shareholder approval)
Approval  of  the  ESOP  is  therefore  sought  under  exception  9  to  Listing  Rule  7.2  so  that  any 
issue of securities under the ESOP over the next 3 years is disregarded when determining the 
15% threshold of the Company.
A summary of the ESOP is set out in Schedule 8 to this Notice of Meeting.
12.2  Directors Recommendation
The Directors recommends that Shareholders vote  in  favour of this Resolution  13 because it 
considers  the  issue  of  securities  under  the  ESOP  will  constitute  an  effective  incentive  to 
eligible participants to improve the performance of the Company.   Additionally, the Company 
believes  it  to  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the  Company  to  preserve  the  maximum  commercial 
flexibility to issue Shares that is afforded to it by Listing Rule 7.1.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 51 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
13.
Voting entitlement
For the purposes of determining voting entitlements at the Meeting, shares will be taken to be 
held by the persons who are registered as holding the Shares on 28th August 2016 at 5:00 PM 
(WST).
Accordingly,  transactions  registered  after  that  time  will  be  disregarded  in  determining 
entitlements to attend and vote at the Meeting.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 52 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
14.
Interpretation
The  following  terms  used  in  the  Notice  of  Meeting  and  the  Explanatory  Memorandum  are 
defined as follows:
15% Capacity has the meaning given to that term in section 2.2.
Acquisition means the acquisition by the Company of 100% of the issued capital of Austasia.
Acquisition Shares means the issue and allotment to the Austasia Shareholders of a total of 
85,363,965  Shares  at  a  deemed  issue  price  of  $0.20  each  in  the  proportions  set  out  in 
Schedule 1.
Advisors means any corporate advisors, brokers or underwriters to the Capital Raising.
Advisor  Options  means  up  to  15,000,000  Options  to  be  issued  to  Advisors  for  services 
provided to the Company in respect of the Capital Raising.
ASIC means the Australian Securities and Investments Commission.
Associate has the meaning given to that term in the Corporations Act.
ASX means the ASX Limited.
Austasia means Austasia Industrial Pty Ltd ACN 605 692 475.
Austasia Notes means the convertible notes on issue by Austasia.
Austasia Shares means a share in the issued capital of Austasia
Austasia  Shareholders  means  the  holders  of  Austasia  Shares  who  hold  (or  will  hold) 
Austasia Shares in the proportions set out in Schedule 1.
Board means the board of Directors of the Company from time to time.
Capital  Raising  means  the  public  offer  under  the  Prospectus  to  raise  between  $6,000,000 
and $8,000,000 through the issue of between 30,000,000 and 40,000,000 Offer Shares at an 
issue price of $0.20 per Share.
Class A Performance Shares means Performance Shares to be issued pursuant to the SSA 
to the Austasia Shareholders on the terms set out in Schedule 5.
Class B Performance Shares means Performance Shares to be issued pursuant to the SSA 
to the Austasia Shareholders on the terms set out in Schedule 5.
Class C Performance Shares means Performance Shares to be issued pursuant to the SSA 
to the Austasia Shareholders on the terms set out in Schedule 5.
Class D Performance Shares means Performance Shares to be issued pursuant to the SSA 
to the Austasia Shareholders on the terms set out in Schedule 5.
Class E Performance Shares means Performance Shares to be issued pursuant to the SSA 
to the Austasia Shareholders on the terms set out in Schedule 5.
Class F Performance Shares means Performance Shares to be issued pursuant to the SSA 
to the Austasia Shareholders on the terms set out in Schedule 5.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 53 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
Closely Related Party or CRP (as defined in section 9 of the Corporations Act) of a member 
of the Key Management Personnel for an entity means:
(a)
a spouse or child of the member;
(b)
(c)
(d)
a child of the member’s spouse;
a dependant of the member or the member’s spouse;
anyone else who is one of the member’s family and may be expected to influence the 
member, or be influenced by the member, in the member’s dealings with the entity;
(e)
a company the member controls; or
(f)
a  person  prescribed  by  the  regulations  for  the  purposes  of  the  definition  of  closely 
related party.
Company means Odin Energy Limited ACN 124 491 416.
Completion means completion of the Acquisition.
Conditional  Approval  means  a  conditional  approval  letter  from  the  ASX  to  the  Company 
confirming that, subject to completion of the Acquisition, the equity securities of the Company 
will be re-admitted to quotation on the Official List of ASX.
Conditional Resolutions means each of Resolutions 1 to 13.
Consolidation means the consolidation of the Company’s Shares on the basis that every  35 
shares are consolidated into 1 Share, with fractional entitlements rounded up.
Constitution means the constitution of the Company from time to time.
Conversion Shares means Shares to be issued on conversion of the Austasia Notes.
Corporations Act means the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) as amended from time to time.
Directors means the directors of the Company from time to time.
Equity Securities has the meaning given to that term in the Listing Rules.
ESOP  means  the  Company’s  Employee  Share  and  Option  Plan  the  terms  of  which  are 
summarised in Schedule 8.
Explanatory Memorandum means the explanatory memorandum accompanying this Notice.
Get2Volume means Get2Volume Pte Ltd UEN 200606764Z.
gridComm means gridComm Pte Ltd UEN 201222120Z.
gridComm Shares means a share in the issued capital of gridComm.
gridComm  Shareholders  means  the  holders  of  gridComm  Shares,  who  hold  gridComm 
Shares in the proportions set out in Schedule 1 and who have agreed to sell 94% of the issued 
capital of gridComm to Austasia pursuant to the gridComm SSA.
gridComm  Solution  means  the  SLMS  developed  by  gridComm,  the  application  of  software, 
applications, IT systems and other technologies owned or licenced by gridComm enabling the
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 54 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
creation of a network over a city’s power lines to enable street lights light control and sensor 
data communications.
gridCommSSA  means  the  securities  sale  agreement  entered  into  between  gridComm,  the 
girdComm Shareholders Austasia and Austasia Shareholders, as varied by the parties.
Independent Expert means RSM Corporate Australia Pty Ltd ACN 050 508 024.
Independent Expert’s Report or IER means the report prepared by the Independent Expert 
and dated July 2016 accompanying this Notice.
IoT means "Internet of Things", further information of  which  is outlined  in  paragraph  0 of the 
Explanatory Memorandum.
IP means intellectual property.
Key  Management  Personnel  or  KMP  has  the  definition  given  in  the  Accounting  Standard 
AASB  124 Related  Party  Disclosure as ‘those persons having authority and responsibility for 
planning,  directing  and  controlling  the  activities  of  the  entity,  directly  and  indirectly,  including 
any director (whether executive or otherwise) of that entity’.
Listing Rules means the official listing rules of the ASX as amended from time to time.
Market Price means the closing market price as that term is defined in the Listing Rules.
Meeting means the Extraordinary General Meeting  of Shareholders  to be held on  30 August 
2016 as convened by the accompanying Notice of Meeting.
Non-Associated Shareholders means the holders of the Company’s Shares whose votes are 
not to be disregarded on Resolutions 2 and 5 respectively.
Notice of Meeting or Notice means the notice of meeting giving notice to shareholders of the 
Meeting, accompanying this Explanatory Memorandum.
Offer  Shares  means  the  new  Shares  being  offered  under  the  Prospectus  (being  between 
30,000,000 and 40,000,000 Shares) at a subscription price of $0.20 per Share.
Option means an option to subscribe for a Share.
Ordinary Resolution means a resolution passed by more than 50% of the votes at a general 
meeting of Shareholders.
Performance Shares means the Class A Performance Shares, Class B Performance Shares, 
Class C Performance Shares, Class D Performance Shares, Class E Performance Shares and 
the Class F Performance Shares.
Preference Shares means preference shares in the Company on issue as at the date of this 
Notice.
PLC means power line communications.
Prospectus means a full form prospectus in accordance with section 710 of the Corporations 
Act with respect to the Capital Raising.
Odin or the Company means Odin Energy Limited ACN 124 491 416.
Re-admission  Date  means  the  date  on  which  the  Company’s  Equity  Securities  are  re-
admitted to quotation on the Official List of ASX.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 55 of 74
Explanatory Memorandum
Related Party has the meaning given to that term in section 228 of the Corporations Act.
Resolutions means the resolutions set out in the Notice of Meeting.
Securities has the meaning in section 92(1) of the Corporations Act.
Shares means fully paid ordinary shares in the Company from time to time.
Shareholder means a shareholder of the Company.
SLMS means the Street Light Management Solution developed by gridComm.
Special Resolution means a resolution:
(a)
(b)
of which notice has been given as set out in paragraph 249L(1)(c) of the Corporations 
Act; and
that has been passed by at least 75% of the votes cast by members entitled to vote on 
the resolution.
SSA means the securities sale agreement  entered  into between the Company,  Austasia and 
Austasia Shareholders, as varied by the parties.
Subsidiary has the meaning given to that term in the Corporations Act.
Trading Day has the meaning given to that term in the Listing Rules.
Transaction has the meaning set out in Section 1 of the Explanatory Memorandum.
Voting Power has the meaning given to that term in the Corporations Act.
Any  inquiries  in  relation  to  the  Resolutions  or  the  Explanatory  Memorandum  should  be  directed  to 
Roland Berzins (Company Secretary):
Suite 4, 16 Ord Street, West Perth WA 6005
Telephone: +61 8 9429 2900
Facsimile No: +61 8 9486 1011
Email: rberzins@gcpcapital.com.au
1559897 - 12090421v5
Page 56 of 74
Schedule 1 - Shareholders
gridComm Shareholders
Name
Get2Volume Pte Ltd  
(UEN  200606764Z)
Chan Kwok Sum Samuel
Melvyn Yeo Hak Boon
Michael Lawrence Holt
Chua Thiam Leng
Nge Tuck Long
Dai Li Zhou
TYLT Lab Partners 1 LP
Jen Kwong Hwa
Yeo Yong
Chuang Toon Lin
Lim Tee Yeow
Tralvex Yeap
Adrosaga Partners (Asia) Pte Ltd 
(UEN  201201211Z)
Phillip Carlton
Miniata Technologies Pty Ltd  
(ACN 140701248)
OnTrack Advisory Pte Ltd 
(UEN  201003182K)
Burton Chua Chua
Hon Tow Siew Mark
Koh Ching Peh
Jen Soe Fun
Total
1559897 - 12090421v5
gridComm          
Ordinary Shares Held
Austasia Ordinary Shares
Issued
291,309
28,623,126
17,391
26,087
168,007
156,705
283,333
1,708,786
2,563,228
16,507,851
15,397,351
27,839,429
283,333
27,839,429
22,335
18,624
17,855
61,143
8,928
2,653
89,277
8,928
10,000
17,850
3,571
8,925
3,571
2,194,568
1,829,937
1,754,377
6,007,723
877,238
260,676
0
877,238
982,569
1,753,886
350,875
876,943
350,875
26,785
2,361,810
1,526,610
141,227,917
Austasia Acquisition Shares
Austasia Shareholders
Austasia Ordinary
Acquisition  Shares to be
Shares held
issued
Get2Volume Pte Ltd  
(UEN  200606764Z)
Chan Kwok Sum Samuel
Melvyn Yeo Hak Boon
Michael Lawrence Holt
Chua Thiam Leng
Nge Tuck Long
Dai Li Zhou
TYLT Lab Partners 1 LP
Jen Kwong Hwa
Yeo Yong
Chuang Toon Lin
Lim Tee Yeow
Tralvex Yeap
Miniata Technologies Pty Ltd  
(ACN 140701248)
OnTrack Advisory Pte Ltd 
(UEN  201003182K)
Burton Chua Chua
Hon Tow Siew Mark
Koh Ching Peh
Jen Soe Fun
Phillip Carlton
AAG Management Pty Ltd  
(ACN 125 476 824)
Hallcrest Investments Pty Ltd  
(ACN 164 752 361)
1559897 - 12090421v5
28,623,126
14,311,563
1,708,786
2,563,228
16,507,851
15,397,351
854,393
1,281,614
8,253,926
7,698,676
27,839,429
13,919,715
27,839,429
13,919,715
2,194,568
1,829,937
1,754,377
6,007,723
877,238
260,676
982,569
1,753,886
350,875
876,943
350,875
2,631,812
6,727,238
1,097,284
914,969
877,189
3,003,862
438,619
130,338
491,285
876,943
175,438
438,472
175,438
1,315,906
3,363,619
14,849,748
7,424,874
3,093,616
1,546,808
Judicium Pty Ltd 
(ACN 167 005 138)
Spartan Nominees Pty Ltd 
(ACN 099 822 081)
Sandgroper Pty Ltd 
(ACN 065 049 032)
GCP Capital Pty Ltd 
(ACN 161 764 647)
R H and C M Berzins
Sealblue Investments Pty Ltd 
(ACN 133 164 726)
Total
Class A Performance Shares
225,020
112,510
2,630,949
1,315,475
479,057
1,452,780
384,408
534,422
239,529
726,390
192,204
267,211
170,727,923
85,363,965
Austasia Shareholders
Class A Performance 
Shares   to be Issued
Get2Volume Pte Ltd  
(UEN  200606764Z)
Michael Lawrence Holt
Nge Tuck Long
Jen Kwong Hwa
Lim Tee Yeow
Lim Song Joo
Total
Class B Performance Shares
10,003,546
10,954,970
10,954,970
568,080
303,265
632,618
33,417,449
Austasia Shareholders
Class B Performance 
Shares   to be Issued
Get2Volume Pte Ltd  
(UEN  200606764Z)
Michael Lawrence Holt
Nge Tuck Long
Jen Kwong Hwa
Lim Tee Yeow
Lim Song Joo
Total
1559897 - 12090421v5
10,003,546
10,954,970
10,954,970
568,080
303,266
632,618
33,417,450
Class C Performance Shares
Austasia Shareholders
Class C Performance 
Shares   to be Issued
Get2Volume Pte Ltd  
(UEN  200606764Z)
Michael Lawrence Holt
Nge Tuck Long
Jen Kwong Hwa
Lim Tee Yeow
Lim Song Joo
Total
Class D Performance Shares
10,003,546
10,954,970
10,954,970
568,080
303,266
632,618
33,417,450
Austasia Shareholders
Class D Performance 
Shares   to be Issued
AAG Management Pty Ltd  
(ACN 125 476 824)
Phillip Carlton
Total
Class E Performance Shares
2,275,000
975,000
3,250,000
Austasia Shareholders
Class E Performance 
Shares   to be Issued
AAG Management Pty Ltd  
(ACN 125 476 824)
Phillip Carlton
Total
Class F Performance Shares
2,275,000
975,000
3,250,000
Austasia Shareholders
Class F Performance 
Shares   to be Issued
2,275,000
975,000
3,250,000
AAG Management Pty Ltd  
(ACN 125 476 824)
Phillip Carlton
Total
1559897 - 12090421v5
Schedule 2 - Material Terms of Acquisition
1.
Parties
Each of Odin, Austasia and the Austasia Shareholders are a party to the SSA.
Each  of  Austasia,  gridComm  and  the  gridCOmm  Shareholders  are  a  party  to  the  gridComm 
SSA.
2.
Acquisition
On  or  about  18  March  2016,  the  Parties  executed  the  SSA  and  the  gridComm  SSA  to 
facilitate,  upon  satisfaction  of  the  Conditions  Precedent  outlined  in  paragraph  3  below,  Odin 
acquiring all of issued capital in Austasia.
As a result of the refusal by ASX of the Company’s application for a waiver of the 20 cent rule 
(as set out in section 2.8), the SSA is to be amended to reflect an issue price of 20 cents and a 
consolidation  ratio  of  35  to  1,  together  with  minor  consequential  amendments.  A  deed  of 
amendment was executed on or about 18July 2016 to give effect to those amendments. As a 
result of the amendment, the terms of the SSA are as set out herein.
Completion  will  occur  on  a  date  that  is  5  business  days  after  the  satisfaction  of  all  of  the 
Conditions Precedent, or some other date agreed to by Odin and Austasia.
3.
Conditions Precedent
Completion  is  conditional  upon  the  satisfaction  (or  waiver,  to  the  extent  permitted  by  law)  of 
the following conditions precedent:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Odin completing legal due diligence investigations, in its absolute satisfaction including 
in relation to the Austasia Shareholders, the Company, gridComm (and its intellectual 
property rights).
Odin’s  shareholders  passing  all  resolutions  as  are  required  under  the  ASX  Listing 
Rules,  the  constitution  of  Odin  and  the  Corporations  Act  to  give  effect  to  the 
transactions contemplated by the SSA.
Odin  obtaining  all  necessary  regulatory  approvals  pursuant  to  the  ASX  Listing  Rules 
and  the  Corporations  Act  or  any  other  law  in  order  for  Completion  to  occur  including 
but  not  limited  to  approval  from  ASX  to  reinstatement  of  Odin  to  official  quotation  on 
ASX following Completion on conditions satisfactory to Odin.
Receipt by Odin of applications and funds for a minimum of $6,000,000 (or such other 
amount  that  is  sufficient  to  meet  ASX  Listing  Rule  1.3)  through  the  issue  of  Odin 
Energy  Shares  pursuant  to  a  prospectus  at  an  issue  price  of  $0.20  each  (on  a  post-
Consolidation basis) (Capital Raising).
Odin  completing  the  Consolidation  in  compliance  with  applicable  laws  and  the  ASX 
Listing Rules including obtaining the necessary shareholder approval.
Odin obtaining confirmation from ASX that the terms of the Odin Performance Shares 
are appropriate and equitable for the purposes of ASX Listing Rule 6.1. The parties will 
agree  any  necessary  amendments  to  the  terms  of  the  Odin  Performance  Shares 
required to obtain ASX approval.
Each of the Austasia Shareholders waiving all pre-emptive or other rights over any of 
the  Securities  conferred  by  the  constituent  documents  of  the  Company,  any  security 
holders agreement relating to those securities or in any other way (if any).
1559897 - 12090421v5
(h)
The  number  of  Odin  Shares  (post  Consolidation)  not  exceeding  16,100,000,  the 
number of the number of Odin Preference Shares not exceeding 7,000 and there being 
no other shares, options, securities of any kind, convertible notes or other agreements 
or arrangements issued by Odin or to which Odin is a party which will or may give rise 
to an obligation on the part of Odin to issue any shares or options whatsoever.
(i)
The  Austasia  Shareholders  being  satisfied,  acting  reasonably,  with  the  result  of  their 
due diligence investigations in respect of Odin.
(together the Conditions Precedent). If the Conditions Precedent are not satisfied or waived 
by 31 December 2016 or such later date agreed by the  parties (End Date), either party may 
by notice terminate the SSA.
4.
Consideration
(a)
Acquisition Shares
A  total  of  85,363,965  Shares  in  Odin  will  be  issued  to  the  Austasia  Shareholders  in 
consideration for the sale of all of the Austasia Shares, in the proportions as set out in 
Schedule 1.
(b)
Performance Shares
total  of  110,002,349  Performance  Shares  will  be
A 
Shareholders in the proportions as set out in Schedule 1.
issued
to
the  Austasia
5.
Stamp Duty
Odin is to pay all stamp duty on the Acquisition.
6.
Capital Raising
As outlined above, Odin must carry out a capital raising as one of the Conditions Precedent.
Odin may determine the maximum raising under the Capital Raising.
7.
Warranties
Each of the Austasia Shareholders provides various warranties as to the business, assets and 
operations  of  Austasia.  Each  Austasia  Shareholder  provides  warranties 
regarding 
unencumbered title to their  Austasia  Shares. Odin has also provided  warranties  regarding its 
operations and compliance with laws.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Schedule 3 - Issued Capital
Capital structure
SHARES
Current Shares on Issue-Post Consolidation
Issue of Acquisition Shares
Issue of Offer Shares
Issue of Shares under Austasia Converting Note 
Conversion Offer upon conversion of the Converting  Notes
TOTAL SHARES
PERFORMANCE SHARES
Issue of Performance Shares under the Acquisition
TOTAL PERFORMANCE SHARES
OPTIONS
Number
Number
Number
Minimum Offer 
Subscription 
$6,000,0001
Mid Point Offer
Maximum Offer
Subscription 
$7,000,0002
Subscription 
$8,000,0003
16,076,845
16,076,845
16,076,845
85,363,965
85,363,965
85,363,965
30,000,000
35,000,000
40,000,000
9,000,000
9,000,000
9,000,000
140,440,810
145,440,810
150,440,810
110,002,349
110,002,349
110,002,349
110,002,349
110,002,349
110,002,349
Issue of Advisor Options
15,000,000
15,000,000
15,000,000
TOTAL OPTIONS
Notes:
15,000,000
15,000,000
15,000,000
1.  This is based on the Minimum Offer Subscription being reached and post Consolidation.
2.  This is the mid-point Offer Subscription being reached and post Consolidation.
3.  This is based on the Maximum Offer Subscription being reached and post Consolidation.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Schedule 4 - Timetable for Acquisition and Capital Raising
Indicative timetable
Company’s Shares suspended from Official Quotation on ASX
Lodgment of Prospectus with ASX & ASIC
Opening Date for the Public Offer
General Meeting of the Company
22nd July 2016
9th August 2016
16th August 2016
30th August 2016
Closing Date for the Public Offer
27th September 2016
Completion of Proposed Acquisition
Issue of Consideration Securities and Securities under the Public Offer and 
Other Offers
Dispatch of holding statements
Expected date for Shares to be reinstated to trading on ASX (subject to 
ASX’s discretion)
7th October 2016
7th October 2016
7th October 2016
8th October 2016
Note: The dates shown in the table above are indicative only and may change without notice. In 
particular, the Company reserves the right to vary the Closing Date without prior notice, which may 
have a consequential effect on the other dates. Applicants are therefore encouraged to lodge their 
Application  Form  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  Opening  Date  if  they  wish  to  invest  in  the 
Company.
.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Schedule 5 - Material Terms of Performance Shares
The  proposed  terms  of  the  Performance  Shares  to  be  issued  to  Austasia  Shareholders  pursuant  to 
Resolution  4  are  set  out  below.  All  the  capitalised  terms  which  are  not  set  out  at  the  end  of  this 
Schedule are defined in Section 14:
Lapse after Expiry Date
If on the relevant Expiry Date:
(i)
(ii)
the A Performance Share Milestone has not been satisfied, then all of A Performance Shares 
held  by  each  Holder  shall  consolidate  into  one  A  Performance  Share  and  then  convert  into 
Shares on a one for one basis;
the B Performance Share Milestone has not been satisfied, then all of B  Performance Shares 
held  by  each  Holder  shall  consolidate  into  one  B  Performance  Share  and  then  convert  into 
Shares on a one for one basis;
(iii)  the  C  Performance  Share  Milestone    has  not  been  satisfied,  and  then  all  of  C  Performance 
Shares held by each Holder shall consolidate into one C Performance Share and then convert 
into Shares on a one for one basis;
(iv)  the D Performance Share Milestone has not been satisfied, then all of D Performance Shares 
held  by  each  Holder  shall  consolidate  into  one  D  Performance  Share  and  then  convert  into 
Shares on a one for one basis;
(v)
the E Performance Share Milestone has not been satisfied, then all of E Performance Shares 
held  by  each  Holder  shall  consolidate  into  one    E  Performance  Share  and  then  convert  into 
Shares on a one for one basis; and
(vi)  the  F  Performance  Share  Milestone  has  not  been  satisfied,  and  then  all  of  F  Performance 
Shares held by each Holder shall consolidate into one F Performance Share and then convert 
into Shares on a one for one basis.
Conversion
Upon the satisfaction of the Milestone prior to the Expiry Date, each Performance Share will convert 
into one Share.
Upon the occurrence of a Change in Control Event:
(A)
that number of Performance Shares that, after conversion, is equal to 10% of the issued 
Share  capital  of  the  Company  (as  at  the  date  of  the  Change  of  Control  Event)  shall 
automatically convert into Shares;
(B)
the Company shall ensure a pro-rata allocation of Shares issued to all Holders; and
(C)
any Performance Shares that are not converted into Shares will continue to be held by 
the Holder on the same terms and conditions.
Takeover Provisions
If  the  conversion  of  Performance  Shares  (or  part  thereof)  would  result  in  any  person  being  in 
contravention  of  section  606(1)  of  the  Corporations  Act  then  the  conversion  of  each  Performance 
Share that would cause the contravention shall be deferred until such time or times thereafter that the 
conversion would not result in a contravention of section 606(1) of the Corporations Act.
1559897 - 12090421v5
The  Holders  shall  give  notification  to  the  Company  in  writing  if  they  consider  that  the  conversion  of 
Performance  Shares  (or  part  thereof)  may  result  in  the  contravention  of  section  606(1)  of  the 
Corporations Act, and if the Holders fail to give such notification to the Company, the Company shall 
assume that the conversion of Performance Shares (or part thereof) will not result in any person being 
in contravention of section 606(1) of the Corporations Act.
The Company may (but is not obliged to) by written notice request the  Holders to give notification to 
the Company in writing within 7 days if they consider that the conversion of Performance Shares (or 
part thereof) may result in the contravention of section 606(1) of the Corporations Act. If the Holders 
do  not  give  notification  to  the  Company  within  7  days  that  they  consider  the  conversion  of 
Performance  Shares  (or  part  thereof)  may  result  in  the  contravention  of  section  606(1)  of  the 
Corporations Act then the Company shall assume that the conversion of Performance Shares (or part 
thereof) will not result in any person being in contravention of section 606(1) of the Corporations Act.
Issue of shares for no consideration - The Company shall allot and issue Shares upon conversion of 
the  Performance  Shares  for  no  consideration  to  the  Holder  or  its  nominees  and  shall  record  the 
allotment and issue in the manner required by the Corporations Act and the ASX Listing Rules.
After  conversion  -  The  Shares  issued  on  conversion  of  any  Performance  Share  will,  as  and  from 
5.00pm (WST) on the date of allotment, rank equally with and confer rights identical to all other Shares 
then  on  issue  and  application  will  be  made  by  the  Company  to  ASX  for  Official  Quotation  of  the 
Shares issued upon conversion.
Dividend
Holders are not entitled to a dividend.
Reconstruction
In the event of any reconstruction, consolidation or division of the issued capital of the Company, the 
Shares, the Performance Shares and their terms of conversion shall be reconstructed, consolidated or 
divided in the same manner such that no additional benefits are conferred on the Holders by virtue of 
such reconstruction, consolidation or division.
Winding up
If the Company is wound up prior to conversion of all of the Performance Shares into Shares then the 
Holders will have no right to participate in surplus assets or profits of the Company on winding up.
Non-transferable
The Performance Shares are not transferable.
Copies of notices and reports
The Holders have the same right as Shareholders to receive notices, reports and audited accounts.
Voting rights
The Holders shall have no right to vote, subject to the Corporations Act.
Participation in new issues
There are no participation rights or entitlements inherent in the Performance Shares and Holders will 
not be entitled to participate in new issues of capital offered to Shareholders during the currency of the 
Performance Shares.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Quotation
The  Performance  Shares  are  unquoted.  No  application  for  quotation  of  the  Performance  Shares  will 
be made by the Company.
Definitions
A  Performance  Share  means  a  Performance  Share  issued  by  the  Company  to  an  Austasia 
Shareholder (or its nominee) in accordance with the SSA that is subject to the A Performance Share 
Milestone and the terms of the Performance Shares.
A  Performance  Share  Expiry  Date  means  that  date  5  years  from  the  date  of  issue  of  the  A 
Performance Shares.
A  Performance  Share  Milestone  will  be  taken  to  have  been  satisfied  upon  the  gridComm  Solution 
achieving gross revenue of $3 million or cumulative 40,000 gridComm Module/Node sales calculated 
from the date of the execution of the SSA.
B  Performance  Share  means  a  Performance  Share  issued  by  the  Company  to  an  Austasia 
Shareholder (or its nominee) in accordance with the SSA that is subject to the B Performance Share 
Milestone and the terms of the Performance Shares.
B  Performance  Share  Expiry  Date  means  that  date  5  years  from  the  date  of  issue  of  the  B 
Performance Shares.
B  Performance  Share  Milestone  will  be  taken  to  have  been  satisfied  upon  the  gridComm  Solution 
achieving gross revenue of $6 million or cumulative 80,000 gridComm Module/Node sales calculated 
from the date of the execution of the SSA.
C  Performance  Share  means  a  Performance  Share  issued  by  the  Company  to  an  Austasia 
Shareholder (or its nominee) in accordance with the SSA that is subject to the C Performance Share 
Milestone and the terms of the Performance Shares.
C  Performance  Share  Expiry  Date  means  that  date  5  years  from  the  date  of  issue  of  the  C 
Performance Shares.
C  Performance  Share  Milestone  will  be  taken  to  have  been  satisfied  upon  the  gridComm  Solution 
achieving  gross  revenue  of  $10  million  or  cumulative  110,000  gridComm  Module/Node  sales 
calculated from the date of the execution of the SSA.
Change in Control Event means the occurrence of:
(a)
(b)
the  offeror,  under  a  takeover  offer  in  respect  of  all  Shares  announcing  that  it  has 
achieved acceptances in respect of 50.1% or more of the Shares and that takeover bid 
has become unconditional; or
the  announcement  by  the  Company  that  Shareholders  have  at  a  court  convened 
meeting  of  Shareholders  voted  in  favour,  by  the  necessary  majorities,  of  a  proposed 
scheme of arrangement under which all Shares are to be either:
(1)
cancelled; or
(2)
transferred to a third party,
D  Performance  Share  means  a  Performance  Share  issued  by  the  Company  to  an  Austasia 
Shareholder (or its nominee) in accordance with the SSA that is subject to the D Performance Share 
Milestone and the terms of the Performance Shares.
1559897 - 12090421v5
D  Performance  Share  Expiry  Date  means  that  date  5  years  from  the  date  of  issue  of  the  D 
Performance Shares.
D  Performance  Share  Milestone  will  be  taken  to  have  been  satisfied  upon  the  gridComm  Solution 
achieving gross revenue of $3 million or cumulative 40,000 gridComm Module/Node sales calculated 
from  the  date  of  the  execution  of  the  SSA;  and  the  signing  of  5  distributor  /  sales  representatives 
under  the  master  distribution  agreement  and  receipt  of  initial  purchase  orders  from  the  distributor  / 
sales representative.
E  Performance  Share  means  a  Performance  Share  issued  by  the  Company  to  an  Austasia 
Shareholder (or its nominee) in accordance with the SSA that is subject to the E Performance Share 
Milestone and the terms of the Performance Shares.
E  Performance  Share  Expiry  Date  means  that  date  5  years  from  the  date  of  issue  of  the  E 
Performance Shares.
E  Performance  Share  Milestone  will  be  taken  to  have  been  satisfied  upon  the  gridComm  Solution 
achieving gross revenue of $6 million or cumulative 80,000 gridComm Module/Node sales calculated 
from  the  date  of  the  execution  of  the  SSA;    and  gross  revenue  from  AAG  signed  distributor  /  sales 
representatives under the master distribution agreement of at least $50,000 per month for a minimum 
of three consecutive months
F  Performance  Share  means  a  Performance  Share  issued  by  the  Company  to  an  Austasia 
Shareholder (or its nominee) in accordance with the SSA that is subject to the E Performance Share 
Milestone and the terms of the Performance Shares.
F  Performance  Share  Expiry  Date  means  that  date  5  years  from  the  date  of  issue  of  the  E 
Performance Shares.
F  Performance  Share  Milestone  will  be  taken  to  have  been  satisfied  upon  the  gridComm  Solution 
achieving  gross  revenue  of  $10  million  or  cumulative  110,000  gridComm  Module/Node  sales 
calculated from the date of the execution of the SSA; and gross revenue from AAG signed distributor / 
sales  representatives  under  the  master  distribution  agreement  of  at  least  $100,000  per  month  for  a 
minimum of three consecutive months
Holder means the holder of a Performance Share.
Milestone  means  the  A  Performance  Share  Milestone,  the  B  Performance  Share  Milestone,  the  C 
Performance Share Milestone, D Performance Share Milestone, the E Performance Share Milestone 
or the F Performance Share Milestone (as the case may be).
Performance  Share  means  an  A  Performance  Share,  a  B  Performance  Share,  a  C  Performance 
Share,  a  D  Performance  Share,  an  E  Performance  Share  or  an  F  Performance  Share  (as  the  case 
may be).
gridComm  Solution  means  the  SLMS  developed  by  gridComm,  the  application  of  software, 
applications, IT systems and other technologies owned or licenced by gridComm enabling the creation 
of  a  network  over  a  city’s  power  lines  to  enable  street  lights  light  control  and  sensor  data 
communications.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Schedule 6 – Material Terms of Advisor Options
The proposed terms of the Advisor Options to be issued to the Advisors pursuant to Resolutions 12, 
are as follows:
(a)
The exercise price of each Advisor Options is $0.22 (Exercise Price).
(b)
The Advisor Options expire at 5:00pm WST on 31 December 2018 (Expiry Date).
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Each Advisor Options shall entitle the holder to subscribe for and be issued one Share in the 
capital of the Company upon exercise of the Advisor Options and payment to the Company of 
the Exercise Price.
Shares issued as a result of the exercise of any of the Advisor Options will rank equally in all 
respects with all Shares currently on issue.
The Advisor Options  holder is not entitled to participate in new issues of securities offered to 
Shareholders (including any rights issue, entitlement issue or bonus issue) unless the Advisor 
Options is exercised before the relevant record date for that new issue.
Shares issued on the exercise of  Advisor Options  will be issued not more than 14 days after 
receipt  of  a  properly  executed  exercise  notice  and  application  moneys.  Shares  issued 
pursuant to the exercise of Advisor Options will rank equally with the then issued Shares of the 
Company in all respects. If the Company is listed on ASX it will, pursuant to the exercise of a 
Advisor Options, apply to ASX for quotation of the Shares issued as a result of the exercise, in 
accordance with the Corporations Act and the ASX Listing Rules.
In the event of any reconstruction (including consolidation, sub-division, reduction or return) of 
the issued capital of the Company, all rights of the Advisor Options holder will be changed to 
the  extent  necessary  to  comply  with  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  applying  to  the  reconstruction  of 
capital at the time of the reconstruction.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Schedule 7 – Financials
Financial position of Odin
CONSOLIDATED
31 December
Pro - forma
Balance Sheet
(assuming
Minimum $6.0M
raising)
31 December
2015
$
6,489,856 
181,088 
18,425 
102,738 
45,000 
6,837,107 
 
 
194,140 
4,174 
 
198,314 
7,035,421 
 
 
 
958,946 
37,465 
1,167,617 
 
2,164,028 
 
4,871,393 
 
14,568,969 
1,786,606 
(11,484,182)
4,871,393
2015
$
458 
154,844 
22,438 
- 
- 
177,740 
 
 
- 
- 
 
- 
177,740 
 
 
 
3,808,575 
245,000 
- 
 
4,053,575 
 
(3,875,835) 
 
14,868,644 
(271,353) 
(18,473,126)
(3,875,835)
ASSETS 
CURRENT ASSETS 
Cash and Cash Equivalent 
Trade and Other Receivables 
Available for Sale Assets                      
Inventory 
Other Assets 
Total current assets 
 
NON CURRENT ASSETS 
Intangible Assets 
Plant and Equipment 
 
Total non-current assets 
Total assets  
  
LIABILITIES 
CURRENT LIABILITIES 
Trade and Other Payables 
Borrowings 
Other Liabilities 
 
Total liabilities 
 
Net (liabilities) / assets 
EQUITY 
Contributed Equity 
Reserves 
Accumulated Losses
Total (deficit) / equity
1559897 - 12090421v5
Schedule 8 – Summary of the ESOP
Summary of the key terms of the Employee Share and Option Plan
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
The  Plan  is  to  extend  to  Eligible  Persons  or  Eligible  Associate  (as  the  case  may  be)  of  the 
Company or an Associated Body Corporate of the Company as the Board may in its discretion 
determine.
The total number of Securities which may be offered by the Company under this Plan shall not 
at  any  time  exceed  5%  of  the  Company’s  total  issued  Shares  when  aggregated  with  the 
number  of  Securities  issued  or  that  may  be  issued  as  a  result  of  offers  made  at  any  time 
during the previous 3 year period under:
(a)
an employee incentive scheme covered by ASIC CO 14/1000; or
(b)
an ASIC exempt arrangement of a similar kind to an employee incentive scheme.
The Shares are to be issued at a price determined by the Board.
The Options are to be issued for no consideration.
The exercise price of an Option is to be determined by the Board at its sole discretion.
The Option Commencement Date will be any such date or dates with respect to the Options or 
tranches  of  Options  (as  the  case  may  be)  as  may  be  determined  by  the  Board  prior  to  the 
issuance of the relevant Options.
The  Option  Period  commences  on  the  Option  Commencement  Date  and  ends  on  the  earlier 
of:
(a)
(b)
the expiration of such period nominated by the Board at its sole discretion at the time 
of the grant of the Option but being not less than 2 years;
if an Eligible Person’s employment or engagement with the Company or an Associated 
Body Corporate ceases because of an Uncontrollable Event, the earlier of:
(1)
the expiry of the Option Period; or
(2)
6  months  (or  such  other  period  as  the  Board  shall,  in  its  absolute  discretion, 
determine) from the date on which the Eligible Person ceased that employment 
or engagement;
(c)
if an Eligible Person’s employment or engagement with the Company or an Associated 
Body Corporate ceases because of a Controllable Event:
(1)
the expiry of the Option Period; or
(2)
3  months  (or  such  other  period  as  the  Board  shall,  in  its  absolute  discretion, 
determine) from the date on which the Eligible Person ceased that employment 
or engagement; or
(d)
the  Eligible  Person  ceasing  to  be  employed  or  engaged  by  the  Company  or  an 
Associated  Body  Corporate  of  the  Company  due  to  fraud,  dishonesty  or  being  in 
material breach of their obligations to the Company or an Associated Body Corporate.
8.
Eligibility to participate is determined by the Board.  Eligibility is restricted to Eligible Persons 
(or  their  Eligible  Associates  where  applicable)  of  the  Company  or  an  Associated  Body 
Corporate of the Company.  The Board is entitled to determine:
1559897 - 12090421v5
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
(a)
subject to paragraph 2, the total number of Shares and Options to be offered in any 1 
year to Eligible Persons or Eligible Associates;
(b)
the Eligible Persons to whom offers will be made; and
(c)
the terms and conditions of any Shares and Options granted, subject to the Plan.
In respect of Options, Option holders do not participate in dividends or in bonus issues unless 
the Options are exercised.
Option holders do not have any right to participate in new issues of securities in the Company 
made  to  shareholders  generally.    The  Company  will,  where  required  pursuant  to  the  ASX 
Listing Rules, provide Option holders with notice prior to the books record date (to determine 
entitlements  to  any  new  issue  of  securities  made  to  shareholders  generally)  to  exercise  the 
Options, in accordance with the requirements of the ASX Listing Rules.
In the event of a pro rata issue (except a bonus issue) made by the Company during the term 
of the Options the Company may adjust the exercise price for the Options in accordance with 
the formula in the terms of the Plan.
The Board has the right to vary the entitlements of Participants to take account of the effect of 
capital reorganisations, bonus issues or rights issues.
The  terms  of  the  Options  shall  only  be  changed  if  holders  (whose  votes  are  not  to  be 
disregarded) of Shares in the Company approve of such a change.  However, the terms of the 
Options shall not be changed to reduce the Exercise Price, increase the number of Options or 
change any period for exercise of the Options.
14.
The Board may impose as a condition of any offer of Shares and Options under the Plan any 
restrictions on the transfer or encumbrance of such Shares and Options as it determines.
15.
The Board may vary the Plan.
16.
The  Plan  is  separate  to  and  does  not  in  any  way  form  part  of,  vary  or  otherwise  affect  the 
rights  and  obligations  of  an  Eligible  Person  under  the  terms  of  his  or  her  employment  or 
arrangement.
17.
At  any  time  from  the  date  of  an  Offer  until  the  Acceptance  Date  of  that  Offer,  the  Board 
undertakes that it shall provide information as to:
(a)
the Current Market Price of the Shares; and
(b)
the  acquisition  price  of  the  Shares  or  Options  offered  where  this  is  calculated  by 
reference to a formula, as at the date of the Offer,
to  any  Participant  within  3  Business  Days  of  a  written  request  to  the  Company  from  that 
Participant to do so.
18.
Any Offer made pursuant to this Plan will specify whether subdivision 83A-C of the applicable 
Tax Laws applies to that Offer such that any tax payable by a Participant under the Offer will 
be deferred to the applicable deferred taxing point described in that subdivision.
19.
In this Plan:
Controllable  Event  means  cessation  of  employment  or  engagement  other  than  by  an 
Uncontrollable Event.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Uncontrollable Event means:
(a)
death, serious injury, disability or illness which renders the Eligible Person incapable of 
continuing  their  employment  or  engagement  (or  providing  the  services  the  subject  of 
the engagement) with the Company or Associated Body Corporate;
(b)
forced early retirement, retrenchment or redundancy; or
(c)
such other circumstances which results in an Eligible Person leaving the employment 
of or ceasing their engagement with the Company or Associated Body Corporate and 
which the Board determines is an Uncontrollable Event.
1559897 - 12090421v5
Schedule 9 – Use of Funds
Minimum Offer 
Subscription   
$6,000,000
Mid Point Offer 
Subscription      
$7,000,000
Maximum Offer 
Subscription     
$8,000,000
Capital Raised
6,000,000
7,000,000
8,000,000
Expenses of the 
Capital Raising
600,000
709,090
818,182
Administration
500,000
1,356,300
500,000
1,602,900
500,000
1,849,500
Staff-product 
development
Staff-business 
development
698,700
825,736
952,773
Staff- marketing
2,055,000
2,428,637
2,802,272
Marketing/PR/Travel  518,000
Working Capital
272,000
612,182
321,455
706,364
370,909
Total Allocated 
Funds
$6,000,000
$7,000,000
$8,000,000
1559897 - 12090421v5
ODIN ENERGY LIMITED
Financial Services Guide and Independent Expert's Report
July 2016
We have concluded that the Proposed Transaction is Fair and Reasonable
I - —
THE POWER OF BEING UNDERSTOOD
AUDIT | TAX i CONSULTING 


FINANCIAL SERVICE GUIDE
21 July 2016
RSM Corporate Australia Pty Ltd ABN 82 050 508 024 (“RSM Corporate Australia Pty Ltd” or “we” or “us” or “ours” as appropriate) 
has been engaged to issue general financial product advice in the form of a report to be provided to you.
In the above circumstances we are required to issue to you, as a retail client, a Financial Services Guide (“FSG”). This FSG is 
designed to help retail clients make a decision as to their use of the general financial product advice and to ensure that we comply 
with our obligations as financial services licensees.
This FSG includes information about:
  who we are and how we can be contacted;


the financial services that we will be providing you under our Australian Financial Services Licence, Licence No 255847;
remuneration  that  we  and/or  our  staff  and  any  associates  receive  in  connection  with  the  financial  services  that  we  will  be 
providing to you;
  any relevant associations or relationships we have; and
  our complaints handling procedures and how you may access them.
Financial services we will provide
For the purposes of our report and this FSG, the financial service we will be providing to you is the provision of general financial 
product advice in relation to securities.
We provide financial product advice by virtue of an engagement to issue a report in connection with a financial product of another 
person. Our report will include a description of the circumstances of our engagement and identify the person who has engaged 
us. You will not have engaged us directly but will be provided with a copy of the report as a retail client because of your connection 
to the matters in respect of which we have been engaged to report.
Any report we provide is provided on our own behalf as a financial services licensee authorised to provide the financial product 
advice contained in the report.
General Financial Product Advice
In our report we provide general financial product advice, not personal financial product advice, because it has been prepared 
without taking into account your personal objectives, financial situation or needs.
You should consider the appropriateness of this general advice having regard to your own objectives, financial situation and needs 
before you act on the advice. Where the advice relates to the acquisition or possible acquisition of a financial product, you should 
also obtain a product disclosure statement relating to the product and consider that statement before making any decision about 
whether to acquire the product.
Benefits that we may receive
We charge various fees for providing different financial services. However, in respect of the financial service being provided to you 
by us, fees will be agreed, and paid by, the person who engages us to provide the report and such fees will be agreed on either a 
fixed  fee  or  time  cost  basis. You  will  not  pay  to us any  fees  for  our services;  the  Company  will  pay  our  fees.  These fees are 
disclosed in the Report.
Except for the fees referred to above, neither  RSM Corporate Australia Pty Ltd, nor any of its directors, employees or related 
entities, receive any pecuniary benefit or other benefit, directly or indirectly, for or in connection with the provision of the report.
Remuneration or other benefits received by our employees
All our employees receive a salary.
Referrals
We do not pay commissions or provide any other benefits to any person for referring customers to us in connection with the reports 
that we are licensed to provide.
Associations and relationships
RSM  Corporate  Australia  Pty  Ltd  is  beneficially  owned  by  the  partners  of  RSM  Australia,  a  large  national  firm  of  chartered 
accountants and business advisers. Our directors are partners of RSM Australia Partners.
From time to time, RSM Corporate Australia Pty Ltd, RSM Australia Partners, RSM Australia and / or RSM Australia related entities 
may provide professional services, including audit, tax and financial advisory services, to financial product issuers in the ordinary 
course of its business.
Complaints Resolution
Internal complaints resolution process
As the holder of an Australian Financial Services Licence, we are required to have a system for handling complaints from persons 
to whom we provide financial product advice. All complaints should be directed to The Complaints Officer, RSM Corporate Australia 
Pty Ltd, P O Box R1253, Perth, WA, 6844.
When  we  receive  a  written  complaint  we  will  record  the  complaint,  acknowledge  receipt  of  the  complaint  within  15  days  and 
investigate the issues raised. As soon as practical, and not more than 45 days after receiving the written complaint, we will advise 
the complainant in writing of our determination.
Referral to External Dispute Resolution Scheme
A complainant not satisfied with the outcome of the above process, or our determination, has the right to refer the matter to the 
Financial Ombudsman Service (“FOS”). FOS is an independent company that has been established to provide free advice and 
assistance to consumers to help in resolving complaints relating to the financial services industry.
Further details about FOS are available at the FOS website or by contacting them directly via the details set out below.
Financial Ombudsman Service 
GPO Box 3 
Melbourne VIC 3001 
Toll Free: 
Facsimile:
1300 78 08 08 
(03) 9613 6399 
info@fos.org.au
Email:
Contact Details
You may contact us using the details set out at the top of our letterhead on page 1 of this report.
CONTENTS
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
Introduction .......................................................................................................................................................................... 5
Summary and conclusion ..................................................................................................................................................... 7
Summary of transaction ..................................................................................................................................................... 10
Scope of the report ............................................................................................................................................................ 13
Profile of Odin .................................................................................................................................................................... 15
Profile of gridComm ........................................................................................................................................................... 19
Valuation approach ............................................................................................................................................................ 21
Valuation of Odin prior to the Proposed Transaction ......................................................................................................... 24
Valuation of Odin following to the Proposed Transaction ................................................................................................... 28
Is the Proposed Transaction Fair to Odin Shareholders? .................................................................................................. 31
Is the Proposed Transaction Reasonable to Odin Shareholders? ..................................................................................... 32
TABLE OF APPENDICES
Declarations and Disclaimers ............................................................................................................................................. 36
Sources of information ....................................................................................................................................................... 37
Glossary of terms ............................................................................................................................................................... 38
Resolutions ........................................................................................................................................................................ 40
A.
B.
C.
D.
21 July 2016 
Shareholders 
Odin Group Limited 
Locked Bag 8 
EAST PERTH, WA, 6892 
 
Dear Shareholders
RSM Corporate Australia Pty Ltd
8 St Georges Terrace Perth WA 6000 
GPO Box R 1253 Perth WA 6844
T +61 (0) 8 9261 9100 
F +61 (0) 8 9261 9111
www.rsm.com.au
INDEPENDENT EXPERT’S REPORT (“REPORT”)
1.
Introduction
1.1
This Independent Expert’s Report (the “Report” or “IER”) has been prepared to accompany the Notice of 
General Meeting and Explanatory Statement (“Notice”) to be provided to shareholders for a General Meeting 
of  Odin  Energy  Limited  (“Odin”  or  “the  Company”)  to  be  held  on  or  around  30  August  2016,  at  which 
shareholder approval will be sought for (among other things):





The  issue  of  85,363,965  (post-consolidation)  shares  (“Acquisition  Shares”)  and  110,002,349  (post-
consolidation)  performance  shares  (“Performance  Shares”)  in  the  Company  to  acquire  100%  of  the 
issued capital in Austasia Industrial Pty Ltd (“Austasia”) (“Acquisition”);
The  issue  of  22,565,489  Acquisition  Shares  on  a  post  consolidation  basis  to  Mr  Michael  Holt  and 
Get2Volume  Pte  Ltd  (“Get2Volume”),  a  company  controlled  by  Mr  Holt,  and  the  issue  of  62,875,548 
Performance Shares on a post consolidation basis to Mr Holt and Get2Volume. Upon conversion of the 
the Performance Shares to ordinary shares, Mr Holt may hold a Relevant Interest in the Company of up 
to 85,441,037 Shares (between 31.0% and 32.2% fully diluted) on a post Consolidation basis,
The acquisition by Austasia of 94% of the issued capital in gridComm Pte Ltd (“gridComm”) pursuant to 
the gridComm Securities Sale Agreement (“SSA”) (“gridComm Acquisition”);
The Company completing a capital raising of between $6,000,0000 and $8,000,000, through the issue 
of 30,000,000 to 40,000,000 Shares at $0.20 per Share (“Capital Raising”); and
The Company converting up to $900,000 of Austasia Notes to up to 9,000,000 Shares;
combined, the “Proposed Transaction”.
1.2
The Acquisition is included as Resolution 2 in the Notice and the Acquistion Shares and Performances Shares 
to Mr Hold and Get2Volume are included in Resolution 5 in the Notice. Resolution 2 and Resolution 5 are 
both subject to the approval of Resolutions 1 to 13 inclusive (“Conditional Resolutions”), in the Notice. We 
have summarised the Conditional Resolutions at Appendix D of this Report.
1.3
The  Directors  of  the  Company  have  requested  that  RSM  Corporate  Australia  Pty  Ltd  (“RSM”),  being 
independent and qualified for the purpose, express an opinion as to whether the Proposed Transaction is fair 
and  reasonable  to  shareholders  not  associated  with  the  Proposed  Transaction  (“Non-Associated 
Shareholders”).
1.4  Whilst we have only been requested to provide an opinion on whether the Resolutions 2 and 5 are fair and 
reasonable to the Non-Associated Shareholders, approval of the Conditional Resolutions are interdependent 
on each other and, therefore, Resolution 2 and Resolution 5 cannot be approved without all 13 resolutions 
being approved and, as such, we consider in substance the Conditional Resolutions are a part of the same 
transaction. On this basis, we have assessed whether Resolution 2 and Resolution 5 are fair and reasonable 
to Non-Associated Shareholders through  the evaluation of whether the proposed transactions as a whole, 
comprising  the  Conditional  Resolutions  (“Proposed  Transaction”)  are  fair  and  reasonable  to  the  Non-
Associated Shareholders.
1.5
The ultimate decision whether to approve the Proposed Transaction should be based on each Shareholder’s 
assessment  of  their  circumstances,  including  their  risk  profile,  liquidity  preference,  tax  position  and 
expectations as to value and future market conditions. If in doubt as to the action they should take with regard 
to the Proposed Transaction, or the matters dealt with in this Report, Shareholders should seek independent 
professional advice.
6
2.
Summary and conclusion
Opinion
2.1
In our opinion, and for the reasons set out in Sections 10 and 11 of this Report, the Proposed Transaction is 
fair and reasonable to the Non-Associated Shareholders of Odin.
Approach
2.2
In assessing whether the Proposed Transaction is fair and reasonable to the non-associated shareholders, 
we  have  considered  Australian  Securities  and  Investment  Commission  (“ASIC”)  Regulatory  Guide  111  – 
Content of Expert Reports (“RG 111”), which provides specific guidance as to how an expert is to appraise 
transactions.
2.3  Where an issue of shares by a company otherwise prohibited under section 606 of the Act is approved under 
item 7 of section 611, and the effect on the company shareholding is comparable to a takeover bid, such as 
the Proposed Transaction, RG 111 states that the transaction should be analysed as if it was a takeover bid.
2.4
Therefore  we  have  considered  whether  or  not  the  Proposed  Transaction  is  “fair”  to  the  Non-Associated 
Shareholders by assessing and comparing:


The Fair Value of a share in Odin on a control basis pre the Proposed Transaction; with
The Fair Value of a share in Odin on a non-control basis immediately post completion of the Proposed 
Transaction,
and, considered whether the Proposed Transaction is “reasonable” to the Non-Associated Shareholders by 
undertaking  an  analysis  of  the  other  factors  relating  to  the  Proposed  Transaction  which  are  likely  to  be 
relevant to  the Non-Associated Shareholders in their  decision  of whether or not  to approve the Proposed 
Transaction.
2.5
Further information of the approach we have employed in assessing whether the Proposed Transaction is 
“fair and reasonable” is set out at Section 4 of this Report.
Fairness
2.6
Our  assessed  values  of  an  Odin  share  prior  to  and  immediately  after  the  Proposed  Transaction,  are 
summarised in the table and figure below.
Table 1  Assessed values of an Odin share pre and post the Proposed Transaction
Assessment of fairness
Fair value of an Odin share pre the Proposed Transaction - Control basis 
Fair value of an Odin share post the Proposed Transaction - Non control basis
Source: RSM analysis
Ref:
Value per Share
8.2 
9.2
Low 
$ 
 
0.023  
0.027
High 
$ 
 
0.039 
0.030
7
Figure 1  Odin Share valuation graphical representation
Fair value of an Odin share pre the Proposed
Transaction
Fair value of an Odin share post the Proposed
Transaction
$-
$0.010
$0.020
$0.030
$0.040
$0.050
$ per share (post-consolidation)
Source: RSM analysis
2.7
Therefore, in accordance with the guidance set out in ASIC RG 111, and in the absence of any other relevant 
information, we consider the Proposed Transaction to be fair to the Non-Associated Shareholders of Odin as 
the value of an Odin share following the Proposed Transaction is within the range of the value of an Odin 
share prior to the Proposed Transaction.
Reasonableness
2.8
RG 111 establishes that a transaction is reasonable if it is fair. It might also be reasonable if, despite not being 
fair, there are sufficient reasons for the security holders to approve the transaction in the absence of a superior 
alternative. In assessing the reasonableness of the Proposed Transaction, we have considered the following 
factors in our assessment:


The future prospects of the Company if the Proposed Transaction does not proceed; and
Any  other  commercial  advantages  and  disadvantages  to  the  Non-Associated  Shareholders  as  a 
consequence of the Proposed Transaction proceeding.
2.9
If the Proposed Transaction does not proceed then the Company will have:


A significant working capital deficiency;
Insufficient cash to pay its liabilities; and
  No operating assets to generate cash flows.
2.10  Consequently,  the  Company  will  be  required  to  seek  additional  capital  funding  and/or  seek  alternative
investments to add value for shareholders.
2.11  We consider the key advantages of the Proposed Transaction to be as follows:





The Proposed Transaction is fair;
The Company will be exposed to a new, growing technology and internet of things (IoT) industries;
The  Company  will  have  the  necessary  working  capital  to  continue  operations  and  to  assist  with  the 
commercialisation of gridComm’s technology and growth of the Company;
The Company’s ability to raise funds and attract strategic investors may be improved; and
The Acquisition may increase liquidity in the shares
8
2.12  The key disadvantages of the Proposed Transaction are:



The  Company  will  be  changing  the  nature  and  scale  of  its  activities,  becoming  a  company  in  the 
technology  and  internet  of  things  (IoT)  industries  with  a  focus  on  enabling  communications  across 
existing power grid systems, which may not be consistent with the objectives of all Shareholders.
The Proposed Transaction will result in the issue of Shares and Performance Shares to the gridComm 
Shareholders, Austasia Noteholders and new investors, which will have a significant dilutive effect on 
the holdings of existing Shareholders.
The activities of gridComm have a different risk and reward profile than the Company had historically. 
gridComm  is  a  start-up  technology  company  with  minimal  income  and  a  focus  on  an  unknown  and 
unproven market that is at risk of competition, regulatory change or simply not materialising. This new 
risk profile may not suit all Shareholders.
2.13
In  our  opinion,  the  position  of  the  Non-Associated  Shareholders  of  Odin  if  the  Proposed  Transaction  is 
approved is more advantageous than if the Proposed Transaction is not approved. Therefore, in the absence 
of any other relevant information and/ or a superior transaction, we consider that the Proposed Transaction 
is reasonable for the Non-Associated Shareholders.
2.14  Non-Associated Shareholders should have particular regard to the potential advantages and disadvantages
set out above in the context of their own risk profile and investment strategy.
9
3.
Summary of transaction
Overview
3.1
3.2
On 18 March, 2016, Odin announced to the ASX that it had entered into Securities Sale Agreements (“SSA”) 
to acquire 94% of the issued capital of gridComm via a wholly owned special purpose vehicle, Austasia.
On 21 July 2016, the Company announced that it had entered into Deeds of Amendment, Restatement and 
Accession (“Amendments”) to vary the terms of the SSA.
Key terms of the SSA
3.3
Under  the  terms  of  the  SSA  and  Amendments,  Odin  will  undertake  the  Acquisition  through  the  issue  of 
85,363,965  (post-consolidation)  fully  paid  ordinary  shares  and  three  tranches  of  110,002,349  (post-
consolidation) performance shares (which convert to the same number of fully paid ordinary shares, subject 
to satisfaction of applicable performance milestones within 5 years of the date of issue).
3.4
The performance conditions required to be satisfied for the performance shares to convert into ordinary shares 
by 31 December 2018 are:






33,417,449 Class A Performance Shares convert upon the gridComm Solution achieving gross revenue 
of $3 million or cumulative 40,000 gridComm Module/Node sales;
33,417,450 Class B Performance Shares convert upon the gridComm Solution achieving gross revenue 
of $6 million or cumulative 80,000 gridComm Module/Node sales;
33,417,450 Class C Performance Shares convert upon the gridComm Solution achieving gross revenue 
of $10 million or cumulative 110,000 gridComm Module/Node sales;
3,250,000 Class D Performance Shares convert upon the gridComm Solution achieving gross revenue 
of  $3  million  or  cumulative  40,000  gridComm  Module/Node  sales  and  signing  of  5  distributor  /  sales 
representatives under the master distribution agreement and receipt of initial purchase orders from the 
distributor / sales representative;
3,250,000 Class E Performance Shares convert upon the gridComm Solution achieving gross revenue 
of $6 million or cumulative 80,000 gridComm Module/Node sales and earning gross revenue from AAG 
signed distributor / sales representatives under the master distribution agreement of at least $50,000 
per month for a minimum of three consecutive months; and
3,250,000 Class F Performance Shares convert upon the gridComm Solution achieving gross revenue 
of $10 million  or cumulative 110,000 gridComm Module/Node sales  and earning gross revenue from 
AAG  signed  distributor  /  sales  representatives  under  the  master  distribution  agreement  of  at  least 
$100,000 per month for a minimum of three consecutive months.
3.5
The key terms of the Performance Shares are set out in Schedule 5 of the Notice.
Rationale for the Proposed Transaction
3.6
The Directors believe that current market conditions make it very difficult to raise funds  and to continue to 
explore  in  the  commodities  and  exploration  sector.  As  such,  the  Company  disposed  of  its  wholly  owned 
subsidiary, Kilgore Exploration Inc. (“KEI”), which held oil and gas assets.
3.7
The Company has identified an opportunity with gridComm and Austasia which could provide investors with 
potentially greater returns than if it had continued exploration of the Company’s oil and gas assets.
10
Impact of Proposed Transaction on Odin’s Capital Structure
3.8
The  tables  below  set  out  a  summary  of  the  capital  structure  of  Odin  prior  to  and  post  completion  of  the 
Proposed Transaction and Capital Raising both on an undiluted and fully diluted basis, assuming both the 
minimum (Table 2) and maximum (Table 3) Capital Raising.
Table 2  Share structure of Odin before and after the Proposed Transaction – Minimum Capital Raising
Consolidation of Odin shares 
Pre-consolidation Odin shares on issue 
Share consolidation at 35:1 
Post-consolidation Odin shares on issue 
  
Non-Associated Shareholders
Fully paid ordinary shares issued to Mr Holt and 
Get2Volume in the Acquisition
Remaining fully paid ordinary shares issued in 
accordance with the Acquisition  
Shares issued upon settlement of the convertible 
note 
Shares issued under the Capital Raising
Performance Shares issued to Mr Holt and 
Get2Volume in the Acquisition
Remaining Performance Shares issued in 
accordance with the Acquisition
Options issued to advisers under the Prospectus 
Total shares on issue
Source: RSM analysis
Pre Proposed 
Transaction
Post Proposed
Post Proposed
Transaction undiluted
Transaction fully diluted
Shares
%
Shares
%
Shares
562,689,570  
(546,612,725)
16,076,845   100.0% 
  
16,076,845   100.0%
16,076,845  
  
16,076,845
11.4% 
  
11.4%
16,076,845  
  
16,076,845
%
6.1% 
  
6.1%
-
-
-  
 -
-
-
-  
 -
22,565,489
16.1%
22,565,489
8.5%
62,798,476
44.7%
62,798,476
23.7%
9,000,000  
30,000,000
6.4% 
21.4%
9,000,000  
30,000,000
3.4% 
11.3%
-
-
62,875,548
23.7%
-  
 -  
16,076,845   100.0%
-  
 -
-  
 -  
140,440,810   100.0%
-  
 -
47,126,801  
15,000,000
17.8% 
5.7% 
265,443,159   100.0%
Table 3  Share structure of Odin before and after the Proposed Transaction – Maximum Capital Raising 
Post Proposed
Post Proposed
Pre Proposed 
Transaction
Transaction undiluted
Transaction fully diluted
Consolidation of Odin shares 
Pre-consolidation Odin shares on issue 
Share consolidation at 35:1 
Post-consolidation Odin shares on issue 
  
Non-Associated Shareholders
Fully paid ordinary shares issued to Mr Holt and 
Get2Volume in the Acquisition
Remaining fully paid ordinary shares issued in 
accordance with the Acquisition  
Shares issued upon settlement of the convertible 
note 
Shares issued under the Capital Raising
Performance Shares issued to Mr Holt and 
Get2Volume in the Acquisition
Remaining Performance Shares issued in 
accordance with the Acquisition
Options issued to advisers under the Prospectus 
Total shares on issue
Source: RSM analysis
Shares
%
Shares
%
Shares
562,689,570  
(546,612,725)
16,076,845   100.0% 
  
16,076,845   100.0%
16,076,845  
  
16,076,845
10.7% 
  
10.7%
16,076,845  
  
16,076,845
%
5.8% 
  
5.8%
-
-
-  
 -
-
-
-
-  
 -
-
22,565,489
15.0%
22,565,489
8.2%
62,798,476
41.7%
62,798,476
22.8%
9,000,000  
40,000,000
6.0% 
26.6%
9,000,000  
40,000,000
3.3% 
14.5%
-
-
62,875,548
22.8%
-  
 -  
16,076,845   100.0%
-  
 -
-  
 -  
150,440,810   100.0%
-  
 -
47,126,801  
15,000,000
17.1% 
5.4% 
275,443,159   100.0%
3.9
As  illustrated  above,  the  Proposed  Transaction  will  result  in  reducing  the  Non-Associated  Shareholders 
aggregate interest to between 11.4% and 10.7% on an undiluted basis or between 6.1% and 5.8% on a fully 
diluted basis, depending on the number of shares issued under the Capital Raising.
11
3.10  The  9,000,000  shares  issued  on  settlement  of  the  Austasia  Notes  relates  to  an  amount  of  $0.9  million  of 
convertible  debt  raised  in  Austasia,  which  was  then  loaned  to  gridComm.  The  terms  of  the  Transaction 
stipulate that the Austasia Notes will convert into ordinary Odin shares as a part of the Transaction.
12
4.
Scope of the report
ASX Listing Rules
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
ASX Listing Rule 10.1 states that an entity must ensure that neither it, nor any of its child entities, acquires a 
substantial asset from, or disposes of a substantial asset to a related party or substantial shareholder or any 
of its associates without the approval of holders of the entity’s ordinary securities.
For the purposes of Listing Rule 10.1, an asset is substantial if its value, or the value of the consideration for 
it is, or in ASX’s opinion is, 5% or more of the equity interests of the entity as set out in the latest accounts 
given to ASX under the Listing Rules (being for the financial year ended 31 December 2015).
The equity interests of the Company as defined by the Listing Rules (being for the financial year ended 31 
December 2015) were negative $3.9 million and, accordingly, the value of the consideration payable for the 
Acquisition is more than 5% of the equity interests of the Company. On that basis, the Acquisition will result 
in the acquisition by the Company of a substantial asset.
For the purposes of Listing Rule 10.1, a related party of an entity includes directors of a public company and 
entities controlled by directors of a public company. Each of the directors of the Company are shareholders 
in Austasia and, as such, for the purpose of the ASX Listing Rules, constitute related parties of the Company.
ASX Listing Rule 10.10 states that the notice for the shareholders’ meeting required under ASX Listing Rule 
10.1 must include a report on the transaction from an independent expert. The report must state whether, in 
the expert’s opinion, the transaction is fair and reasonable to the Non-Associated Shareholders.
Corporations Act
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
Further, Section 606 of the Act prohibits a person from acquiring a relevant interest in the issued voting shares 
of a public company if the acquisition results in that person’s voting interest in the company increasing from 
a starting point that is below 20% to an interest that is above 20%. Completion of the Proposed Transaction 
will  result  in  gridComm  director  Mr  Michael  Holt  and  Get2Volume  Pte  Ltd  (“Get2Volume”),  a  company 
controlled by Mr Holt, acquiring a Relevant Interest in  the Company of up to 85,441,037 Shares (between 
31.0% and 32.2% fully diluted) on a post consolidation basis.
Under  Item  7  of  Section  611  of  the  Act,  the  prohibition  contained  in  Section  606  does  not  apply  if  the 
acquisition has been approved by the Non-Associated Shareholders of the company.
Accordingly, the Company is seeking approval from the Non-Associated Shareholders for Resolution 5 under 
Item 7 of Section 611 of the Act.
Section 611(7) of the Act states that shareholders must be given all information that is material to the decision 
on how to vote at the meeting. ASIC Regulatory Guide 111 (“RG 111”) advises the requirement to commission 
an Independent Expert’s Report in such circumstances and provides guidance on the content.
4.10  Accordingly, for the purposed or Listing Rule 10.1 and Section 611(7) of the Act, Odin is to hold a meeting of 
its shareholders  where it  will seek approval for the Proposed Transaction and the Company  has engaged 
RSM  to  prepare  a  report  which  sets  out  our  opinion  as  to  whether  the  Proposed  Transaction  is  fair  and 
reasonable to Non-Associated Shareholders.
Basis of Evaluation
4.11
In determining whether the Proposed Transaction is “fair and reasonable” we have given regard to the views 
expressed by the ASIC in RG 111.
13
4.12  RG 111 provides ASIC’s views on how an expert can help security holders make informed decisions about 
transactions.  Specifically  it  gives  guidance  to  experts  on  how  to  evaluate  whether  or  not  a  proposed 
transaction is fair and reasonable.
4.13  RG 111 states that the expert’s report should focus on:


the issues facing the security holders for whom the report is being prepared; and
the substance of the transaction rather than the legal mechanism used to achieve it.
4.14  Furthermore, RG 111 states that the expert’s assessment of fair and reasonable should not be applied on a 
composite  test  –  that  is,  there  should  be  a  separate  assessment  of  whether  the  transaction  is  ‘fair’  and 
‘reasonable’, as in a control transaction.
4.15  Consistent  with  the  guidelines  in  RG  111,  in  assessing  whether  the  Proposed  Transaction  is  fair  and
reasonable to the Non-Associated Shareholders, the analysis undertaken is as follows:


Whether the value of an Odin share prior to implementation of the broader transaction (on a control 
basis) is less than the value of an Odin share following implementation of the broader transaction (on 
a non-control basis) – fairness; and
A  review  of  other  significant  factors  which  Non-Associated  Shareholders  might  consider  prior  to 
approving the Proposed Transaction – reasonableness.
4.16  The other significant factors to be considered include:


The future prospects of the Company if the Proposed Transaction does not proceed; and
Any  other  commercial  advantages  and  disadvantages  to  the  Non-Associated  Shareholders  as  a 
consequence of the Proposed Transaction proceeding.
4.17  Our assessment of the Proposed Transaction is based on economic, market and other conditions prevailing
at the date of this report.
14
5.
Profile of Odin
Background
5.1
5.2
5.3
Odin Energy Limited is an ASX listed company (ASX:ODN) which engages in the production of oil and gas in 
the United States. The company was incorporated in 2007 and is based in West Perth, Australia.
On  23  November  2015,  the  Company  announced  that  it  had  executed  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding 
(“MOU”) with gridComm Pte Ltd (“gridComm”), to explore the possible acquisition of the Company. On 18 
March 2016 the Company announced that it had completed the SSA with 94% of gridComm shareholders 
executing  the  agreements.    On  21  July  2016,  the  Company  announced  that  it  had  entered  into  Deeds  of 
Amendment, Restatement and Accession to vary the terms of the SSA.
On 11 December 2015, the Company announced that it had entered into an agreement to dispose of Kilgore 
Exploration, Inc (“KEI”) to Paser Pte Ltd (“Paser”), a Singaporean company for $1. This disposal also included 
Odin  transferring  its  debt  in  the  principal  amount  of  US$12.4  million  (plus  accrued  interest)  to  Paser.  The 
Board  had  previously  decided  that  the  costs  of  any  further  appeals  in  KEI’s  litigation  against  Apache 
Corporation were not warranted. Judgement and the writ of garnishment were subsequently issued against 
KEI.
5.4
The disposal of KEI was completed in January 2016.
Directors and management
5.5
The directors and key management of Odin are summarised in the table below.
Table 4  Odin Directors
Name 
Mr Alex Bajada
Title 
Executive 
Chairman
Mr Roland Berzins   Non-executive
Director and 
Company 
Secretary
Mr David 
Ballantyne
Non-Executive 
Director
Source: Company
Experience 
Mr Bajada is Executive Director of Spartan Nominees Pty Ltd, corporate consultants. 
He is a former stockbroker with many years’ experience in the corporate sector and 
has been involved in the management of public companies for many years fulfilling 
the roles of chairman and director. 
 
Mr Berzins graduated from the University of Western Australia with a Bachelor of 
Commerce degree majoring in accounting and finance. He has over 25 years’ 
experience in the mining industry and was previously Chief Accountant for 6 years at 
Kalgoorlie Consolidated Gold Mines Pty Ltd (“Kalgoorlie Super Pit”). Since 1996, Mr 
Berzins has been a Director and Company Secretary for a variety of ASX listed 
companies, and has also had experience in retail, merchant banking, venture capital 
and SME business advisory.
David is a Chartered Accountant who has considerable commercial experience in the 
resources industry, both oil and gas, and hard rock. In addition, he has experience 
outside resources in technology, primary production and international trade. David 
has also had extensive experience in corporate management, directorship and 
company secretary roles in listed companies, and has been involved in listings on 
ASX and AIM.
15
Financial Performance
5.6
The following table sets out a summary of the financial performance of Odin for the financial years ended 30 
June 2014 (“FY14”) and 30 June 2015 (“FY15”) and the half year ended 31 December 2015 (“HY16”).
Table 5  Odin financial performance
Revenue 
Other income 
Accounting and audit expenses 
Depletion expense 
Staff/consulting expenses 
Legal expenses 
Regulatory expenses 
Travel expenses 
Impairment expenses 
Other administrative expenses 
Loss before income tax expense 
Income tax expense 
Net loss for the year 
Other Comprehensive Income/(loss) for the period: 
Exchange differences arising on translation of foreign 
operations 
Total Comprehensive Loss
Source: Company financial statements
Ref
5.7
5.7
HY16 
Reviewed 
$ 
18,183  
 -  
(22,098) 
 -  
(159,644) 
(20,577) 
(42,898) 
(1,992) 
408  
(67,236) 
(295,854) 
 -  
(295,854)
FY15 
Audited 
$ 
 -  
 -  
(26,059) 
 -  
(414,244) 
(14,907) 
(3,822) 
(21,011) 
(781,240) 
(585,187) 
(1,846,470) 
 -  
(1,846,470)
FY14 
Audited 
$ 
123,488  
114,086  
(63,829) 
(41,043) 
(364,795) 
 -  
(26,234) 
(28) 
(894,389) 
(540,536) 
(1,693,280) 
 -  
(1,693,280)
(63,363)
(167,979)
(6,587)
(359,217)
(2,014,449)
(1,699,867)
The Statement of Comprehensive Income is indicative of an exploration company, with very little revenue and 
the majority of expenditure on exploration (impairment) and staff and administrative costs.
In FY15, Odin discontinued operations of its oil and gas assets and, as such, wrote down the value to $nil. 
Accordingly, total costs incurred fell in the HY16 as the Company considered strategic options.
In January 2016, the Company completed the disposal of its oil and gas licences held in KEI and consequently 
deconsolidated related liabilities.
16
5.7
5.8
5.9
Financial Position
5.10  The table below sets out a summary of the financial position of Odin as at 31 December 2015 and 30 June
2015.
Table 6  Odin financial position
Current assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Trade and other receivables 
Available for sale assets 
Total current assets 
  
Non-current assets 
Plant and equipment 
Oil and gas properties 
Other financial assets 
Total current assets 
Total assets 
  
Current liabilities 
Trade and other payables 
Borrowings  
Total current liabilities 
Total liabilities 
Net assets   
  
Equity 
Contributed equity 
Reserves 
Accumulated losses 
Total equity
Source: Company financial statements
Ref:
5.12
5.13 
5.14
5.11
31-Dec-15 
Reviewed 
$ 
  
458  
154,844  
22,438  
177,740  
  
  
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
177,740  
  
  
3,808,575  
245,000  
4,053,575  
4,053,575  
(3,875,835) 
  
  
14,868,644  
(271,353) 
(18,473,126) 
(3,875,835)
30-Jun-15 
Audited 
$ 
  
10,873  
209,003  
22,179  
242,055  
  
  
 -  
 -  
 -  
 -  
242,055  
  
  
3,637,108  
245,000  
3,882,108  
3,882,108  
(3,640,053) 
  
  
14,745,209  
(207,990) 
(18,177,272) 
(3,640,053)
5.11  As at 31 December 2015, Odin had net liabilities of $3.9 million. The Company had net liabilities of $3.6 million
as at 30 June 2015.
5.12  During FY15, Odin discontinued operations in its oil and gas assets and, as such, wrote down the value to
$nil. The Company has since disposed of all oil and gas assets and related liabilities.
5.13  As at 31 December 2015, Odin had significant labilities. Approximately $1.4 million relates to liabilities in the 
KEI entity which was deconsolidated in January 2016. A further $1.8 million was owing to major shareholders, 
directors and former directors. A total of $1.5 million of these related party liabilities were forgiven post 31 
December 2015.
5.14  Borrowings of $0.245 million are convertible notes in the Company. These were converted to shares in the
Company in January 2016.
Capital Structure
5.15  Odin  has  562,689,570  ordinary  pre-consolidation  shares  on  issue.  There  are  no  options  over  unissued
ordinary shares outstanding.
17
Share price performance
5.16  The figure below sets out a summary of Odin’s closing share prices and traded volumes for the 12 months to
1 June 2016.
Figure 2  Odin daily closing share price and traded volume
Announcement of 
Proposed Transaction
0.041
0.036
0.031
0.026
0.021
e
c
i
r
P
0.016
0.011
0.006
0.001
250
200
150
100
)
s
n
o
i
l
l
i
m
n
i
(
e
m
u
o
V
l
50
0
09-Jun-15
06-Aug-15
03-Oct-15
30-Nov-15
27-Jan-16
25-Mar-16
22-May-16
Volume
Price
Source: S&P Capital IQ/ ASX
5.17
In the period prior to the announcement of the Proposed Transaction on 24 November 2015, Odin’s shares 
traded at limited volumes on very few trading days. Upon announcement of the Proposed Transaction, the 
share price and trading volumes increased significantly.
5.18
In the days following announcement of the Proposed Transaction, trading volumes remained stronger and 
share prices were volatile, ranging from $0.035 to $0.015. Shares last traded at $0.008 on 1 June 2016.
18
6.
Profile of gridComm
General information
6.1
6.2
6.3
gridComm was incorporated in Singapore in 2012 as a high technology company following a management 
buyout of Singapore’s Semitech Semiconductor’s Asia-focused smart grid device capability.
gridComm owns the technology and provides chips that enable communications across existing power grid 
systems  by  connecting  utilities  to  power  consumers.  The  business  is  a  smart  city-focused  company  that 
creates a network over a city’s power lines to enable street light control and sensor data communications with 
its power line networking solution.
gridComm has developed machine-to-machine (M2M) communication to be used on power generation and 
distribution  grids  to  establish  greater  efficiency  and  productivity  in  energy  delivery.  gridComm  provides 
components  that  enable  communications  over  power  grids  to  enable  “smart  grid”  and  “smart  home” 
communications.
Financial Performance
6.4
The following table sets out a summary of the unaudited financial performance of gridComm for the financial 
years ending 31 December 2013 (“CY13”), 31 December 2014 (“CY14”) and 31 December 2015 (“CY15”).
Table 7  gridComm financial performance
Revenue 
Cost of Sales and Services 
Gross Profit 
  
Other operating income 
Administrative expenses 
Depreciation and amortisation 
Distribution costs 
Finance costs 
Staff costs 
Other operating expenses 
Loss before income tax expense 
Income tax expense 
Net loss for the year 
Other Comprehensive Income/(loss) 
Total Comprehensive Loss
Source: Company financial statements
Ref
6.6
6.7
6.7
6.5
CY15 
Unaudited 
SGD$ 
178,069  
(95,387) 
82,682  
  
278,281  
(6,975) 
(43,507) 
(189,771) 
(94,363) 
(413,295) 
3,641  
(383,307) 
 -  
(383,307) 
 -  
(383,307)
CY14 
Unaudited 
SGD$ 
25,621  
(18,222) 
7,399  
  
433,851  
(12,455) 
(13,847) 
(137,544) 
(77,335) 
(528,694) 
(7,986) 
(336,611) 
 -  
(336,611) 
 -  
(336,611)
CY13 
Unaudited 
SGD$ 
68,016  
(57,147) 
10,869  
  
13,328  
(12,222) 
(1,102) 
(121,773) 
(68,376) 
(371,668) 
(4,293) 
(555,237) 
 -  
(555,237) 
 -  
(555,237)
6.5
gridComm was incorporated in 2012 and in the subsequent years has incurred net losses.
6.6
The business has generated sales revenue in each of the past three financial years through the sale of its 
technology. The business has generated a gross profit in each of the years CY13 to CY15.
6.7
The major costs of the business have been staff and distribution costs.
19
Financial Position
6.8
The table below sets out a summary of the unaudited financial position of gridComm as at 31 December 2015 
and 30 June 2015.
Table 8  gridComm financial position
Current assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Trade and other receivables 
Inventory 
Other assets 
Total current assets 
  
Non-current assets 
Plant and equipment 
Intangible assets 
Total current assets 
Total assets 
  
Current liabilities 
Trade and other payables 
Other liabilities 
Borrowings 
Redeemable convertible bonds 
Preferred Shares 
Total current liabilities 
Total liabilities 
Net assets   
  
Equity 
Issued Capital 
Reserves 
Accumulated losses 
Total equity
Source: Company financial statements
Ref:
6.10
6.11
6.9
6.9
31-Dec-15 
Unaudited 
SGD$ 
  
590,854  
26,816  
104,953  
18,822  
741,445  
  
  
4,264  
228,971  
233,235  
974,680  
  
  
639,050  
77,247  
140,428  
916,841  
99,999  
1,873,565  
1,873,565  
(898,885) 
  
  
253,000  
140,679  
(1,292,564) 
(898,885)
31-Dec-14 
Unaudited 
SGD$ 
  
18,088  
749  
73,018  
4,089  
95,944  
  
  
8,575  
53,273  
61,848  
157,792  
  
  
120,395  
43,071  
- 
592,905  
99,999  
856,370  
856,370  
(698,578) 
  
  
70,000  
140,679  
(909,257) 
(698,578)
6.9
As at 31 December 2015, gridComm had net liabilities of SGD$0.9 million. The Company had net liabilities of 
SGD$0.7 million as at 31 December 2014.
6.10  Other than working capital, the main assets held by gridComm are intangible assets consisting of computer
software and, more significantly, intellectual property (IP).
6.11
gridComm  has  SGD$0.9  million  in  redeemable  convertible  bonds  and  SGD$0.1  million  preference  shares 
outstanding  as  at  31  December  2015.  Both  the  redeemable  convertible  bonds  and  preference  shares  will 
convert into ordinary gridComm shares prior to the Acquisition.
Capital Structure
6.12
gridComm  has  1,526,611  ordinary  shares  on  issue.  Other  than  the  redeemable  convertible  bonds  and 
preference shares, there are no options over unissued ordinary shares outstanding.
20
7.
Valuation approach
Valuation methodologies
7.1
In  assessing  the  Fair  Value  of  an  ordinary  Odin  share  prior  to  and  immediately  following  the  Proposed 
Transactions, we have considered a range of valuation methodologies. RG 111 proposes that it is generally 
appropriate for an expert to consider using the following methodologies:





the discounted cash flow (“DCF”) method and the estimated realisable value of any surplus assets;
the application of earnings multiples to the estimated future maintainable earnings or cash flows added 
to the estimated realisable value of any surplus assets;
the amount which would be available for distribution on an orderly realisation of assets;
the quoted price for listed securities; and
any recent genuine offers received.
7.2  We  consider  that  the  valuation  methodologies  proposed  by  RG  111  can  be  split  into  three  valuation
methodology categories, as follows.
Market based methods
7.3
Market based methods estimate the Fair Value by considering the market value of a company’s securities or 
the market value of comparable companies. Market based methods include;


The quoted price for listed securities; and
Industry specific methods.
7.4
7.5
The recent quoted price for listed securities method provides evidence of the fair market value of a company’s 
securities where they are publicly traded in an informed and liquid market.
Industry specific methods usually involve the use of industry rules of thumb to estimate the fair market value 
of a company and its securities. Generally rules of thumb provide less persuasive evidence of the fair market 
value of a company than other market based valuation methods because they may not account for company 
specific risks and factors.
Income based
7.6
Income based methods estimate value  by  calculating the present value  of a company’s estimated future 
stream of earnings or cash flows. Income based methods include:


Capitalisation of maintainable earnings; and
Discounted cash flow methods.
7.7
The capitalisation of earnings methodology is generally considered a short form DCF, where an estimation of 
the Future Maintainable Earnings (“FME”) of the business, rather than a stream of cash flows is capitalised 
based  on  an  appropriate  capitalisation  multiple.  Multiples  are  derived  from  the  analysis  of  transactions 
involving comparable companies and the trading multiples of comparable companies.
21
7.8
The DCF technique has a strong theoretical basis, valuing a business on the net present value of its future 
cash  flows.  It  requires  an  analysis  of  future  cash  flows,  the  capital  structure  and  costs  of  capital  and  an 
assessment of the residual value or the terminal value of the company’s cash flows at the end of the forecast 
period. This method of valuation is appropriate when valuing companies where future cash flow projections 
can be made with a reasonable degree of confidence.
Asset based methods
7.9
Asset based methodologies estimate the Fair Value of a company’s securities based on the realisable value 
of its identifiable net assets. Asset based methods include:



orderly realisation of assets method;
liquidation of assets method; and
net assets on a going concern basis.
7.10  The value achievable in an orderly realisation of assets is estimated by determining the net realisable value 
of  the  assets  of  a  company  which  would  be  distributed  to  security  holders  after  payment  of  all  liabilities, 
including realisation costs and taxation charges that arise, assuming the company is wound up in an orderly 
manner. This technique is particularly appropriate for businesses with relatively high asset values compared 
to earnings and cash flows.
7.11  The liquidation of assets method is similar to the orderly realisation of assets method except the liquidation 
method assumes that the assets are sold in a shorter time frame. The liquidation of assets method will result 
in a value that  is lower than the orderly realisation of  assets method, and is  appropriate for companies in 
financial distress or where a company is not valued on a going concern basis.
7.12  The net assets on a going concern method estimates the market values of the net assets of a company but 
unlike the orderly realisation of assets method it does not take into account realisation costs. Asset based 
methods are appropriate when companies are not profitable, a significant proportion of the company’s assets 
are liquid, or for asset holding companies.
Selection of Valuation Methodologies
Valuation of an Odin share pre the Proposed Transaction (control basis)
7.13
In assessing the value of an Odin share prior to the Proposed Transaction we have utilised the net assets as 
a going concern methodology.
7.14  We have also utilised the quoted market price methodology as a secondary valuation method.
7.15  Our valuation methodologies were selected on the following basis:




In January  2016, Odin’s exploration assets  were disposed of and the Company  does not have any 
other operating assets or any other significant assets. As such, the most appropriate basis of valuation 
is the book value of asset and liabilities.
Odin’s shares are listed on the ASX which means there is a regulated and observable market for its 
shares. However, consideration must be paid to adequate liquidity and activity in order to rely on the 
quoted market price method;
In  our  opinion,  the  DCF  methodology  cannot  be  used  as  future  revenue  and  expenses  cannot  be 
forecast with sufficient reasonable basis to meet the requirements of RG111; and
The FME methodology is not appropriate as Odin does not have a history of profits.
22
Valuation of an Odin share post the Proposed Transaction (non-control basis)
7.16
In assessing the value of Odin post the Proposed Transaction, we have used the pre Proposed Transaction 
value and included the impact of the Proposed Transaction assuming it proceeds. In particular, we have made 
the following adjustments:
 
 


 
 

Eliminated any value attributable to the shell company status of Odin; 
Included the assessed value of gridComm’s assets and liabilities;
Included  the  cash  raised  as  a  result  of  the  capital  raising  that  is  a  condition  of  the  Proposed 
Transaction;
Included impact of the Austasia Notes converting to equity in the Company  that is a condition of the 
Proposed Transaction;
Included any dilution from the issue of shares;
Included specific costs associated with the Proposed Transaction; and
Included the payments made to convertible note holders plus the  Odin shares issued to convertible 
note holders.
7.17  We have then assessed the value of an Odin share post the Proposed Transaction on a non-controlling basis
by adjusting for minority discount.
7.18
In assessing the value of gridComm we have utilised the net assets methodology. Our valuation methodology 
was selected on the following basis:

 


gridComm  is  a  start-up  business  which  has  only  generated  minimal  operating  revenue  from  its 
technology and incurred a net loss in every reporting period since the incorporation in 2012. Further, 
as gridComm incurred a loss of A$0.4 million for the year ended 31 December 2015 and is in a net 
liability position as at that date, there appears to be significant uncertainty as to the company’s ability 
to  continue  as  a  going  concern,  and  therefore  whether  it  will  realise  its  assets  and  extinguish  its 
liabilities in the normal course of business and at the amounts stated in its financial statements. As 
such, the most appropriate basis of valuation is the value of asset and liabilities;
The market value of IP cannot be reliably measured given the early stages of operations.
In  our  opinion,  the  DCF  methodology  cannot  be  used  as  future  revenue  and  expenses  cannot  be 
forecast with sufficient reasonable basis to meet the requirements of RG111; and
The FME methodology is not appropriate as gridComm does not have a history of profits.
23
8.
Valuation of Odin prior to the Proposed Transaction
8.1
As stated at paragraph 7.13, we have assessed the value of an Odin share prior to the Proposed Transaction 
on a net assets basis and have also considered the quoted price of its listed securities. In both valuations, we 
have included a premium for control.
Net assets valuation
8.2  We have assessed the value of an Odin share on a control basis to be between $0.023 and $0.039 per share, 
prior to the  Proposed Transaction,  based  on the  net  assets valuation methodology, as summarised in the 
table below.
Table 9  Assessed fair value of an Odin Share – net assets   
  
Ref. 
  
Net assets at 31 December 2015 
Cash from rights issue 
Disposal of KEI 
Conversion of convertible notes 
Liabilities forgiven 
Value of the Company as a listed shell 
Net assets 
  
Post consolidation number of shares on issue 
  
Value per share (undiluted)
8.3 
8.4 
8.5 
8.6 
8.7 
8.8
3.8
8.2
Low 
$ 
(3,875,835) 
631,339  
1,372,422  
245,000  
1,500,000  
500,000  
372,926  
  
16,076,845  
  
$0.023
High 
$ 
(3,875,835) 
631,339  
1,372,422  
245,000  
1,500,000  
750,000  
622,926  
  
16,076,845  
  
$0.039
Source: RSM analysis
8.3
Our assessment has been based on the net liability position of Odin as at 31 December 2015 of $3.9 million 
as set out in the Company’s financial statements. We have been advised that, except for adjustments noted 
below and normal operating costs, there has been no significant change in the net assets of  Odin since 31 
December 2015.
Cash from rights issue
8.4
In January 2016, the Company completed a rights issue of 52,611,602 shares at an issue price of $0.012 to 
raise $0.63 million.
Disposal of KEI
8.5
Following 31 December 2015 the Company’s disposed of KEI, which had previously held the Company’s oil 
and gas assets. The deconsolidation of KEI from the group in January resulted in net labilities of approximately 
$1.37 million being disposed of.
Conversion of convertible notes
8.6
Convertible  notes  of  $0.245  million  were  converted  to  245,000,000  Odin  shares  in  January  2016  in  full 
settlement of the liability.
Liabilities forgiven
8.7
Amounts  totalling  $1.5  million  owed  to  directors,  former  directors  and  shareholders  of  Odin  were  forgiven 
subsequent to 31 December 2015.
24
8.8
Value of a listed shell
In  considering  the  value  of  the  listed  shell  we  have  reviewed  similar  recent  transactions  and  the  values 
attributed to shells. We have also considered comparable dormant listed companies and concluded that the 
value of a shell is between $0.50 million and $0.75 million based on recent data and the financial position of 
the Company.
Quoted Price of Listed Securities (secondary method)
8.9
In order to provide a comparison and cross check to our net assets valuation of Odin, we have considered 
the  recent  quoted  market price  for  Odin’s shares on the ASX prior to the announcement of the Proposed 
Transaction.
8.10  Unless stated, the analysis in this section is based on the pre-consolidation capital structure of Odin.
Analysis of recent trading in Odin shares
8.11  The figure below sets out a summary of Odin’s closing share price and volume of Odin shares traded in the 
12  months  to  23  November  2015,  the  date  prior  to  the  announcement  of  the  Proposed  Transaction.  The 
assessment only reflects trading prior to the announcement of the Proposed Transaction in order to avoid the 
influence of any movement in price that may have occurred as a result of the announcement.
Figure 3 Odin share price volume graph
0.006
0.005
0.004
)
$
(
 
e
c
i
r
P
0.003
0.002
0.001
0
Jan-15
Source: S&P Capital IQ
Feb-15
Mar-15
Apr-15
May-15
Jun-15
Jul-15
Aug-15
Sep-15
Oct-15
Volume
Price
25
20
15
10
5
0
l
V
o
u
m
e
 
(
i
n
 
m
i
l
l
i
o
n
s
)
8.12  Over the trading period prior to the announcement of the Proposed Transaction, Odin shares have traded at 
a high of $0.005 and a low of $0.001. Trade volumes peaked at 19.7 million on 29 April 2015, which followed 
the announcement of Odin signing a memorandum of understanding to acquire The Hemp Corporation Pty 
Ltd. This transaction was cancelled in August 2015.
8.13  Trade  volumes  were  minimal  over  the  following  months  prior  to  the  announcement  of  the  Proposed
Transaction on 24 November 2015.
25
8.14  To provide further analysis of the quoted market prices for  Odin’s shares, we have considered the VWAP 
over  a  number  of  trading  day  periods  ending  23  November  2015.  An  analysis  of  the  volume  in  trading  in 
Odin’s shares for the 1, 10, 30, 60, 90 and 180 day trading periods is set out in the table below.
Table 10 Traded volumes of Odin Shares to 23 November 2015
VWAP ($) 
Total Volume (000's) 
Total Volume as a % of Total Shares 
Low Price ($) 
High Price ($) 
Trading Days (no.)
Source: S&P Capital IQ
1 Day
10 Day
30 Day
60 Day
90 Day
120 Day
180 Day
- 
 -  
0.00%  
 -  
 -  
 -
- 
 -  
0.00%  
 -  
 -  
 -
0.002  
12,461  
4.70%  
0.001  
0.002  
8
0.002  
13,471  
5.08%  
0.001  
0.002  
14
0.002  
20,174  
7.61%  
0.001  
0.004  
25
0.002  
28,316  
10.68%  
0.001  
0.004  
40
0.003  
66,364  
25.04%  
0.001  
0.005  
59
8.15  The table above indicates very low volume and liquidity in Odin shares, with only 7.6% of total shares traded
over aver the past 90 trading days. This is reflective of an illiquid stock.
Value of an Odin Share on a non-control minority basis
8.16  We  have  selected  the  30-day  VWAP  for  trading  prior  to  23  November  2015  as  this  is  indicative  of  recent 
market trading for the shares. Therefore, in our opinion, $0.002 reflects the quoted market price valuation of 
an Odin share on a minority basis prior to the Proposed Transaction.
Valuation of an Odin share (quoted price of listed securities methodology)
8.17  Our valuation of an Odin share, on the basis of the recent quoted market price including a premium for control 
is approximately $0.003 (between $0.088 and $0.095 on a post-consolidation basis), as summarised in the 
table below.
Table 11 Assessed value of an Odin share – Quoted Price of Listed Securities 
  
  
30-day VWAP of an Odin share at 23 November 2015 
Add premium for control 
  
Quoted market price controlling value 
  
Consolidation multiple 
Consolidated quoted market price controlling value
8.16 
 8.19
Ref.
Low 
  
$0.002 
25% 
  
$0.003 
  
35.0x 
$0.088
Source: RSM analysis
High 
  
$0.002 
35% 
  
$0.003 
  
35.0x 
$0.095
26
Key assumptions
Control Premium
8.18  The value derived at paragraph 8.17 is indicative of the value of a marketable parcel of shares assuming the 
shareholder does not have control of Odin. RG 111.11 states that when considering the value of a company’s 
shares the expert should consider a premium for control. If the Proposed Transaction is successful, Austasia 
shareholders  will  hold  an  interest  of  at  least  56.7%  of  the  issued  share  capital  of  Odin  and,  therefore,  as 
explained in Section 4 above, our assessment of the Fair Value of an Odin share must include a premium for 
control.
8.19
In selecting a control premium we have given consideration to the RSM 2013 Control Premium Study. The 
study  performed  an  analysis  of  control  premiums  paid  over  a  7-year  period  to  31  December  2012  in  345 
successful takeovers and schemes of arrangements of companies listed on the ASX. Our study concluded 
that,  on  average,  control  premiums  in  takeovers  and  schemes  of  arrangements  involving  Australian 
companies in the mining and metals sectors was in the range of 25% to 35%. In valuing an ordinary Odin 
Share  prior  to  the  Proposed  Transaction  using  the  quoted  price  of  listed  securities  methodology  we  have 
reflected a premium for control in the range of 25% to 35%.
Valuation summary and conclusion
8.20  A summary of our assessed values of an ordinary Odin share on a post-consolidation control basis prior to
the Proposed Transaction, derived under the two methodologies, is set out in the table below.
Table 12  Odin Share valuation summary
Net assets 
Quoted market price 
 
Preferred valuation (post-consolidation at 35:1)
Source: RSM analysis
Ref.
Low 
 
$0.023 
$0.088 
 
$0.023
High 
 
$0.039 
$0.095 
 
$0.039
8.21
In our opinion, we consider that the net assets valuation methodology provides a better indicator of the fair 
value of an Odin share as we consider our analysis of the trading of Odin’s shares prior to the announcement 
of the Proposed Transaction indicates that the market for  Odin’s shares is not deep enough to provide an 
assessment of their fair value via the quoted market price methodology.
8.22  Therefore, in our opinion, the fair value of an Odin share prior to the Proposed Transaction is between $0.023
and $0.039 on a controlling, post-consolidation and undiluted basis.
27
9.
Valuation of Odin following to the Proposed Transaction
9.1  We summarise our valuation of an Odin share subsequent to the Proposed Transaction on a net assets basis 
in the table below. This valuation assumes the minimum capital of $6.0 million before costs is raised from the 
condition precedent Capital Raising.
Table 13 Assessed value of Odin post the Proposed Transaction
Net assets of Odin pre Proposed Transaction 
Adjusted net assets of gridComm 
Net cash raised from condition precedent Capital Raising 
Undiluted value of Odin 
  
Number of shares on issue pre Proposed Transaction 
Shares issued in the Acquisition 
Shares issued in condition precedent capital raising 
Shares issued to Austasia convertible note holders 
Total shares after Proposed Transaction 
  
Post-consolidation value per share  
Discount for minority interest 
Minority value per share after capital raising
Source: RSM analysis
Ref:
9.4 
9.6 
9.12
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8
9.12
Low Value 
$ 
  
(127,074) 
(107,749) 
5,400,000  
5,165,177  
  
16,076,845  
85,363,965  
30,000,000  
9,000,000  
140,440,810  
  
0.037  
26% 
0.027
High Value 
$ 
  
(127,074) 
(107,749) 
5,400,000  
5,165,177  
  
16,076,845  
85,363,965  
30,000,000  
9,000,000  
140,440,810  
  
0.037  
20% 
0.030
9.2  We consider that the minority value of an Odin share post the Proposed Transaction to be between $0.027
and $0.030 per share on a post-consolidation, undiluted basis.
9.3  We have assessed the value of an Odin share following the Proposed Transaction combining the value of the 
net assets of Odin and the net assets of gridComm, including adjustments all Conditional Resolutions, over 
the total shares  on issue following the Proposed Transaction.
Net assets of Odin
9.4  We have assessed the value of Odin on a net assets basis to be negative $0.13 million, as set out in the table
below.
Table 14  Net tangible assets of Odin
Net assets at 31 December 2015 
Cash from rights issue 
Disposal of KEI 
Conversion of convertible notes 
Liabilities forgiven
Adjusted net tangible assets of Odin
Source: RSM analysis
Ref.
8.3 
8.4 
8.5 
8.6 
8.7
8.2
Low
$
(3,875,835) 
631,339  
1,372,422  
245,000  
1,500,000
(127,074)
9.5  We have assessed the value of the Company, prior to the adjustments for the Proposed Transaction, to be 
negative $0.13 million. In reaching the value we have used the same valuation methodology applied in valuing 
Odin in Section 8, however we have not included any value for the Company’s status as a listed shell.
28
Net assets of gridComm
9.6  We have assessed the value of gridComm on a net assets basis to be negative A$0.11 million, as set out in
the table below.
Table 15  Assessed equity value of gridComm
Net assets 
Intangible assets 
Preferred shares 
Redeemable convertible bonds 
Net tangible assets
Source: RSM analysis
Ref:
6.9 
 9.8 
 9.9 
 9.10
31-Dec-15 
Unaudited 
SGD$ 
  
(898,885) 
(228,971) 
99,999  
916,841  
(111,016)
31-Dec-15 
Unaudited 
A$ 
  
(872,431) 
(222,232) 
97,056  
889,858  
(107,749)
9.7  We have adjusted the net assets of gridComm for the adjustments as set out below. We have converted the 
carrying value of the gridComm assets and liabilities from Singapore dollars (SGD) to Australia dollar at a rate 
of $A1:0.9706SGD, being the exchange rate as at 1 June 2016.
Intangible assets
9.8
As  at  31  December  2015,  gridComm  had  A$0.23  million  of  intangible  assets  on  its  balance  sheet.  The 
intangible assets consist of $0.03 million in software and $0.20 million in intellectual property (IP). We have 
excluded the intangible assets from the valuation as we cannot substantiate the recoverable value of these 
assets.
Preferred shares
9.9
As at 31 December 2015, gridComm had A$0.1 million of preferred shares on its balance sheet. The liability 
related to the preferred shares were settled subsequent to 31 December 2015.
Redeemable convertible bonds
9.10  As  at  31  December  2015,  gridComm  had  A$0.92  million  of  redeemable  convertible  bonds  on  its  balance 
sheet. This liability relates to the Austasia Notes which were loaned to gridComm. These convertible bonds 
will convert into Odin shares upon completion of the Acquisition and have therefore been eliminated from the 
net assets of gridComm.
Minority interest discount
9.11
In selecting  a minority discount  we have given consideration to  our control premium applied  in  Paragraph 
8.19,  where  we  established  a  range  for  a  control  premium  of  between  25%  and  35%.  The  resulting 
corresponding minority discount range based on said control premiums is between 20% and 26%.
Condition precedent capital raising
9.12  We have adjusted the net asset value of Odin post the Proposed Transaction by $6 million (less $600,000 for 
transaction and capital raising costs) and the  30 million Odin shares issued to reflect the minimum capital 
raising that is a condition precedent of the Proposed Transaction. We have assumed that this capital was 
raised at the issue price of $0.20 per share (on a post-consolidation basis).
29
Performance Shares
9.13  Under the Proposed Transaction, a total of 110,002,349 Performance Shares are to be issued, which each 
convert into an ordinary shares. The conversion of Performance Shares is dependent on achieving certain 
milestones and does not involve any receipt of cash by the Company upon conversion.
9.14  Given  the  uncertainty  of  achieving  the  milestones,  the  impact  of  the  Performance  Shares  has  not  been 
included in our assessment of the value of an Odin share following the Proposed Transaction. However, we 
note that the nature of the milestones is such that, when met, the milestones are expected to increase the 
value for Shareholders.
30
10.
Is the Proposed Transaction Fair to Odin Shareholders?
10.1  Our  assessed  values  of  an  Odin  share  prior  to  and  immediately  after  the  Proposed  Transaction,  are
summarised in the table and figure below.
Table 16  Assessed values of an Odin share pre and post the Proposed Transaction
Assessment of fairness
Fair value of an Odin share pre the Proposed Transaction - Control basis 
Fair value of an Odin share post the Proposed Transaction - Non control basis
Source: RSM analysis
Figure 4  Odin Share valuation graphical representation
Ref:
Value per Share
8.2 
9.2
Low 
$ 
 
0.023  
0.027
High 
$ 
 
0.039 
0.030
Fair value of an Odin share pre the Proposed
Transaction
Fair value of an Odin share post the Proposed
Transaction
$-
$0.010
$0.020
$0.030
$0.040
$0.050
$ per share (post-consolidation)
Source: RSM analysis
10.2  Therefore, in accordance with the guidance set out in ASIC RG 111, and in the absence of any other relevant 
information, we consider the Proposed Transaction to be fair to the Non-Associated Shareholders of Odin as 
the value of an Odin share following the Proposed Transaction is within the range of the value of an Odin 
share prior to the Proposed Transaction.
31
11.
Is the Proposed Transaction Reasonable to Odin Shareholders?
11.1  RG111 establishes that an offer is reasonable if it is fair. If an offer is not fair it may still be reasonable after 
considering the specific circumstances applicable to the offer. In our assessment of the reasonableness of 
the Proposed Transaction, we have given consideration to:
 

The future prospects of Odin if the Proposed Transaction does not proceed; and
Other  commercial  advantages  and  disadvantages  to  the  Non-Associated  Shareholders  as  a 
consequence of the Proposed Transaction proceeding.
Future prospects of Odin if the Proposed Transaction does not proceed
11.2
If the Proposed Transaction does not proceed then the Company will have:


A significant working capital deficiency;
Insufficient cash to pay its liabilities; and
  No operating assets to generate cash flows.
11.3  Consequently,  the  Company  will  be  required  to  seek  additional  capital  funding  and/or  seek  alternative
investments to add value to shareholders.
Trading in Odin shares following the announcement of the Proposed Transaction
11.4  As  demonstrated  in  the  chart  below,  there  was  a  strong  positive  response  to  the  announcement  of  the
Proposed Transaction.
Figure 5  Odin post announcement share price volume chart
Announcement of 
Proposed Transaction
0.041
0.036
0.031
0.026
0.021
e
c
i
r
P
0.016
0.011
0.006
0.001
250
200
150
100
)
s
n
o
i
l
l
i
m
n
i
(
e
m
u
o
V
l
50
0
09-Jun-15
06-Aug-15
03-Oct-15
30-Nov-15
27-Jan-16
25-Mar-16
22-May-16
Volume
Price
Source: S&P Capital IQ/ ASX
11.5  The chart above shows that the Odin share price increased significantly initially, however has since declined
from as high as $0.036 to a low of $0.008 on 1 June 2016.
32
Advantages and disadvantages
11.6
In assessing whether the Non-Associated Shareholders are likely to be better off if the Proposed Transaction 
proceed, than if it does not, we have also considered various advantages and disadvantages that are likely 
to accrue to the Non-Associated Shareholders.
Advantages of approving the Proposed Transaction
Advantage 1 – The Proposed Transaction is fair
11.7  RG 111 states that a transaction is reasonable if it is fair.
Advantage 2 – The Company will be exposed to a new, growing industry
11.8  The Company  will  be exposed to a rapidly  growing technology and internet of things (IoT) industries, and
Shareholders have the ability to gain exposure to future opportunities the business offers.
Advantage 3 – The Company has working capital to continue operations
11.9  The Capital Raising that is a Conditional Resolution to the Proposed Transaction will add necessary funds for 
working  capital  for  the  ongoing  operations  and  will  assist  with  the  commercialisation  of  gridComm’s 
technology and growth of the Company.
Advantage 4 – The Company’s ability to raise funds and attract strategic investors may be improved
11.10  The Company’s ability to raise  additional  funds  and  attract  strategic  investors  may  be  improved  once  the 
Acquisition is completed and the Company pursues commercialisation of its technology. This depends greatly 
on demonstrating and selling gridComm’s products.
Advantage 5 – Increase liquidity in the shares
11.11  The Acquisition may encourage new investors in the Company which may lead to increased liquidity of Shares
and greater trading depth than currently experienced by Shareholders.
Disadvantages of approving the Proposed Transaction
Disadvantage 1 – Change in nature and scale of activities
11.12  The Company will be changing the nature and scale of its activities to become a company in the technology 
and internet of things (IoT) industries with a focus on enabling communications across existing power grid 
systems, which may not be consistent with the objectives of all Shareholders.
Disadvantage 2 – Dilution on Non-Associated Shareholders
11.13  The  Proposed  Transaction  will  result  in  the  issue  of  Shares  and  Performance  Shares  to  the  gridComm 
Shareholders,  Austasia  Noteholders  and  new  investors,  which  will  have  a  significant  dilutive  effect  on  the 
holdings of existing Shareholders.
Disadvantage 3 – Change in risk profile of the Company
11.14  The  activities  of  gridComm  has  a  different  risk  and  reward  profile  than  the  Company  had  historically. 
gridComm is start-up technology company with minimal income and a focus on an unknown and unproven 
market that is at risk of competition, regulatory change or simply not materialising. This new risk profile may 
not suit all Shareholders.
33
Alternative Proposal
11.15  We  are  not  aware  of  any  alternative  proposal  at  the  current  time  which  might  offer  the  Non-Associated
Shareholders of Odin a greater benefit than the Proposed Transaction.
Conclusion on Reasonableness
11.16
In our opinion, the position of the Non-Associated Shareholders if the Proposed Transaction is approved is 
more advantageous than the position if it is not approved.  Therefore, in the absence of any other relevant 
information and/or a superior offer, we consider that the Proposed Transaction  is  reasonable for the Non-
Associated Shareholders of Odin.
11.17  An individual shareholder’s decision in relation to the Proposed Transaction may be influenced by his or her
individual circumstances.  If in doubt, shareholders should consult an independent advisor.
Yours faithfully
RSM FINANCIAL SERVICES AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
A GILMOUR 
Director
G YATES 
Director
34
APPENDICES
35
A.  DECLARATIONS AND DISCLAIMERS
Declarations and Disclosures
RSM Corporate Australia Pty Ltd holds Australian Financial Services Licence 255847 issued by ASIC pursuant to which they are 
licensed to prepare reports for the purpose of advising clients in relation to proposed or actual mergers, acquisitions, takeovers, 
corporate reconstructions or share issues.
Qualifications
Our report has been prepared in accordance with professional standard APES 225 “Valuation Services” issued by the Accounting 
Professional & Ethical Standards Board.
RSM Corporate Australia Pty Ltd is beneficially owned by the partners of RSM Australia Pty Ltd (RSM) a large national firm of 
chartered accountants and business advisors.
Mr. Andrew Gilmour and Mr Glyn Yates are directors of RSM Corporate Australia Pty Ltd.  Both Mr Gilmour and Mr Yates are 
Chartered Accountants with extensive experience in the field of corporate valuations and the provision of independent expert’s 
reports for transactions involving publicly listed and unlisted companies in Australia.
Reliance on this Report
This report has been prepared solely for the purpose of assisting Shareholders of the Company in considering the Security.  We 
do not assume any responsibility or liability to any party as a result of reliance on this report for any other purpose.
Reliance on Information
Statements and opinions contained in this report are given in good faith.  In the preparation of this report, we have relied upon 
information  provided  by  the  Directors  and  management  of  Odin  Energy  Limited  and  we  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  this 
information was inaccurate, misleading or incomplete.  RSM Corporate Australia Pty Ltd does not imply, nor should it be construed 
that it has carried out any form of audit or verification on the information and records supplied to us.
The opinion of RSM Corporate Australia Pty Ltd is based on economic, market and other conditions prevailing at the date of this 
report.  Such conditions can change significantly over relatively short periods of time.
In addition, we have considered publicly available information which we believe to be reliable.  We have not, however, sought to 
independently verify any of the publicly available information which we have utilised for the purposes of this report.
We assume no responsibility or liability for any loss suffered by any party as a result of our reliance on information supplied to us.
Disclosure of Interest
At the date of this report, none of RSM Corporate Australia Pty Ltd, RSM, Andrew Gilmour, Glyn Yates, nor any other member, 
director,  partner or  employee of  RSM  Corporate  Australia  Pty  Ltd  and  RSM  has  any  interest  in  the  outcome  of  the  Proposed 
Transaction, except that RSM Corporate Australia Pty Ltd are expected to receive a fee of approximately $15,000 based on time 
occupied at normal professional rates for the preparation of this report.  The fees are payable regardless of whether Odin Energy 
Limited receives Shareholder approval for the Security, or otherwise.
Consents
RSM Corporate Australia Pty Ltd consents to the inclusion of this report in the form and context in which it is included with the 
Notice of Extraordinary General Meeting and Explanatory Memorandum to be issued to Shareholders.  Other than this report, 
none  of  RSM  Corporate  Australia  Pty  Ltd  or  RSM  Australia  Pty  Ltd  or  has  been  involved  in  the  preparation  of  the  Notice  of 
Extraordinary General Meeting and Explanatory Memorandum.  Accordingly, we take no responsibility for the content of the Notice 
of General Meeting and Explanatory Statement.
36
B.  SOURCES OF INFORMATION
In preparing this Report we have relied upon the following principal sources of information:








Drafts and final copies of the Notice of Meeting;
Audited financial statements for Odin for the years ended 30 June 2013, 30 June 2014 and 30 June 
2015;
Reviewed half yearly accounts of Odin for the period to 31 December 2015;
Draft financial statements of gridComm for the years ended 31 December 2013, 31 December 2014 
and 31 December 2015;
SSA and amendments to the SSA for the Acquisition and gridComm Acquisition
ASX announcements of Odin;
S&P Capital IQ database; and
Discussions with Directors, Management and staff of Odin and gridComm.
37
C.  GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Term or Abbreviation
Definition
$
Act
Acquisition
Amendments
APES
ASIC
ASX
Austasia
Company
Control basis
CY##
DCF
Directors
EBIT
EBITDA
Equity
EV
Fair Value
FME
FOS
FSG
FY##
Australian Dollar
Corporations Act 2001 (Cth)
The acquisition of 100% of the issued capital of Austasia by the Company
Deeds of Amendment, Restatement and Accession to vary the terms of the SSA
Accounting Professional & Ethical Standards Board
Australian Securities & Investments Commission
Australian Securities Exchange
Austasia Industrial Pty Ltd, a special purpose vehicle created for the Acquisition and 
the gridComm Acquisition
Odin
As assessment of the fair value on an equity interest, which assumes the holder or 
holders have control of entity in which the equity is held
Calendar year ended 31 December
A method within the income approach whereby the present value of future expected 
net cash flows is calculated using a discount rate
Directors of the Company
Earnings, Before, Interest and Tax
Earnings, Before, Interest, Tax, Depreciation and Amortisation 
The owner’s interest in property after deduction of all liabilities 
Enterprise Value, meaning, the total value of the equity in a business plus the value of 
its debt or debt-related liabilities, minus any cash or cash equivalents available to 
meet those liabilities
The amount at which an asset could be exchanged between a knowledgeable and 
willing but not anxious seller and a knowledgeable and willing but not anxious buyer, 
both acting at arm’s length 
Future Maintainable Earnings
Financial Ombudsman Service
Financial Services Guide
Financial year ended 30 June
gridComm
gridComm Pte Ltd
gridComm Acquisition
The acquisition of 94% of the issued capital of gridComm by Austasia
IER
This Independent Expert Report
Non Associated Shareholders
Shareholders who are not a party, or associated to a party, to the Proposed 
Transaction
Non control basis
As assessment of the fair value on an equity interest, which assumes the holder or 
holders do not have control of entity in which the equity is held
Notice
NPBT
NPAT
Odin
Regulations
Report
RG 111
The notice of meeting to vote on the Proposed Transaction
Net Profit Before Tax
Net Profit After Tax
Odin Energy Limited
Corporations Act Regulations 2001 (Cth)
This Independent Experts Report prepared by RSM dated 3 June 2016 
ASIC Regulatory Guide 111 Contents of Expert’s Reports
38
Term or Abbreviation
Definition
RSM
S&P Capital IQ
RSM Corporate Australia Pty Ltd
An entity of Standard and Poors which is a third party provider of company and other 
financial information
SSA
Securities Sale Agreement for the Acquisition and gridComm Acquisition
Proposed Transaction
It has the meaning given to the term in paragraph 1.2 of this Report
VWAP
Volume weighted average share price
39
D.  RESOLUTIONS
Resolution 1 – Consolidation of Capital
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolution, as an Ordinary Resolution, with or without amendment:
“That, subject to the passing of the Conditional Resolutions, for the purposes of section 254H of the Corporations Act, 
Listing Rule 7.20, Listing Rule 7.22 and the Constitution and for all other purposes, approval is given for the issued capital 
of the Company to be consolidated on the basis that every  thirty five Shares be consolidated into one Share,  with the 
Consolidation  taking effect  on  a date  announced  to  ASX  in  accordance  with the  Listing Rules  and  with any  fractional 
entitlements  being  rounded  up  to  the  nearest  whole  number  on  the  terms  and  conditions  set  out  in  the  Explanatory 
Memorandum.
Resolution 2 – Approval of Acquisition of Austasia: Change of Activities
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolution, as an Ordinary Resolution, with or without amendment:
“That, subject to the passing of the Conditional Resolutions, for the purposes of Listing Rule 11.1.2, Listing Rule 10.1  and 
for all other purposes, approval is given for the Company to:
(a)
(b)
undertake the Acquisition the terms and conditions of which are summarised in the Explanatory Memorandum; 
and
change the nature and scale of the Company’s activities on completion of the Acquisition as described in the 
Explanatory Memorandum.”
Resolution 3 – Creation of New Class of Securities: Performance Shares
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolution, as an Ordinary Resolution, with or without amendment:
“That,  subject  to  the  passing  of  the  Conditional  Resolutions,  for  the  purposes  of  section  246B(1)  and  246C(5)  of  the 
Corporations  Act,  the  Constitution  and  for  all  other  purposes,  the  Directors  are  authorised  to  issue  the  Performance 
Shares on the terms and conditions set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
Resolution 4 – Approval of the Issue of Shares and Performance Shares to Austasia Shareholders
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolution, as an Ordinary Resolution, with or without amendment:
“That, subject to the passing of the Conditional Resolutions, for the purposes of Listing Rule 7.1, Listing Rule 10.11 and 
for all other purposes, the Company is authorised to issue and allot on a post Consolidation basis 85,363,965 Shares and 
110,002,349  Performance  Shares  to  Austasia  Industrial  Pty  Ltd  (Austasia)  Shareholders  or  their  nominees,  in 
consideration for the transfer to the Company by the Austasia Shareholders of the Austasia Shares held by them, pursuant 
to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  Securities  Sale  Agreement  (SSA),  the  details  of  which  are  summarised  in  the 
Explanatory Memorandum.”
40
Resolution 5 - Approval of the Issue of Shares and Performance Shares to Michael Holt and Get2Volume 
Pte Ltd
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution, with or without amendment:
“That, subject to the passing of the Conditional Resolutions, for the purposes of Chapter 2E and item 7 of section 611 of 
the Corporations Act  and for all other purposes, the Company is authorised to:
(a)
(b)
issue  and  allot  a  total  of  22,565,489  Acquisition  Shares  on  a  post  Consolidation  basis  to  Michael  Holt  and 
Get2Volume Pte Ltd UEN 200606764Z (Get2Volume), a company controlled by Michael Holt, or their nominees, 
on  the terms  and  conditions  set  out in  the  Explanatory  Memorandum, in consideration  for  the  transfer to  the 
Company by Michael Holt and Get2Volume of the Austasia Shares held by them, pursuant to the terms and 
conditions of the SSA; and
issue and  allot  a  total  of  62,875,548  Performance  Shares on  a  post  Consolidation  basis  to  Michael  Holt and 
Get2Volume,  a  company  controlled  by  Michael  Holt,  on  the  terms  and  conditions  set  out  in  the  Explanatory 
Memorandum and issue and allot up to 62,875,548 Shares on a post Consolidation basis to Michael Holt and 
Get2Volume on the subsequent conversion of the Performance Shares into Shares,
and,  as  a  consequence,  that  shareholders  of  the  Company  approve  Michael  Holt,  Get2Volume  and  their  associates, 
acquiring a Relevant Interest in up to 85,441,037 Shares on a post Consolidation basis .”
Resolution 6 - Approval to Issue Offer Shares under the Prospectus
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution, with or without amendment:
“That, subject to the passing of the Conditional Resolutions, for the purposes of Listing Rule 7.1 and for all other purposes, 
the Company is authorised to issue between 30,000,000 and 40,000,000 Offer Shares at an issue price of $0.20 per 
Offer Share, to raise a minimum of $6,000,000 and up to $8,000,000 pursuant to the Capital Raising, on the terms and 
conditions set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
Resolution 7 - Approval of Participation of Roland Berzins in the Capital Raising
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution, with or without amendment:
“That, subject to the passing of the Conditional Resolutions, for the purposes of Listing Rule 10.11, section 195(4) and 
Chapter 2E of the Corporations Act and for all other purposes, approval  is given for the Company to issue to Roland 
Berzins (or his nominee) up to an aggregate maximum of 250,000 Offer Shares (on a post Consolidation basis), which 
represent a value of up to $50,000, on the same terms and conditions as other participants of the Capital Raising and on 
the terms and conditions set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
Resolution 8 - Approval of Participation of David Ballantyne in the Capital Raising
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution, with or without amendment:
“That, subject to the passing of the Conditional Resolutions, for the purposes of Listing Rule 10.11, section 195(4) and 
Chapter  2E  of  the  Corporations  Act  and  for  all  other  purposes,  approval  is  given  for  the  Company  to  issue  to  David 
Ballantyne (or his nominee) up to an aggregate maximum of 250,000 Capital Raising Shares (on a post Consolidation 
basis), which represent a value of up to $50,000, on the same terms and conditions as other participants of the Capital 
Raising and on the terms and conditions set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
Resolution 9 - Approval of Participation of Alex Bajada in the Capital Raising
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution, with or without amendment:
“That, subject to the passing of the Conditional Resolutions, for the purposes of Listing Rule 10.11, section 195(4) and 
Chapter 2E of the Corporations Act and for all other purposes, approval is given for the Company to issue to Alex Bajada 
(or his nominee) up to an aggregate maximum of 250,000 Capital Raising Shares (on a post Consolidation basis), which 
represent a value of up to $50,000, on the same terms and conditions as other participants of the Capital Raising and on 
the terms and conditions set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
41
Resolution 10 - Approval of the Issue of Conversion Shares to Austasia Noteholders
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution, with or without amendment:
“That, subject to the passing of the Conditional Resolutions, for the purpose of Listing Rule 7.1 and for all other purposes, 
the Company is authorised to issue up to 9,000,000 Conversion Shares on conversion of the Austasia Notes with a face 
value of $900,000, on the terms and conditions set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
Resolution 11 - Change of Company Name
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolution as a Special Resolution, with or without amendment:
“That, subject to the passing of the Conditional Resolutions and the consent of ASIC, for the purposes of section 157(1) 
of the Corporations Act and for all other purposes, the name of the Company be changed to “gridComm Limited” with 
effect from the date on which the ASIC alters the details of the Company’s registration to reflect the change of name.”
Resolution 12 - Approval for the Issue of Advisor Options
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolution, as an Ordinary Resolution, with or without amendment:
“That, for the purposes of Listing Rule 7.1 and for all other purposes, the Company is authorised to issue 15,000,000 
Options (on a post-Consolidation basis) to advisors and lead managers of the Company (or their nominees) (Advisor 
Options) on the terms and conditions set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.”
Resolution 13 – Approval of ESOP
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution as an Ordinary Resolution, with or without amendment:
“That, the Employee Share and Option Plan (ESOP), which is summarised in the attached Explanatory Memorandum, 
be approved and that for the purposes of Exception 9(b) of Listing Rule 7.2 and for all other purposes, the issue of 
securities under the ESOP within three (3) years from the date of this resolution be an exception to Listing Rules 7.1 
and 7.1A.”
42
THE POWER OF BEING UNDERSTOOD

AUDIT I TAX I CONSULTING

RSM Australia Ply Ltd is a member of the RSM network and trades as RSM
RSM is the trading name used by the members or the RSM network

Each member oi the RSM network is an independent accounting and
Consulting ﬁrm each of which practices in its own right the RSM network Is
not itself a separate legal entity at any description in any lunsdiction.

The RSM network is administered by RSM international Limited a company
registered in England and Wales (company number 4040593) whose
registered othee is at 11 Old lewry. London EC2R suu.

The brand and trademark REM and other inteliecluai property rights used
by members of the network are owned by RSM lmerriatiorial Association

an assooation governed by article 60 et seq ol the Ciyii Code oi SWitzeriand
whose seat is in Zug.

:6 RSM international Association

rsm.com.au

Liability limited by a seheme approved under protessional standards legislation
THE POWER OF BEING UNDERSTOOD

AUDIT I TAX I CONSULTING

