
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 
For the Fiscal Year Ended May 31, 2010
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF
FORM 10-K
[X] 
 
 
[  ] 
1934 
For the transition period from ________________ to ________________.
Commission file number 000-50907
DOUGLAS LAKE MINERALS INC. 
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation of organization)
Nevada
98-0430222
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
Suite 222-6820 188th Street, Surrey, British Columbia  V4N 3G6
(Address of Principal Executive Offices)
(Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)
(604) 575-3552
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:  None 
 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
Common Stock, Par Value $0.001
(Title of class)
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. 
[  ]  Yes          [X] No
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act. 
[  ]  Yes          [X] No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange 
Act during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) 
has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.       [X] Yes   [  ] No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Website, if any, every 
Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T during the preceding 12 
months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files.      [  ] Yes     [  ] No
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers in response to Item 405 of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, 
and will not be contained, to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by 
reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K.     [X]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a 
smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer”, “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting 
company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
3841349.2
i
Large accelerated filer [  ] 
Non-accelerated filer [  ] (do not check if a smaller reporting company)
Accelerated filer [  ] 
Smaller reporting company [X]
Indicate by checkmark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).   
Yes [  ]  No [X]
The  aggregate  market  value  of  the  registrant’s  stock  held  by  non-affiliates  of  the  registrant  as  of  November  30,  2009, 
computed by reference to the price at which such stock was last sold on the OTC Bulletin Board ($0.26 per share) on that 
date, was approximately $17,913,813.
The registrant had 82,113,281 shares of common stock outstanding as of September 10, 2010.
__________
3841349.2
ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ITEM 1. 
BUSINESS.............................................................................................................................................................2 
ITEM 1A.  RISK FACTORS..................................................................................................................................................13 
ITEM 1B.  UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS...............................................................................................................17 
ITEM 2. 
PROPERTIES ......................................................................................................................................................17 
ITEM 3. 
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS ....................................................................................................................................17 
(REMOVED AND RESERVED) ........................................................................................................................17 
ITEM 4. 
ITEM 5.  MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS 
AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES .................................................................................17 
SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA .......................................................................................................................19 
ITEM 6. 
ITEM 7.  MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND 
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.............................................................................................................................19 
ITEM 7A.  QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK.....................................24 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS .............................................................................................................................24 
ITEM 8. 
ITEM 9. 
CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND 
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE...............................................................................................................................47 
ITEM 9A.  CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES ....................................................................................................................47 
ITEM 9B.  OTHER INFORMATION....................................................................................................................................48 
ITEM 10.  DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE .............................................48 
ITEM 11.  EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION .......................................................................................................................51 
ITEM 12. 
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND 
RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS..........................................................................................................52 
ITEM 13.  CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS AND DIRECTOR 
INDEPENDENCE ...............................................................................................................................................53 
ITEM 14. 
PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES ......................................................................................53 
ITEM 15.  EXHIBITS............................................................................................................................................................54
__________
3841349.2
iii
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
This  annual  report  contains  forward-looking  statements  that  involve  risks  and  uncertainties.  Any  statements 
contained herein that are not statements of historical fact may be deemed to be forward-looking statements. In some 
cases,  you  can  identify  forward-looking  statements  by  terminology  such  as  “may”,  “will”,  “should”,  “expect”, 
“plan”, “intend”, “anticipate”, “believe”, “estimate”, “predict”, “potential” or “continue”, the negative of such terms 
or other comparable terminology. In evaluating these statements, you should consider various factors, including the 
assumptions,  risks  and  uncertainties  outlined  in  this  annual  report  under  “Risk  Factors”.  These  factors  or  any  of 
them  may  cause  our  actual  results  to  differ  materially  from  any  forward-looking  statement  made  in  this  annual 
report. Forward-looking statements in this annual report include, among others, statements regarding:
• 
• 
•
our capital needs; 
business plans; and  
expectations.
While these forward-looking statements, and any assumptions upon which they are based, are made in good faith 
and reflect our current judgment regarding future events, our actual results will likely vary, sometimes materially, 
from any estimates, predictions, projections, assumptions or other future performance suggested herein. Some of the 
risks and assumptions include:
• 
• 
• 
•
•
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•
our need for additional financing; 
our limited operating history; 
our history of operating losses; 
our exploration activities may not result in commercially exploitable quantities of ore on our current or any 
future mineral properties; 
the risks inherent in the exploration for minerals such as geologic formation, weather, accidents, equipment 
failures and governmental restrictions; 
the competitive environment in which we operate; 
changes in governmental regulation and administrative practices; 
our dependence on key personnel; 
conflicts of interest of our directors and officers; 
our ability to fully implement our business plan; 
our ability to effectively manage our growth; and 
other regulatory, legislative and judicial developments.
We advise the reader that these cautionary remarks expressly qualify in their entirety all forward-looking statements 
attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf. Important factors that you should also consider, include, but are 
not limited to, the factors discussed under “Risk Factors” in this annual report.
The forward-looking statements in this annual report are made as of the date of this annual report and we do not 
intend or undertake to update any of the forward-looking statements to conform these statements to actual results, 
except as required by applicable law, including the securities laws of the United States.
AVAILABLE INFORMATION
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. files annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy statements, and other information with 
the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (the  “Commission”  or  “SEC”).    You  may  read  and  copy  documents 
referred  to  in  this Annual  Report on  Form  10-K  that have  been filed with  the  Commission  at  the  Commission’s 
Public Reference Room, 450 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, D.C.  You may obtain information on the operation of 
the  Public  Reference  Room  by  calling  the  Commission  at  1-800-SEC-0330.    You  can  also  obtain  copies  of  our 
Commission filings by going to the Commission’s website at http://www.sec.gov.
3841349.2
1
REFERENCES
As used in this annual report: (i) the terms “we”, “us”, “our”, “Douglas Lake” and the “Company” mean Douglas 
Lake Minerals Inc.; (ii) “SEC” refers to the Securities and Exchange Commission; (iii) “Securities Act” refers to the 
United  States  Securities  Act  of  1933,  as  amended;  (iv)  “Exchange  Act”  refers  to  the  United  States  Securities 
Exchange  Act  of  1934,  as  amended;  and  (v)  all  dollar  amounts  refer  to  United  States  dollars  unless  otherwise 
indicated.
PART I
ITEM 1.
BUSINESS
Name, Incorporation and Principal Offices
We were incorporated on January 5, 2004 under the laws of the State of Nevada.  Effective January 21, 2009 we 
effected a 5 for 1 stock split of our common stock and increased our authorized capital to 500,000,000 shares of 
common stock having a $0.001 par value.
Our  principal offices  are  located  at  222-6820  188th  Street,  Surrey,  British  Columbia,  Canada,  V4N  3G6;  our  telephone 
number is (604) 575-3552.
Overview
We are an exploration stage company engaged in the acquisition and exploration of mineral properties.  During our 
year  ended  May  31,  2010,  we  had  interests  in  several  mineral  claims  located  in  Tanzania,  Africa,  through 
prospecting licenses issued by the government of Tanzania.  However, we have allowed several of such property 
interests to lapse, and the only the property on which we have an interest at this time is the Mkuvia Alluvial Gold 
Project, as described below.
None of our mineral claims that we held during our year ended May 31, 2010, including the Mkuvia Alluvial Gold 
Project, contain any substantiated mineral deposits or reserves of minerals. Minimal exploration has been carried out 
on these claims. Accordingly, additional exploration of these mineral claims is required before any determination as 
to whether any commercially viable mineral deposit may exist on our mineral claims. Our plan of operations is to 
carry  out  preliminary  exploration  work  on  our  mineral  claims  in  order  to  ascertain  whether  our  mineral  claims 
warrant advanced exploration to determine whether they possess commercially exploitable deposits of minerals. We 
will not be able to determine whether or not any of our mineral claims contain a commercially exploitable mineral 
deposit,  or  reserve,  until  appropriate  exploratory  work  is  done  and  an  economic  evaluation  based  on  that  work 
concludes economic viability.
We are considered an exploration or exploratory stage company because we are involved in the examination and 
investigation of land that we believe may contain valuable minerals, for the purpose of discovering the presence of 
ore, if any, and its extent.  Because we are an exploration stage company, there is no assurance that a commercially 
viable  mineral  deposit  exists  on  the  property  underlying  our  mineral  claim  interests,  and  a  great  deal  of  further 
exploration  will  be  required  before  a  final  evaluation  as  to  the  economic  and  legal  feasibility  for  our  future 
exploration is determined.  We have no known reserves of any type of mineral.  To date, we have not discovered an 
economically viable mineral deposit on the property, and there is no assurance that we will discover one.
Our Mineral Claims
Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project
Our primary property of interest is the Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project.  On June 27, 2008 but effective on August 4, 
2008 when ratified by our Board of Directors, we entered into a Joint Venture Agreement with Mkuvia Maita (“Mr. 
Maita”), the registered holder of certain prospecting licenses over certain areas covering approximately 430 square 
kilometers located in the Liwale and Nachigwea Districts of Tanzania. Pursuant to this agreement, we had the right 
to  enter,  sample,  drill  and  otherwise  explore  for  minerals  on  the  property  underlying the  prospecting  licenses  as 
granted by the Government of Tanzania under the Mining Act of 1998, subject to a perpetual net smelter royalty 
return of 3% payable to Mr. Maita.
3841349.2
2
Effective on July 14, 2009, our Board of Directors ratified, confirmed and approved our entering into of a new Joint 
Venture Agreement (the “New Mkuvia Agreement”) with Mr. Maita.  The New Mkuvia Agreement covers a slightly 
smaller area than the original agreement, covering an area of approximately 380 square kilometers located in the 
Liwale and Nachigwea Districts of Tanzania, and more particularly described as follows:
•  Prospecting License No. 5673/2009; 
•  Prospecting License No. 5669/2009; 
•  Prospecting License No. 5664/2009; and 
•  Prospecting License No. 5662/2009
The New  Mkuvia  Agreement,  which  is dated  for  reference June 5, 2009,  supersedes and  replaces  the prior joint 
venture agreement as entered into by and between the Company and Mr. Maita (the “Prior Agreement”) regarding 
prior  prospecting  licenses  held  by  Mr.  Maita  over  substantially  the  same  area,  known  as  the  “Mkuvia  Project”, 
which is the focus of our current exploration and development efforts.
Pursuant to the terms of the New Mkuvia Agreement we shall continue to have the right to enter, sample, drill and 
otherwise  explore  for  minerals  on  the  property  underlying  the  New  Prospecting  Licenses  as  granted  by  the 
Government of Tanzania under the Mining Act of 1998 and any other rights covered by the prospecting licenses 
listed above.
In consideration for the entry into of the New Mkuvia Agreement, we were required to pay Mr. Maita US$40,000 
upon  signing  of  the  New  Mkuvia  Agreement.  In  addition,  and  upon  commencement  of  any  production  on  the 
property underlying the prospecting licenses, Mr. Maita is still entitled to receive a perpetual net smelter royalty 
return  of  3%  from  any  product  realized  from  the  property  underlying  the  prospecting  licenses  under  the  New 
Mkuvia Agreement. By entering into the New Mkuvia Agreement, the Company is no longer required to pay Mr. 
Maita the balance of approximately US$460,000 in aggregate yearly cash payments previously due under the Prior 
Agreement in consideration, in part, of the Company reducing the current unexplored property area underlying the 
prospecting licenses under the New Mkuvia Agreement by approximately 50 square kilometers.
The prospecting licenses were renewed on June 12, 2009 for the period of three years.
The property has several overlying primary mining licenses (“PMLs”) that have mineral rights that lie within the 
boundaries of the Mkuvia property.  Generally, PMLs represent limited mining rights which allow the small scale 
exploration  of  minerals  by  local  miners  and  must  predate  the  establishment  of  a  prospecting  license.    PMLs  are 
retained exclusively for Tanzanian citizens.  The maximum size of the demarcated area for a PML for all minerals 
other than building materials is 10 hectares.  The PML is granted for a period of five years, renewable once upon 
request.    When  a  PML  expires,  the  mineral  rights  succeed  to  the  underlying  prospecting  license  and  cannot  be 
renewed or re-staked thereafter, so long as the prospecting license remains valid.  Specifically, the PMLs on the 
Mkuvia property consist of approximately 115 licenses owned by Mr. Maita, and have been provided for in the New 
Mkuvia  Agreement.    Upon  a  successful  mining  permit  application  and  receipt,  the  PMLs  will  be  collapsed  and 
superseded by the prospecting license rights.
We  obtained  a  Technical  and  Recourse  Report  on  the  Mkuvia  Alluvial  Gold  Project,  dated  July  24,  2009,  as 
prepared  by  Laurence  Stephenson,  P.  Eng.,  and  Ross  McMaster,  MAusIMM.    This  report  was  prepared  in 
accordance  with  Canadian  National  Instrument  43-101  Standards  for  Disclosure  of  Mineral  Projects  and  its 
Companion Policy (“NI 43-101”).  Much of the information regarding the Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project as provided 
below is based on information provided in the 43-101 Report.
Effective  November  7,  2009,  the  Company  entered  into  a  purchase  agreement  with  Ruby  Creek  Resources,  Inc. 
(“Ruby  Creek”),  pursuant  to  which  Ruby  Creek  has  the  right  to  purchase  a  70  percent  interest  in  125  square 
kilometres of the Company’ 380 square kilometre Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project upon payment of $3,000,000 over a 
three-year period. The schedule by which Ruby Creek is to pay such $3,000,000 to the Company is as follows:
• 
• 
• 
•
$100,000 within five business days of signing of the Agreement;  
$150,000 within 15 business days of signing of the Agreement;  
$100,000 upon satisfactory completion of Ruby Creek’s due diligence;  
$400,000 upon closing under the Agreement and receipt of the first mining license;
3841349.2
3
• 
• 
•
$750,000 within 12 months of closing;  
$750,000 within 24 months of closing and  
$750,000 within 36 months of closing (this final payment may be made, in Ruby Creek’s discretion, in cash 
or shares of Ruby Creek).
The Agreement also provides that within 12 months of the closing transaction, Ruby Creek has the option to 
increase its interest from 70 percent to 75 percent of the 125 square kilometres by making an additional $1,000,000 
payment to the Company.
In a further purchase agreement between the Company and Ruby Creek dated for reference May 19, 2010 and fully 
executed on June 16, 2010, Ruby Creek agreed to purchase 70% of the remaining 255 sq km of the Mkuvia Alluvial 
Gold  Project  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  such  further  purchase  agreement.    Under  the  terms  of  the  further 
purchase  agreement,  Ruby  Creek  will  earn  a  70  percent  interest  in  the  remaining  255  square  kilometres  of  the 
Company’s  380  square  kilometre  Mkuvia  Alluvial  Gold  Project  by  making  payments  totaling  $6,000,000  to  the 
Company. The schedule by which Ruby Creek is to pay such $6,000,000 to the Company is as follows:
• 
•
• 
• 
•
$200,000 due within seven days of execution of the agreement;  
$150,000 plus the issuance of 4 million restricted shares of common stock of Ruby Creek, with an agreed 
upon  value  of  $0.80  per  share  for  a  stated  valuation  of  $3.2  million,  within  30  days  of  the  receipt  of 
Certificates  of  Acknowledgement  for  all  underlying  and  related  Agreements  from  the  Commissioner  for 
Minerals in Tanzania as required by the Mining Act of Tanzania;  
$450,000 on June 1, 2011;  
$1,000,000 on June 1, 2012; and  
$1,000,000 on June 1, 2013 (which may be satisfied by the issuance of stock by Ruby Creek).
Thus,  the  combined  payments  under  the  November  2009  and  the  June  2010  Agreement  provide  for  a  total 
commitment of $9,000,000 payable to the Company by Ruby Creek to purchase a 70% interest in the entire 380 
square kilometre Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project.
The ownership structure of the interest in the Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project shall be a 70% interest for Ruby Creek, 
a 25% interest for Douglas Lake, and a 5% interest for Mr. Mkuvia Maita, the original owner of the underlying 
prospecting licenses. In addition, Mr. Maita retains a 3% net smelter royalty. However, the Agreement also provides 
that Ruby Creek may increase its ownership position from a 70% interest to 75%, reducing the Company’s position 
to 20%, by giving Notice to the Company and paying $1,000,000 to the Company by June 1, 2011.
Location and Access
The  380  square  kilometres  Mkuvia  Project  is  located  in  the  Nachingwea  District,  Lindi  Region  of  the  United 
Republic of Tanzania, and approximately 140 kilometres west of Nachingwea town. Lindi Region is one of the three 
regions forming Southern Zone of United Republic of Tanzania, the other regions being Mtwara and Ruvuma. The 
Mtwara  and  Ruvuma  regions  border  northern  Mozambique  and  eastern  Malawi.  A  central  point  in  the  mining 
license is located at 361600 mE, 8856946 mN, UTM Zone 37 Southern Hemisphere (WGS 84)
The Lindi Region is one of the 20 Regions in Tanzania Mainland. The Region lies between South latitude 08o30’ 
and 10o30’ and East longitude 37o30’ and 39o30’. It is bordered by four other regions, the Coastal and Morogoro 
regions to the North, the Ruvuma region to the West, the Mtwara region to the South and the Indian Ocean to the 
East.
The main road from Dar es Salaam to the southern regions passes through the Coastal, Lindi, Mtwara and Ruvuma 
regions.  The  road  connects  to  northern  Mozambique  and  eastern  Malawi  via  the  Mtwara  and  Ruvuma  regions. 
Recently funding from external donors and the central government have significantly improved the road from Dar 
Es  Salaam  to  the  Lindi  and  Mtwara  regions  from  gravel  to  tarmac  level,  covering  a  total  distance  of  about  700 
kilometres, including the construction of 1 kilometre long bridge across the Rufiji River.
The Lindi Region is served by 4 airstrips, in Lindi, Nachingwea, Liwale and Kilwa Masoko. These gravel strips are 
capable of supporting small to medium size planes only. There is no commercial air service to the region.
3841349.2
4
LOCATION MAP: MKUVIA PROPERTY IN TANZANIA
The  Mkuvia  Property  is  accessible  by  dirt  gravel  road  from  Nachingwea  town  via  Mbondo,  Kilimarondo  and 
Kiegeyi villages. However, during intense rain, access to the property from Kiegeyi village can only be achieved by 
using  4  x  4  trucks.  Operations  for  the  exploration  of  the  Mkuvia  Property  would  be  based  out  of  the  town  of 
Nachingwea located 140 kilometres east of the property and about 600 kilometres southwest of Dar es Salaam, the 
capital of Tanzania.  Nachingwea town, which is one of the districts within Lindi Region, has an airstrip facility on 
which up to medium size aircrafts can safely be utilized.
Access  to  the  property  is  via  main  Tanzanian  highways  to  the  village  of  Kiegeyi  and  then  by  field  road  to  the 
Company’s main field camp. Field roads exist throughout the property.
Although the electrical power grid is reaching most areas of Tanzania it does not extend to the area of the Mkuvia 
property and will not likely be available in the near future. Since Tanzania has a vibrant mining community, a large 
pool of experienced mining personnel and equipment is available, some of it locally.
There are no waste treatment plants in the immediate area.
3841349.2
5
Topography and Climate
The topography of the area ranges between 480 to 760 metres and is relatively moderately rugged to the central, 
west and the southwest, and flat to the eastern part. Many of the rivers and streams which are flowing to the south, 
north and east directions are seasonally dry. The main Mbwemkuru River flows all year round and water availability 
for all aspects of the exploration and development program will not be a problem. The area is dense vegetated with 
thick bushes along the rivers and streams valleys.
There  are  four  main  climatic  zones  that  can  affect  the  whole  of  Tanzania:  the  coastal  area  where  conditions  are 
tropical;  the  central  plateau,  which  is  hot  and  dry;  the  semi-temperate  highland  areas;  and  the  high,  moist  lake 
regions. There are two rainy seasons in the north, from November to January and from March through May. In the 
Lindi Region, annual rainfall ranges from 600mm in low lands to 1200mm in the highland plateau. Most parts of the 
coastal, central and north eastern highlands are currently experiencing extreme drought conditions after a prolonged 
period of below  average  annual  rainfall  in consecutive  seasons. Plans  to develop  water  resources  could not only 
facilitate operations but might provide a local resource that will attract government approval and funding.
The mean annual temperatures vary with altitude from the valley bottom to the mountain top. The average annual 
temperature varies between 18 degrees C on the mountains to 30 degrees C in river valleys. In most parts of the 
region, the average temperatures are almost uniform at 25 degrees C. In general the hot season runs from July to 
September.
History
Gold mineralization in the area was first discovered at the time of the government’s Geological Survey of Tanzania, 
a country-wide geochemical survey program conducted in the 1990s. The property is part of a previously described 
gold  district,  the  Kitowero  Prospect,  in  which  a  State  Mining  Corporation  reported  mineral  concentrates  in  the 
current rivers, including the Mbwemkuru River. The authors of the 43-101 Report have advised that they have not 
been  able  to  verify  this  information,  and  no  historical  estimates  or  details  is  available  on  the  source  of  this 
information.
Small scale artisanal mining activities commenced in 2002 by local miners, with the aim of exploring and mining 
gemstone along the main Mbwemkuru River and its tributaries. However, gold was recovered from the concentrates 
and  hence  the  area  turned  from  gemstone  to  alluvial  gold  mining.  The  current  production  from  artisanal  mining 
work by local miners, as reported by them averages between 1.5 to 2 kilograms of gold per month, recovered from 
loose sands and gravels. The authors of the 43-101 Report have not been able to verify this information.
Geological Setting
Tanzania has a geological environment representing all the known chronostratigraphical units of the world ranging 
from  Archaean,  Proterozoic,  Phanerozoic  to  Quarternary  ages.  These  geological  formations  host  a  variety  of 
minerals such as gold, base metals, diverse types of gemstones (including tanzanite, diamonds, emerald, sapphires, 
colored quartz, ruby, beryl, tourmaline, garnet), various industrial minerals, building materials, phosphate, coal, salt, 
kaolin, tin, water and hydrocarbons.
Regional Geology.  Much of the central and northern part of the country is underlain by the Tanzania Archaean 
Craton.  The  central  part  of  the  country  is  composed  of  the  high  grade  metamorphic  terrain  (the  Dodoman 
Supergroup dominated by rafts of amphibolite to granulite facies metamorphic rocks in migmatitic granite terrain), 
whereas the northern part is covered by the Greenstone Belt (the Nyazian – Kavirondian Supergroup comprising 
sequences of mafic to felsic volcanics, chert/banded iron formation and clastic sediments). The Tanzania Archaean 
Craton is well known as a host for world-class gold deposits similar to other Archaean Cratons around the world. 
The Craton is also intruded by a number of diamondiferous kimberlite pipes.
The Tanzania Archaean Craton is engulfed to southeast and southwest by Palaeaproterozoic Usagaran and Ubendian 
mobile belts respectively, with high grade crystalline metamorphic rocks with a number of postorogenic gabbroic 
and  granitic  intrusives  hosting  base  metals,  shear  zone  hosted  gold,  various  types  of  gemstones  and  industrial 
minerals. The eastern part of the Usagaran Belt is mobilized by the Neoproterozoic Pan African Orogeny forming 
the Mozambique Belt with lithological, structural and metallurgical characteristics similar to that of the Usagaran - 
Ubendian Belt.
3841349.2
6
The Palaeoproterozoic Ubendian mobile belt is bound to the west by the mildly metamorphosed Mesoproterozoic 
Fold  Belt  (the  Kibaran  –Bukoban  -  Karagwe-Ankolean Supergroup).  The  supercrustal  rocks  of  this  Belt  (mainly 
meta – argillites, phyllites, low-grade sericite schists and quartzites) are intruded by post orogenic granites which 
have alteration haloes containing veins with tin and tungsten mineralization. The Belt is also characterized by post – 
orogenic basic intrusives hosting platinum group metals (PGMs).
The  Uha  -  Malagarasi  Neoproterozoic  to  early  Palaeozoic  age  is  an  intracratonic  formation  consisting  of 
sedimentary  –  volcanic  depositional  sequences  of  sandstones,  quartzites,  shales,  red  beds,  dolomitic  limestones, 
cherts and amygdaloidal lavas with indications of strata-bound copper deposits and various industrial minerals.
Phanerozoic formations in Tanzania include the following:
(i)   The  Karoo  Supergroup  of  Late  carboniferous  to  Jurassic  age  made  up  of  continental  sedimentary  rocks 
famous  for  hosting  good-quality  coal  resources  occurring  in  several  isolated  coalfields  located  in  south 
west of Tanzania.
(ii)  Marin Formations that are dominated by shelf-facies clay bound sands, marls and some isolated coral reefs 
good  for  production  of  portland  cement,  lime  and  construction  aggregates.  The  marls  and  sands  are 
respectively, good source and reservoir rocks of hydrocarbons. At Mandawa there are salt domes made up 
of gypsums and other evaporates salts that can be used for various industrial purposes.
(iii) Neogene to Quarternary continental formations in isolated basins and river channels composed of clays (red 
soils, ochre, kaolin, bentonites, meerschaum, bauxite), limestone, evaporates (gypsum, nitrates and halides) 
and sands; volcanic rocks ranging in composition from lavas (basalts, andesites, and phonolites) good for 
aggregates, apatite and niobium bearing carbonatites (good for fertilizers), tuffs, ash and pumice (good for 
production  of  pozzolana  cement)  and  dimension  stones;  volcanic  fumarolic  exhalative  deposits  (mainly 
sulphur and fluorites).
Property Geology.  The Mkuvia Project is situated at the eastern margin of the Selous Basin where Karoo and young 
sedimentary rock are in fault contact with low to high-grade metamorphosed rocks of Neoproterozoic age belonging 
to  the  Mozambique  Belt.  The  Proterozoic  basement  rocks  are  bounded  by  Palaeozoic,  Mesozoic  and  Cenozoic 
basins to the east, north and west. The dominant rocks are biotite schist and gneiss, granitic gneiss, garnetiferous 
amphibolites, quartzite, pegmatite dyke and mafic sills which are unconformably overlain by palaeo-placer sand and 
pebble beds and recent superficial deposits. The regional structural trends that control the deposition appear to be 
trending at northwest and northeast.
The geology of the property is dominated by thick (up to 10 m) of transported cover consisting of palaeo-placer 
sand, gravel and pebble beds derived from Karoo to the west and younger sedimentary rocks. The sand horizon is 
massive, graded from fine to coarse grained, characterized by orange-yellow sands, well exposed at Old Matandani 
Prospect,  and  white-grey  sands  which  cover  the  large  part  of  the  property.  The  basal  conglomerate  pebbles 
(auriferous pebbles and cobbles beds) are well rounded, well sorted, dominantly made of quartzite, quartz rocks, and 
other basement rocks.
The thickness of palaeo-placer sand–pebble beds and the overlaying black clays material increase toward the eastern 
part of Mbwemkuru River as observed at Mkilikage Prospect. This would be expected if the source of the deltaic or 
beach placer material is from the west. At Mkilikage Prospect, a thick layer of medium to coarse grained sandy bed 
(~ 2.5 m thick) resulted from modern river deposition is overlaying palaeo-placer sand-pebble beds. This sandy bed 
is characterized by well developed cross bedding sedimentary structures with minimal gold content until the lower 
reaches.
The red-brown sands are massive with no obvious bedding. They comprise subangular quartz grains with a matrix of 
hematite clay. They range from <1 m up to 3 m thickness, and generally appear to be thicker upslope, particularly at 
the western extremity of the property, well exposed at Old Matandani workings. They have been reworked in the 
current river bed, with removal of the clay, to produce white friable sands that extend for up to 300 m, but generally 
less,  upslope.  These  are  clearly  gold-bearing  as  they  have  been  extensively  mined  by  artisanals,  but  panning 
suggests that they are low grade.
The sands overlie a polymictic conglomerate sequence that comprises several clay-rich, horizontally bedded units 
interlayered  with  sandy  beds.  The  clasts  range  from  pebbles  through  cobbles  to  boulders,  the  latter  being  only 
sporadically developed, but suggesting that there may be distinct channels in the conglomerate sequence upslope
3841349.2
7
from the present river. Artisanal activity and panning indicate that the conglomerates have higher gold grades than 
the overlying sands. This feature would be anticipated in a delta or beach placer forming river fan.
Most of the Neoproterozoic basement rocks are exposed on the NE-SW trending ridge located in the central-eastern 
portion  of  the  property  with  few  outcrops  observed  in  the  south  part,  exposed  on  the  river  banks  and  beds.  The 
basement geology consists of granite-gneisses, biotite gneiss, schists and quartzo-feldspathic gneiss and quartzite, 
which have been intruded by pegmatite veins and mafic dykes and quartz veins.
The quartzite has a bedded sugary texture. The biotite gneiss is fine grained, well bedded with biotite, feldspar and 
quartz. Quartz-feldspar gneiss additionally contains minor biotite and was also observed to contain some large augen 
like feldspar crystals. Pegmatite was generally seen to have graphic texture with very coarse grained feldspar and 
smaller quartz crystals, and with only biotite or chlorite as an accessory mineral. The granite-gneiss characterized by 
granoblastic texture and weakly developed foliation fabrics.
Mineralization
Thus far, the known gold mineralization in Mkuvia Property occurs as placer deposits comprising of a significant, 
but unquantified accumulation of gold in alluvium hosted by: 1) reworked palaeo-placer by the Mbwemkuru River 
and its tributaries, and 2) an over 10 m thick zone of palaeo-placer sand and pebble beds non-conformably overlying 
biotite schist, gneiss, quartzite, garnet-amphibolite and granitoids. The latter comprises a poorly sorted palaeo-beach 
placer  plateau  extending  over  29  km  along  a  NW-SE  direction  and  ~5  km  wide  along  a  NE-SW  direction.    In 
addition there are extensive troughs with similar continental alluvium further west in the Karroo Basin. It is however 
notable that at the highest point on the property, pebble conglomerates were noted on the surface that have been 
worked sporadically by the artisanal miners (due to lack of water resources) suggesting that gold is present. This is 
consistent with the proposition that the mineralization is associated with a wide spread beach placer environment.
Gold-bearing alluvium along the Mbwemkuru River occurs within a 0.35 to 2.0 m thick zone between the bedrock 
and sandy-gravelly material related to present drainage active channels and terraces. This zone contains an estimated 
1.0 grams per cubic metre that the small-scale miners are currently reportedly recovering.
Gold is very fine-grained in general, suggesting a distal source, although some coarser-grained flakes are present. 
The  gold  is  associated  with  the  black  sands  that  comprise  fine-grained  ilmenite  and  pink  garnet  and  minor 
magnetite. These may be represented by distinct ferruginous layers in the conglomerate sequence. The minerals in 
the black sand are consistent with the beach placer model.
Artisanal miners have been active since 2002 exploiting these deposits using simple sluice techniques and hence 
dependant on water for treatment. Placer type gold occurs as very fine flat pieces implying reworking or a distal 
source. Other elements (such as Pt, Pd, Ag, U and Th) in the placer are of passing interest only. Pt and Pd do not 
appear to be a consistent constituent.
The area was loosely defined by the surface inspection of the beach placer type gravel formations in place. The wide 
spread area remains to definitively be surveyed to confirm that the boundaries indicated are correctly delineated. 
This delineation should be treated as speculative and will need further exploration work to define.
Exploration Activities
The Mkuvia Property is without known reserves and our activities to date have been exploratory in nature.
An estimated total of US$2.1 million has been spent on Mkuvia Property during the period from April to December 
2008  for  various  exploration  activities,  which  include  casual  labour  salaries,  transport,  field  costs,  office  and 
administration and hardware.  Reconnaissance exploration work on the project to date has consisted of pitting and 
sampling, geological mapping and bedrock sampling, and stream and sediments sampling, as described below.
Pitting and Sampling.  Pitting work commenced in June 2008 and continued throughout to March 2009. The initial 
pit  sampling  program  on  the  Mkuvia  property  was  undertaken  at  the  Matandani  Main  workings,  along  the 
Mbwemkuru  River.    A  total  of  161  pits  consisting  of  498  samples  were  completed  from  10  sections  during  the 
period  from  June  to  December  2008.    These  pits  were  deepened  and  sampled  trying  to  reach  bedrock  (12-15  m 
estimate, bedrock was not encountered) where possible.  Analysis of the gold content in the pit samples continued 
through to May 2009.
3841349.2
8
Lines were run north south across the area on a line spacing of 500 m and with a pit being dug to the bedrock refusal 
at 50 m intervals along the line.  The sampling was done volumetrically from the surface, where a 100 litre sample 
was  collected  from  each  cubic  meter  of  material  recovered.  The  pit  sampling  was  done  based  on  the  geological 
control. Each individual horizon (sand, gravel, pebble) was sampled separately, maintaining a 100 litre sample size.
The pit samples were then treated using a Knelson Concentrator on site in September 2008.
The  compilation  of all  heavy  mineral  and  gold  results was  completed  by TMEx  staff  in  laboratory  conditions  at 
Arusha, Tanzania, which included separating and weighing the gold recovered from each sample where measurable 
gold was observed. Each sample was taken from a designated and mapped stratigraphy as a measured volume of 
loose material (e.g.: sands, gravel) and usually were 100 litres in field estimated volume. Sample treatment was by a 
7.5  inch  Knelson  concentrator  to  produce  a  heavy  mineral  concentrate. After further  hand panning  in  the  TMEx 
laboratory    reduced  the  concentrate,  it  was  dried  and  the  gold  was  finally  separated  from  all  other  minerals, 
described and weighed to give a result in g/Lcm. (A loose cubic metre (Lcm) is defined as the expansion of the in 
situ measurement of material that once excavated increases by a 20-30% factor that will be determined exactly in 
further  test  work.)  TMEx  is  a  company  controlled  by  Mr.  McMaster  took  charge  of  the  concentrate  from  the 
Knelson concentrator and proceeded to calculate the weight of gold.
All pits were geologically mapped, level surveyed and generated cross sections.  Of significance is that where the 
test pits were able to penetrate below the pebble conglomerate the encountered clay rich units were significantly 
devoid of gold colour counts and assay analysis.
The  pit  sampling  has  successfully  identified  the  sand  and  pebble  conglomerates  as  auriferous  in  the  area  of  the 
Matandani Main workings, along the Mbwemkuru River.
Geological  Mapping  and  Bedrock  Sampling.    Geological  mapping  work  is  ongoing  in  the  Mkuvia  Project.  The 
mapping is conducted at scale of 1:20,000. However, most of the Mkuvia Property lies under superficial covers, 
with outcrops being exposed on the NE-SW trending Mbwemkuru ridge located in the central - eastern portion of 
the property and along rivers and streams beds flowing in the southern portion.  The dominant basement lithologies 
encountered  during  the  mapping,  stream  sampling  and  pitting  activities  are  biotite-hornblende  gneiss,  which 
developed  strong  foliation  fabrics  and  compositional  banding  and  weakly  foliated  to  massive  quartzo-feldspathic 
gneiss referred as granite-gneiss, with granular igneous texture being preserved. The granite-gneiss is characterized 
by  granoblastic  texture  and  weak  foliation  fabrics.  Quartz-magnetite  subcrops  and  rubbles  are  exposed  on  the 
northern part along Mbwemkuru ridge. The rock is characterized by alternating narrow bands/layers of quartz and 
magnetite. The basement rocks have been intruded by the late pegmatite dykes and veins and quartz veins.
The superficial covers which dominated the western part of the project consist of palaeo-sands, gravels, pebbles and 
cobbles  deposition,  with  recent  river  deposition  and  clayey  material.  The  pebbles  and  cobbles  are  well  rounded, 
made up of mainly quartzite and quartz vein.
Calcrete formations have been observed, mostly formed in the swamps.
Bedrock sampling work is taking place concurrently with the geological mapping. Thus far, a total of 60 bedrock 
samples were collected for gold and base metals assaying and references. The samples for assaying were sent to 
SGS  Laboratory,  Mwanza  for  analysis.    Many  of  the  bedrock  samples  were  collected  from  the  central-eastern 
portion of the property where basement rocks are well exposed along Mbwemkuru Hill and river beds.
Stream and Sediments Sampling.  Reconnaissance stream sediments sampling work commenced in September 2008 
in all prioritized rivers and streams within the Mkuvia Property. The objective of the program was to quickly define 
the  pattern  and  limit  of  the  placer  gold  mineralization  within  the  property.  The  program  was  undertaken  in  the 
eastern and northeast part of the property. The stream samples were taken from at least one meter deep pits dug to 
the base of the selected part of the stream where gravels and heavy minerals are concentrated. A total of 73 stream 
sediments samples were collected during the period from September to December 2008.
From  September  2008,  sample  treatment  was  by  a  7.5  inch  Knelson  Concentrator  to  produce  a  heavy  mineral 
concentrate. This concentrate was dried and examined under a binocular microscope to identify heavy minerals of 
interest and gold. The gold was recovered, described, and gold grain counts were recorded to guide exploration in 
the reconnaissance stream samples.
3841349.2
9
A  preliminary  review  heavy  mineral  stream  sampling,  field  observations  and  interpretation  of  available  aerial 
photography has resulted in the identification of substantial additional areas of recent palaeo-alluvial deposits in the 
Mkuvia  project  area.  The  initial  reconnaissance  heavy  mineral  sampling  has  highlighted  several  drainages  and 
gravel ridges that warrant exploration and further evaluation.
Of  the  256  stream  samples,  over  a  hundred  had  gold  colours  of  more  then  10  with  16  having  over  100.  With 
reference to the work done in the pits, and since the samples taken from the stream sediments were done with the 
same volumetric procedure, the high colour counts suggest that other zones with grade potential could be identified 
on the property.
Results and Recommendations
The authors of the 43-101 report concluded that the Mkuvia Property is a significant property of exploration merit 
and  have  recommended  a  two-phase  exploration  program,  as  described  below,  which  the  Company  intends  to 
implement, subject to sufficient funding.
Phase I has a budget of $2.58 million and will lead directly to the implementation of Phase II. Phase II is contingent 
on positive results that show the presence of gold in measurable quantities throughout the units identified and tested 
in Phase I. A decision will be made at the completion of Phase I as to whether to proceed to Phase II.
Phase II is recommended to expand on the results of Phase I with a full test mining program which will include 
development  and  resource  definition  and  consisting  of  further  Auger  or  a  reverse  circulation  drilling  program,  a 
further local test mining pit sampling along sections of newly selected areas, and full scale test placer operation. 
Phase II has a budget of $7.42 million.
A break-down of the budgets for each of Phase I and Phase II are as follows:
PHASE I 
 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
Total: 
 
PHASE II 
 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Total:
Action 
Quaternary Surface geological mapping and drill site selection  
Additional Pit Sampling on Cross section  
Drilling 3000 metres @ $125/metre (15 to 20 metres /hole)  
Assaying (Pan cons, soil, etc.)  
Permitting and bonding  
Support, logistical and operational, travel & supplies  
Drill Site preparation  
Test Pit Equipment and Operation  
Supervision, report writing & contingency (20%)
Action 
Drilling 6000 metres @ $125/ metre (15 to 20 metres /hole 
Quaternary Surface geological mapping and drill site selection  
Test Pit Operation  
Large Scale Test Pit Equipment and Operation 
Support logistical and operational, travel & supplies 
Supervision, report writing & contingency (25%)
Budgeted Cost 
$25,000 
$150,000 
$375,000 
$30,000 
$20,000 
$250,000 
$100,000 
$1,000,000 
$430,000 
$2,580,000
Budgeted Cost 
$750,000 
$40,000 
$250,000 
$2,500,000 
$2,500,000 
$1,380,000 
$7,420,000
Mineral  exploration  and  development  involves  a  high  degree  of  risk,  and  few  properties  that  are  explored  are 
ultimately developed into producing mines. There is no assurance that our mineral exploration activities will result 
in any discoveries of commercial bodies of ore. Our long-term profitability is directly related to the cost and success 
of our exploration programs, which may be affected by a number of factors beyond our control.
We will require additional financing in order to pursue the exploration of the Mkuvia Project to determine whether a 
economic mineral deposit exists on the property.  Our ability to pursue the exploration program outlined above is 
contingent  on  our  ability  to  raise  additional  financing  in  order  to  proceed  with  such  exploration.    There  is  no 
assurance that we will be able to obtain any additional financing to fund our exploration activities.
3841349.2
10
Other Property Interests 
All of the properties in which we held an interest during our year ended May 31, 2010 are in the exploration stage. 
As described above, our only current mineral property interest at this time is with respect to the Mkuvia Alluvial 
Gold Project.  The Company has allowed its interests in various other properties to lapse during its most recent 
fiscal year.
Morogoro
On August 4, 2005, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (the “KBT Agreement”) with KBT Discovery 
Group  Tanzania  Ltd.  (“KBT”)  to  acquire  three  prospecting  licenses,  which  cover  an  area  of  approximately  621 
square  kilometers  in  Tanzania,  for  an  aggregate  purchase  price  of  $75,000  and  2,800,000  restricted  shares  of 
common stock. On November 10, 2005, we entered into an amendment agreement to the KBT Agreement pursuant 
to  which  the  number  of  shares  to  be  issued  was  increased  to  5,600,000  restricted  shares  of  common  stock.  On 
October 16, 2006, we entered into an Amendment Agreement in which the aggregate purchase price was increased 
to $225,000. By the end of the fiscal year ended May 31, 2006, we had completed due diligence and closed the 
agreement. At the first closing, Prospecting License No. 2810/2004, known as “Tabora”, was transferred to us and 
we  issued  5,600,000  restricted  shares  of  common  stock  to  KBT.  Prospecting  License  No.  3117/2005,  known  as 
“Morogoro”, and Prospecting License No. 3118/2005, known as “KM 7”, were in the name of Atlas Africa Limited 
(“Atlas”),  a  Tanzanian  company.  KBT  had  entered  into  an  agreement  with  Atlas  which  gave  KBT  the  right  to 
prospect minerals under the Morogoro and KM 7 Prospecting Licenses and an option to enter into a joint venture 
with Atlas to prospect and mine minerals under the Morogoro and KM 7 Prospecting Licenses. KBT caused Atlas to 
terminate this joint venture agreement and transferred the Morogoro and KM 7 Prospecting Licenses to us and we 
paid KBT $75,000. On July 19, 2006, we entered into a Letter of Amendment, pursuant to which we agreed to pay 
$50,000 directly to Atlas. During the year ended May 31, 2007, we paid the $50,000 to Atlas and recognized an 
impairment  loss  of  $50,000  as  there  are  no  proven  or  probable  reserves  on  any  of  the  Tanzania  properties.  The 
prospecting licenses expire three years after the initial issuance. We can apply to reacquire 50% of the area covered 
by  the  original  prospecting  licenses.    The Company  has allowed  its  interests  in  Tabora,  KM 7  and Morogoro  to 
lapse.
On October 5, 2006, we entered into an option agreement (the “Option Agreement”) with Canaco pursuant to which 
we granted Canaco the right to earn up to a 70% interest in Prospecting License 3117/2005 in Tanzania known as 
“Morogoro” held by us. Under the Option Agreement Canaco has agreed to:
(a)  make cash payments to us of $250,000, of which $50,000 (received) is payable upon the approval of 
the Option Agreement by the board of directors of both companies and the TSX Venture Exchange 
(the  stock  exchange  upon  which  Canaco’s  shares  are  listed;  and  such  date  being  referred  to  as  the 
“Effective  Date”).  An  additional  $75,000  (paid)  is  payable  on  the  first  anniversary  of  the  Effective 
Date and an additional $125,000 is payable on the second anniversary of the Effective Date;
(b)   issue up to 800,000 of its common shares to us, of which 100,000 shares are issuable on the Effective 
Date (received), an additional 200,000 shares are issuable on the first anniversary of the Effective Date 
(received); and an additional 500,000 shares are issuable on the second anniversary of the Effective 
Date; and
(c)  spend up to $2,000,000 in exploration expenses on the subject property prior to the third anniversary of 
the Effective Date in the following manner: up to $250,000 in exploration expense prior to the first 
anniversary  of  the  Effective  Date,  up  to  $750,000  in  cumulative  exploration  expense  prior  to  the 
second anniversary of the Effective Date and up to $2,000,000 in cumulative exploration expense prior 
to the third anniversary of the Effective Date.
Canaco has failed to make their required payments and has abandoned their option on this property.
Magembe
On November 17, 2006, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with Atlas to acquire Prospecting License 
No. 3920/2006, known as “Shinyanga” or “Magembe”, which covers an area of approximately 46 square kilometres 
in Tanzania. The license was transferred to us on signing the agreement for an aggregate purchase price of $200,000 
(paid)  and  4,500,000  restricted  shares  of  common  stock.  We  determined  the  fair  market  value  of  the  4,500,000 
shares to be $3,172,500. As at May 31, 2007, the Company had issued 1,500,000 shares, and as at February 28, 
2010, the remaining 3,000,000 shares that are issuable under the agreement had not been issued.
3841349.2
11
On March 2, 2007, we entered into an option agreement with Canaco, whereby we granted Canaco the right to earn 
up to a 75% interest in Prospecting License 3920/2006 in Tanzania known as “Shinyanga” or “Magembe” held by 
the Company. Under the option agreement Canaco has agreed to:
(a)  make cash payments to us of $200,000, of which $100,000 (received) is payable upon the approval of 
the  board  of  directors  of  both  companies  and  the  TSX  Venture  Exchange,  the  stock  exchange  that 
Canaco’s shares are listed on (such date is referred to as the “Effective Date”). An additional $100,000 
is payable on the first anniversary of the Effective Date (received);
(b)   issue up to 750,000 of its common shares to us, of which 250,000 shares are issuable on the second 
anniversary of the Effective Date, an additional 500,000 shares are issuable on the third anniversary of 
the Effective Date; and
(c)   commit to spend up to $2,500,000 in exploration expenses on the subject property prior to the fourth 
anniversary  of  the  Effective  Date  ($250,000  in  cumulative  exploration  expense  prior  to  the  first 
anniversary  of  the  Effective  Date,  up  to  $500,000  in  cumulative  exploration  expense  prior  to  the 
second anniversary of the Effective Date, and up to $750,000 in cumulative exploration expense prior 
to the third anniversary of the Effective Date, and up to $1,000,000 in cumulative exploration expense 
prior to the fourth anniversary of the Effective Date).
Canaco has failed to make their required payments and has abandoned their option on this property.  As at May 31, 
2010, the Company has decided to focus on other properties and has let the Magembe prospecting license lapse.
Compliance with Government Regulation
We are subject to local laws and regulation governing the exploration, development, mining, production, importing 
and  exporting  of  minerals;  taxes;  labor  standards;  occupational  health;  waste  disposal;  protection  of  the 
environment;  mine  safety;  toxic  substances;  and  other  matters.  We  require  licenses  and  permits  to  conduct 
exploration and mining operations. Amendments to current laws and regulations governing operations and activities 
of  mining  companies  or  more  stringent  implementation  thereof  could  have  a  material  adverse  impact  on  our 
Company.  Applicable  laws  and  regulations  will  require  us  to  make  certain  capital  and  operating  expenditures  to 
initiate new operations. Under certain circumstances, we may be required to close an operation once it is started 
until a particular problem is remedied or to undertake other remedial actions. This would have a material adverse 
effect on our results and financial condition.
The Company’s mineral interests in Tanzania are held under prospecting licenses granted pursuant to the Mining 
Act, 1998 (Tanzania) for an initial period of three years and a prospecting license reconnaissance issued for initial 
periods of two years, and are renewable in two successive periods of two years only. We must pay annual rental fees 
for our prospecting licenses at a rate of $20 per square kilometer. There is also an initial one-time “preparation fee” 
of $200 per license. Upon renewal, we pay a fee of $200 per license. Renewals of our prospecting licenses can take 
many months and even years to process by the regulatory authority in Tanzania.
All prospecting licenses in Tanzania require the holder to employ and train local residents, typically amounting to 
$5,000 per year, and make exploration expenditures, as set out in the Mining Act, 1998 (Tanzania). At each renewal, 
at least 50% of our licensed area must be relinquished. If we wish to keep the relinquished one-half portion, we must 
file a new application for the relinquished portion.
The geographical area covered by a prospecting license (“PL”) may contain one or more previously granted primary 
mining licenses (a “PML”). A PLM is a mining license granted only to a Tanzanian citizen consisting of an area of 
not to exceed 10 hectares. Once a PL is granted, no additional PMLs can be granted within the geographical area 
covered by the PL. The PL is subject to the rights of previously granted and existing PMLs. The holder of a PL will 
have to work around the geographical area of the PML unless the PL holder acquires the PML and any rights to the 
land covered by the PML.
We must hold a mining license to carry on mining activities, which are granted only to the holder of a prospecting 
license covering a particular area. A mining license is granted for a period of 25 years or the life of the mine. It is 
renewable  for  a  period  not  exceeding  15  years.  We  do  not  hold  any  mining  licenses,  only  prospecting  licenses. 
Prospecting and mining license holders must submit regular reports in accordance with mining regulations. Upon 
commercial production, the government of Tanzania imposes a royalty on the gross value of all production at the 
rate of 3% of all gold produced. The applicable regulatory body in Tanzania is the Ministry of Energy and Minerals.
3841349.2
12
In July 1999, environmental management and protection regulations under the Mining Act, 1998 (Tanzania) came 
into  force.  An  environmental  impact  statement  and  an  environmental  management  plan  must  accompany  special 
mining  license,  mining  license  and  gemstone  mining  license  applications  for  mineral  rights.  In  addition  to  the 
establishment of environmental regulations, the Tanzanian government has improved management procedures for 
effective monitoring and enforcement of these regulations by strengthening the institutional capacity, especially in 
the  field  offices.  The  government  has  provided  rules  for  the  creation  of  reclamation  funds  to  reinstate  land  to 
alternative uses after mining and it has developed guidelines for mining in restricted areas, such as forest reserves, 
national parks, near sources of water and other designated areas. These regulations have not had any material effect 
on our operations to date.
Competition
We  operate  in  a  highly  competitive  industry,  competing  with  other  mining  and  exploration  companies,  and 
institutional  and  individual  investors,  which  are  actively  seeking  minerals  exploration  properties  throughout  the 
world  together  with  the  equipment,  labour  and  materials  required  to  exploit  such  properties.  Many  of  our 
competitors  have  financial  resources,  staff  and  facilities  substantially  greater  than  ours.  The  principal  area  of 
competition is encountered in the financial ability to cost effectively acquire prime minerals exploration prospects 
and then exploit such prospects. Competition for the acquisition of minerals exploration properties is intense, with 
many  properties  available  in  a  competitive  bidding  process  in  which  we  may  lack  technological  information  or 
expertise available to other bidders. Therefore, we may not be successful in acquiring, exploring and developing 
profitable properties in the face of this competition. No assurance can be given that a sufficient number of suitable 
minerals exploration properties will be available for acquisition, exploration and development.
Employees
We have no significant employees other than our officers and directors. We plan to retain independent geologists 
and consultants on a contract basis to conduct the work programs on our mineral properties in order to carry out our 
plan of operations.
Research and Development Expenditures
We have not incurred any research or development expenditures since our incorporation.
Subsidiaries
We currently have one wholly-owned subsidiary, Beijing Dao Hu Investment Consulting, Ltd., a Chinese company.  
We use this subsidiary primarily to facilitate and pay the direct costs associated with due diligence being conducted 
by our current Chinese investors and potential project joint venture partners.
Patents and Trademarks
We do not own, either legally or beneficially, any patent or trademark.
ITEM 1A.
RISK FACTORS
An investment in our common stock involves a number of very significant risks.  You should carefully consider 
the  following risks and  uncertainties  in  addition  to other  information  in  this  annual  report  in evaluating our 
company and its business before purchasing shares of our common stock.  Our business, operating results and 
financial condition could be seriously harmed due to any of the following risks.  The risks described below may 
not  be  all  of  the  risks  facing  our  company.    Additional  risks  not  presently  known  to  us  or  that  we  currently 
consider immaterial may also impair our business operations.  You could lose all or part of your investment due 
to any of these risks.
We are a recently organized business with a limited operating history.
We were incorporated in January 2004 and have a limited operating history which makes it difficult to evaluate the 
investment merits of our Company. As of May 31, 2010, we had incurred losses since inception of $30,095,548.
3841349.2
13
We have incurred net losses since our inception and expect losses to continue.
We  have  not  been  profitable  since  our  inception.  For  the  fiscal  year  ended  May  31,  2010,  we  had  a  net  loss  of 
$2,049,304. Since our inception on January 5, 2004 to May 31, 2010, we had a net loss of $30,095,548. We have not 
generated revenues from operations and do not expect to generate revenues from operations unless and until we are 
able to bring a mineral property into production. There is a risk that we may never bring a mineral property into 
production, that our operations will not be profitable in the future and you could lose your entire investment.
We may not be able to continue as a going concern if we do not obtain additional financing.
Our independent accountants’ audit report states that there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a 
going  concern.  We  have  incurred  only  losses  since  our  inception  raising  substantial  doubt  about  our  ability  to 
continue  as  a  going  concern.  Therefore,  our  ability  to  continue  as  a  going  concern  is  highly  dependent  upon 
obtaining additional financing for our planned operations. There can be no assurance that we will be able to raise 
any additional funds, or we are able to raise additional funds, that such funds will be in the amounts required or on 
terms favourable to us.
Our exploration activities are highly speculative and involve substantial risks.
The mineral properties that we held interests in during our year ended May 31, 2010 are in the exploration stage and 
no proven mineral reserves have been established. Our exploration work may not result in the discovery of mineable 
deposits of ore in a commercially economical manner. There may be limited availability of water, which is essential 
to mining operations, and interruptions may be caused by adverse weather conditions. Our operations are subject to 
a  variety  of  existing  laws  and  regulations  relating  to  exploration  and  development,  permitting  procedures,  safety 
precautions,  property  reclamation,  employee  health  and  safety,  air  quality  standards,  pollution  and  other 
environmental protection controls. Our exploration activities are subject to substantial hazards, some of which are 
not insurable or may not be insured for economic reasons. Any of these factors could have a material adverse effect 
on our results and financial condition.
We cannot accurately predict whether commercial quantities of ores will be established.
Whether an ore body will be commercially viable depends on a number of factors beyond our control, including the 
particular attributes of the deposit such as size, grade and proximity to infrastructure, as well as mineral prices and 
government regulations, including regulations relating to prices, taxes, royalties, land tenure, land use, importing 
and exporting of minerals and environmental protection. We cannot predict the exact effect of these factors, but the 
combination of these factors may result in a mineral deposit being unprofitable which would have a material adverse 
effect on our business. We have no mineral producing properties at this time. We have not defined or delineated any 
proven or probable reserves or resources on any of our properties to date.
We may not be able to establish the presence of minerals on a commercially viable basis.
Substantial expenditures will be required to develop the exploration infrastructure at any site chosen for exploration, 
to establish ore reserves through drilling, to carry out environmental and social impact assessments, and to develop 
metallurgical  processes  to  extract  the  metal  from  the  ore. We  may  not  be  able  to  discover  minerals  in  sufficient 
quantities to justify commercial operation, and we may not be able to obtain funds required for exploration on a 
timely basis. Accordingly, you could lose your entire investment.
We  will  need  to  incur  substantial  expenditures  in  an  attempt  to  establish  the  economic  feasibility  of  mining 
operations  by  identifying  mineral  deposits  and  establishing  ore  reserves  through  drilling  and  other  techniques, 
developing metallurgical processes to extract metals from ore, designing facilities and planning mining operations. 
The economic feasibility of a project depends on numerous factors beyond our control, including the cost of mining 
and production facilities required to extract the desired minerals, the total mineral deposits that can be mined using a 
given facility, the proximity of the mineral deposits to a user of the minerals, and the market price of the minerals at 
the time of sale. Our existing or future exploration programs or acquisitions may not result in the identification of 
deposits that can be mined profitably and you could lose your entire investment.
3841349.2
14
Our competition is intense in all phase of our business.
We  operate  in  a  highly  competitive  industry,  competing  with  other  mining  and  exploration  companies,  and 
institutional  and  individual  investors,  which  are  actively  seeking  minerals  exploration  properties  throughout  the 
world  together  with  the  equipment,  labour  and  materials  required  to  exploit  such  properties.  Many  of  our 
competitors  have  financial  resources,  staff  and  facilities  substantially  greater  than  ours.  The  principal  area  of 
competition is encountered in the financial ability to cost effectively acquire prime minerals exploration prospects 
and then exploit such prospects. Competition for the acquisition of minerals exploration properties is intense, with 
many  properties  available  in  a  competitive  bidding  process  in  which  we  may  lack  technological  information  or 
expertise available to other bidders. Therefore, we may not be successful in acquiring, exploring and developing 
profitable properties in the face of this competition. No assurance can be given that a sufficient number of suitable 
minerals exploration properties will be available for acquisition, exploration and development.
Our exploration activities are subject to various local laws and regulations
We are subject to local laws and regulation governing the exploration, development, mining, production, importing 
and  exporting  of  minerals;  taxes;  labor  standards;  occupational  health;  waste  disposal;  protection  of  the 
environment;  mine  safety;  toxic  substances;  and  other  matters.  We  require  licenses  and  permits  to  conduct 
exploration and mining operations. Amendments to current laws and regulations governing operations and activities 
of  mining  companies  or  more  stringent  implementation  thereof  could  have  a  material  adverse  impact  on  our 
Company.  Applicable  laws  and  regulations  will  require  us  to  make  certain  capital  and  operating  expenditures  to 
initiate new operations. Under certain circumstances, we may be required to close an operation once it is started 
until a particular problem is remedied or to undertake other remedial actions. This would have a material adverse 
effect on our results and financial condition.
We have uninsurable risks.
We may be subject to unforeseen hazards such as unusual or unexpected formations and other conditions. We may 
become subject to liability for pollution, cave-ins or hazards against which we cannot insure or against which we 
may elect not to insure. The payment of such liabilities may have a material adverse effect on our financial position.
We depend on key management personnel.
The success of our operations and activities is dependent to a significant extent on the efforts and abilities of our 
management. We do not have employment contracts with, and we do not maintain key-man life insurance on any of 
our officers. A loss of any of them could adversely affect our business.
We are subject to the volatility of metal and mineral prices.
The  economics  of  developing  metal  and  mineral  properties  are  affected  by  many  factors  beyond  our  control 
including, without limitation, the cost of operations, variations in the grade ore or resource mined, and the price of 
such  resources.  The  market  prices  of  the  metals  for  which  we  are  exploring  are  highly  speculative  and  volatile. 
Depending on the price of gold or other resources, we may determine that it is impractical to commence or continue 
commercial production. The price of gold has fluctuated widely in recent years. The price of gold and other metals 
and minerals may not remain stable, and such prices may not be at levels that will make it feasible to continue our 
exploration activities, or commence or continue commercial production.
Our business activities are conducted in Tanzania.
Our  mineral  exploration  activities  in  Tanzania  may  be  affected  in  varying  degrees  by  political  stability  and 
government regulations relating to the mining industry and foreign investment in that country. The government of 
Tanzania  may  institute  regulatory  policies  that  adversely  affect  the  exploration  and  development  (if  any)  of  our 
properties. Any changes in regulations or shifts in political conditions in this country are beyond our control and 
may  materially adversely affect our business. Our operations may be  affected in varying degrees by government 
regulations  with  respect  to  restrictions  on  production,  price  controls,  export  controls,  foreign  exchange  controls, 
income taxes, expropriation of property, environmental legislation and mine safety.
3841349.2
15
We may not have clear title to our properties.
Acquisition of title to mineral properties is a very detailed and time-consuming process, and title to our properties 
may  be  affected  by  prior  unregistered  agreements  or  transfer,  or  undetected  defects.  Some  of  our  prospecting 
licenses are currently subject to renewal by the Ministry of Energy and Minerals of Tanzania. There is a risk that we 
may not have clear title to all our mineral property interests, or they may be subject to challenge or impugned in the 
future, which would have a material adverse effect on our business.
Our mineral property interests may be subject to other mining licenses.
Local residents in Tanzania may have registered the right to mine in small areas located within a prospecting license, 
such rights are evidenced by a mining license.  There can be no guarantee that we will be successful in negotiating 
with mining license owners to acquire their rights if we determine that we need their permission to drill or mine on 
the land covered by such mining licenses.
We have requirements for and there is an uncertainty of access to additional capital.
At  May  31,  2010,  we  had  cash  of  $Nil  and  a  working  capital  deficit  of  $1,539,978.  We  will  continue  to  incur 
exploration costs to fund our plan of operations and intend to fund our plan of operations from working capital and 
equity subscriptions. Ultimately, our ability to continue our exploration activities depends in part on our ability to 
commence operations and generate revenues or to obtain financing through joint ventures, debt financing, equity 
financing, production sharing agreements or some combination of these or other means. There can be no assurance 
that we will be able to obtain any such financing.
We have no cash flow from operations and depend on equity financing for our operations.
Our current operations do not generate any cash flow. Any work on our properties may require additional equity 
financing. If we seek funding from existing or new joint venture partners, our project interests will be diluted. If we 
seek  additional  equity  financing,  the  issuance  of  additional  shares  will  dilute  the  current  interests  of  our 
shareholders. We may not be able to obtain additional funding to allow us to fulfill our obligations on our existing 
exploration property or any future exploration properties. Our failure to obtain such additional financing could result 
in  delay  or  indefinite  postponement  of  further  exploration  and  the  possible  partial  or  total  loss  of  our  potential 
interest in certain properties or dilution of our interest in certain properties which would have a material adverse 
effect on our business.
Our directors and officers are indemnified for any monies they pay in settlement of actions performed while a 
director or officer.
Sections  78.7502  and  78.751  of  the  Nevada  Revised  Statutes  provide  for  indemnification  of  our  officers  and 
directors in certain situations where they might otherwise personally incur liability, judgments, penalties, fines and 
expenses in connection with a proceeding or lawsuit to which they might become parties because of their position 
with the Company. We have authorized the indemnification of our officers and directors to the full extent available 
under the Nevada Revised Statutes.
We could be required to rescind an offering of our shares.
On January 23, 2006, the Pennsylvania Securities Commission (“PSC”) issued an inquiry letter to the Company. The 
inquiry  alleged  that  the  Company  offered  and  sold  securities  to  investors  without  being  in  compliance  with 
Regulation D and without registration. The PSC notified us that an acceptable course of action was for us to offer 
the Pennsylvania state residents an opportunity to rescind their investment with us. While the Pennsylvania state 
residents have rejected our offer to repurchase their shares, we do not plan to make the same offer to our other US 
investors, residents of California, or our British Columbia resident investors. The offering consisted of a total of 38 
investors,  35  of  which  are  residents  of  British  Columbia  and  the  total  amount  of  money  paid  to  us  to  acquire 
common stock during this offering was $397,000. If the investors invoked their rescission right or if any securities 
commission  requires  us  to  offer  a  right  of  rescission  to  the  rest  of  the  investors,  we  may  have  to  refund  up  to 
$388,600.
3841349.2
16
Penny stock rules may make it more difficult to trade our shares.
Our shares will have to comply with the Penny Stock Reform Act of 1990 which may potentially decrease your 
ability to easily transfer our shares. Broker-dealer practices in connection with transactions in “penny stocks” are 
regulated. Penny stocks generally are equity securities with a price of less than $5.00. The penny stock rules require 
a broker-dealer, prior to a transaction in a penny stock not otherwise exempt from the rules, to deliver a standardized 
risk disclosure document that provides information about penny stocks and the risks in the penny stock market. The 
broker-dealer  also  must  provide  the  customer  with  current  bid  and  offer  quotations  for  the  penny  stock,  the 
compensation of the broker-dealer and its salesperson in the transaction, and monthly account statements showing 
the market value of each penny stock held in the customer’s account. In addition, the penny stock rules generally 
require that prior to a transaction in a penny stock, the broker-dealer make a special written determination that the 
penny  stock  is  a  suitable  investment  for  the  purchaser  and  receive  the  purchaser’s  written  agreement  to  the 
transaction.  These  disclosure  requirements  may  have  the  effect  of  reducing  the  level  of  trading  activity  in  the 
secondary market for a stock that has to comply with the penny stock rules. As our shares will likely have to comply 
with such penny stock rules, our shareholders will in all likelihood find it more difficult to sell their securities.
ITEM 1B.
UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
None.
ITEM 2.
PROPERTIES
Our executive offices are located at 222-6820 188th Street, Surrey, British Columbia, V4N 3G6.
Our  mineral  claim  interests  and  the  properties  underlying  such  interests  are  described  above  under  Item  1, 
“Business”.
ITEM 3.
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
We  are  not  a  party  to  any  material  legal  proceedings  nor  are  we  aware  of  any  legal  proceedings  pending  or 
threatened against us or our properties.
ITEM 4.
(REMOVED AND RESERVED)
Not applicable.
PART II
ITEM 5.
MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER 
MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES
Market Information
Our shares of common stock were quoted for trading on the OTC Bulletin Board under the symbol “DLKM.OB” on 
March 23, 2005.  The market for our common stock is limited, volatile and sporadic. The following table sets forth 
the high and low prices relating to our common stock for the periods indicated, as provided by the OTC Bulletin 
Board. These quotations reflect inter-dealer prices without retail mark-up, mark-down, or commissions, and may not 
reflect actual transactions.
QUARTER ENDED 
May 31, 2010 
February 28, 2010 
November 30, 2009 
August 31, 2009 
May 31, 2009 
February 28, 2009 
November 30, 2008 
August 31, 2008 
May 31, 2008
HIGH 
$0.26 
$0.39 
$0.49 
$0.44 
$0.51 
$0.69 
$0.69 
$1.01 
$0.57
3841349.2
17
LOW 
$0.11 
$0.22 
$0.18 
$0.18 
$0.19 
$0.12 
$0.23 
$0.22 
$0.11
Holders
As of September 10, 2010, we had 112 shareholders of record.
Dividend Policy
No  dividends  have  been  declared  or  paid  on  our  common  stock.    We  have  incurred  recurring  losses  and  do  not 
currently intend to pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
Securities Authorized For Issuance Under Compensation Plans
In  October  2008,  we  adopted  a  2008  stock  incentive  plan  (the  “2008  Plan”)  which  provides  for  the  granting  of 
equity awards as provided in the Plan to eligible participants. The following summary of the Plan is not complete 
and  is  qualified  in  its  entirety  by  reference  to  the  Plan,  a  copy  of  which  has  been  filed  as  an  exhibit  to  our 
registration statement on Form S-8 as field with the SEC on December 30, 2008.
The  Plan  provides  for  the  granting  of  stock  options,  stock  appreciation  rights,  restricted  stock  and  other  equity 
awards as set out in the Plan to our directors, officers, employees or consultants. The maximum number of shares 
that may be issued under the Plan are 10,000,000 shares of our common stock. No insider of the Company is eligible 
to receive an award under the Plan where (i) the insider is not a director or senior officer of the Company, (ii) any 
award, together with all of the Company’s previously established or proposed awards under the Plan could result at 
any time in (a) the number of shares reserved for issuance pursuant to options granted to the insider exceeding 50% 
of the outstanding issue of common stock or (b) the issuance to the insider pursuant to the exercise of options within 
a one-year period of the number of shares exceeding 50% of the outstanding issue of our common stock. Unless the 
administrator under the Plan determines that an award to a grantee is not designed to qualify as performance-based 
compensation, the maximum number of shares with respect to options and/or stock appreciation rights that may be 
granted during any one calendar year under the Plan to any one grantee is 5,000,000, all of which may be granted as 
incentive stock options, and the maximum aggregate grant of restricted stock, unrestricted shares, restricted stock 
units and deferred stock units in any one calendar year to any one Grantee is 5,000,000. The Plan is administered by 
a committee consisting of two or more members of our Board of Directors, who have the authority to, among other 
things, interpret the Plan, select eligible participants, determine whether and to what extent awards are granted under 
the Plan, approve award agreements under the Plan and amend the terms of any outstanding award granted under the 
Plan.
In addition to the 2008 plan, the Company previously adopted a stock incentive plan we adopted in April 2007, 
which has substantially the same terms as the 2008 Plan.  No more options may be granted under the April 2007 
plan, but there remain some options outstanding that may be exercised.
The table set forth below presents information relating to our equity compensation plans as of the date of May 31, 
2010:
Number of Securities to 
be Issued Upon Exercise 
of Outstanding Options, 
Warrants and Rights
(a)
Plan Category
Equity Compensation 
Plans to be Approved by 
Security Holders
n/a
Weighted-Average 
Exercise Price of
Outstanding Options, 
Warrants and Rights
(b)
Number of Securities
Remaining Available for 
Future Issuance Under 
Equity Compensation 
Plans (excluding column
(a))
n/a
n/a
Equity Compensation 
Plans Not Approved by 
Security Holders (2007 
and 2008 Stock Incentive 
Plan)
3,123,333
$0.30
3,800,000
3841349.2
18
Subsequent to our year ended May 31, 2010, on August 11, 2010, we granted 3,800,000 options under our 2008 
Plan, which have been exercised.  As such, as of the date of filing of this annual report, no more options may be 
granted under our 2008 Plan, but there remain some options outstanding that may be exercised.
In addition, subsequent to our year ended May 31, 2010, on August 11, 2010, we adopted a 2010 Stock Incentive 
Plan on substantially the same terms as the 2008 Plan as described above.  The maximum number of shares that may 
be issued under the 2010 Stock Incentive Plan are 10,000,000 shares of our common stock.  On August 11, 2010, we 
granted 6,000,000 options under our 2010 Plan, which have been exercised.  As such, as of the date of filing of this 
annual report, we may grant options for up to 4,000,000 common shares under our 2010 Plan.
Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
Any sales of unregistered securities during the Company’s fiscal year ended May 31, 2010 to the date of this report 
have been previously reported in a quarterly report on Form 10-Q or in a current report on Form 8-K.
No Repurchases
Neither we nor any affiliated purchaser has made any purchases of our equity securities during the fourth quarter of 
our fiscal year ended May 31, 2010.
ITEM 6.
SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act and are not required to provide 
the information required under this item.
ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND 
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition, changes in financial condition, plan of operations and results of 
operations should be read in conjunction with (i) our audited financial statements as at May 31, 2010, May 31, 2009 
and  for  the  period  from  inception  (January  5,  2004)  to  May  31,  2010  and  (ii)  the  section  entitled  “Business”, 
included in this annual report.  The discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties 
and  assumptions.    Our  actual  results  may  differ  materially  from  those  anticipated  in  these  forward-looking 
statements  as  a  result  of  many  factors,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  those  set  forth  under  “Risk  Factors”  and 
elsewhere in this annual report.
Plan of Operations
Our  plan  of  operations  for  the  next  twelve  months  is  to  focus  on  the  acquisition  and  exploration  of  mineral 
properties in Tanzania..  We anticipate that we will require approximately $2,600,000 for our plan of operations over 
the next twelve months, as follows:
(a)          approximately $1,600,000 for acquisition and exploration of mineral properties.
(b)          approximately $1,000,000 for management, consulting, administration and operating expenses.
At May 31, 2010, we had cash of $Nil and a working capital deficit of $1,539,978. We will require additional funds 
to pursue our plan of operations as set forth above. Accordingly, we will be required to obtain additional financing 
in order to pay our planned expenses during the next 12 months. We are continuing to seek to raise funds through 
private  placement  offerings  of  our  shares  of  common  stock.  However,  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  we  will 
complete any such private placement offerings or that the funds raised will be sufficient for us to pay our expenses 
for and beyond the next twelve months.
During  the  twelve  month  period  following  the  date  of  this  report,  we  anticipate  that  we  will  not  generate  any 
revenue. Accordingly, we will be required to obtain additional financing in order to pursue our plan of operations for 
and beyond the next twelve months. We believe that debt financing will not be an alternative for funding additional 
phases of exploration as we do not have tangible assets to secure any debt financing. We anticipate that additional 
funding will be in the form of equity financing from the sale of our common stock. We cannot provide investors 
with any assurance that we will be able to raise sufficient funding from the sale of our common stock to fund our 
acquisition and exploration program going forward. In the absence of such financing, we will not be able to continue
3841349.2
19
acquisition and exploration of mineral claims and our business plan will fail. Even if we are successful in obtaining 
equity  financing  to  fund  our  acquisition  and  exploration  program,  there  is  no  assurance  that  we  will  obtain  the 
funding  necessary  to  pursue  any  advanced  exploration  of  any  mineral  claims.  If  we  do  not  continue  to  obtain 
additional financing, we will be forced to abandon our mineral claims and our plan of operations.
We entered into a joint venture agreement with Mr. Maita with respect to the Mkuvia Project, and we have also 
entered into a purchase agreement with Ruby Creek whereby Ruby Creek may purchase a substantial interest in this 
project from us, in each case as described in Item 1 – “Business” above.  We may consider entering into additional 
arrangements to provide the required funding to develop the mineral claims. If we determine to pursue another joint 
venture partner, there is no assurance that any third party would enter into a joint venture agreement with us in order 
to  fund  the  exploration  of  our  current,  and  any  future,  mineral  claims.  If  we  entered  into  another  joint  venture 
arrangement, we would likely have to assign a significant percentage of our interest in our mineral claims to the 
joint venture partner.
Financial Condition
During the twelve-month period following the date of this annual report, we anticipate that we will not generate any 
revenue.  Accordingly, we will be required to obtain additional financing in order to pursue our plan of operations 
during and beyond the next twelve months.  We believe that debt financing will not be an alternative for funding as 
we do not have tangible assets to secure any debt financing.  We anticipate that additional funding will be in the 
form of equity financing from the sale of our common stock.  However, we do not have any financing arranged and 
we cannot provide investors with any assurance that we will be able to raise sufficient funding from the sale of our 
common stock to fund any additional and more advanced exploration programs beyond our initial aforementioned 
exploration program.  In the absence of such financing, we will not be able to continue exploration of the property 
underlying our mineral claim interest and our business plan will fail.  Even if we are successful in obtaining equity 
financing to fund any continuation of our exploration program, there is no assurance that we will obtain the funding 
necessary to pursue any advanced exploration of the property underlying our mineral claim interest.  If we do not 
continue to obtain additional financing, we will be forced to abandon our mineral claim interest.
Results of Operations
The following sets table sets out our losses for the periods indicated:
Revenue 
 
Expenses
Amortization 
Consulting 
General and administrative  
Mineral property costs 
Professional  
Travel 
Rent
Total Expenses 
Loss Before Other Income 
Other Income (Expense)
Mineral property option receipts 
Loss on sale of investment securities
Net Loss
3841349.2
20
Accumulated
from January 5, 2004 
(Date of Inception) to
May 31,
2010
$
– 
 
 
42,753 
7,550,389 
1,000,826 
19,529,413 
1,119,545 
1,167,830 
133,738 
30,544,494 
(30,544,494) 
 
506,017 
(57,071) 
(30,095,548)
Ended 
May 31,
2010
$
24,950 
1,710,134 
178,083 
98,361 
209,481 
122,291 
56,004 
2,399,304 
(2,399,304) 
 
350,000 
– 
(2,049,304)
For the Year
For the Year
–
Ended 
May 31,
2009
$
–
16,216 
1,934,253 
304,311 
1,661,186 
353,687 
440,014 
49,343 
4,759,010 
(4,759,010) 
 
– 
– 
(4,759,010)
Results of Operations for the Years Ended May 31, 2010 and 2009
Revenues
We had no operating revenues since our inception (January 5, 2004) to May 31, 2010.  We anticipate that we will 
not generate any revenues for so long as we are an exploration stage company.
Expenses
Our expenses in the year ended May 31, 2010 decreased to $2,399,304 from $4,759,010 in the year ended May 31, 
2009, as follows:
•  Our consulting fees decreased to $1,710,134 during our year ended May 31, 2010 (2009 - $1,934,253);
•  Our general and administrative fees decreased to $178,083 during our year ended May 31, 2010 (2009 -
$304,311) primarily due to decreased operations during the period;
•  Our mineral property costs decreased substantially to $98,361 during our year ended May 31, 2010 (2009 -
$1,661,186) primarily due to decreased operations during the period;
•  Our  professional  fees  decreased  to  $209,481  during  our  year  ended  May  31,  2010  (2009  -  $353,687)
primarily as a result of decreased legal costs;
•  Our travel expenses decreased to $122,291 during our year ended May 31, 2010 (2009 - $440,014);
•  Our  only  expense  line  items  that  increased  during  our  year  ended  May  31,  2010 were  for  amortization, 
which  increased  to  $24,950  (2009-$16,216)  and  for  rent,  which  increased  slightly  to  $56,004  (2009  - 
$49,343).
Net Loss
Our net loss for the year ended May 31, 2010 was $2,049,304, compared to $4,759,010 for the year ended May 31, 
2009.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had cash of $Nil and a working capital deficit of $1,539,978 at May 31, 2010.
We estimate that our total expenditures over the next twelve months will be approximately $2,600,000, as outlined 
above under the heading “Plan of Operations”.
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $226,943 during the year ended May 31, 2010, as compared to $3,588,880 
during the year ended May 31, 2009.  Net cash used in operating activities from our inception on January 5, 2004 to 
May 31, 2010 was $6,228,367.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $Nil during the year ended May 31, 2010, as compared to $73,300 during 
the year ended May 31, 2009, with respect to the purchase of property and equipment.  Net cash used in investing 
activities from our inception on January 5, 2004 to May 31, 2010 was $173,729.
Net Cash from Financing Activities
During the year ended May 31, 2010, we received $29,913 net cash from financing activities, primarily as proceeds 
from the issuance of our common stock.  During the year ended May 31, 2009, we received $3,805,600 net cash 
from financing activities, primarily from the issuance of our common stock.  We have funded our business to date 
primarily from sales of our common stock.  From our inception on January 5, 2004 to May 31, 2010, we raised a 
gross  total  of  approximately  $6,733,532  from  the  issuance  of  our  common  stock,  resulting  in  net  cash  from 
financing activities from inception on January 5, 2004 to May 31, 2010 of $6,402,096.
3841349.2
21
There are no assurances that we will be able to achieve further sales of our common stock or any other form of 
additional financing.  If we are unable to achieve the financing necessary to continue our plan of operations, then we 
will not be able to continue our exploration of the property underlying our mineral claim interest and our venture 
will fail.
Going Concern
We  have  not  attained  profitable  operations  and  are  dependent  upon  obtaining  financing  to  pursue  any  extensive 
exploration activities. For these reasons our auditors stated in their report on our audited financial statements for the 
year ended May 31, 2010 that they have substantial doubt we will be able to continue as a going concern.
Future Financings
We anticipate continuing to rely on equity sales of our common shares in order to continue to fund our business 
operations.  Issuances of additional shares will result in dilution to our existing shareholders.  There is no assurance 
that we will achieve any additional sales of our equity securities or arrange for debt or other financing to fund our 
planned exploration activities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future 
effect  on  our  financial  condition,  changes  in  financial  condition,  revenues  or  expenses,  results  of  operations, 
liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements and accompanying notes have been prepared in accordance with United States generally 
accepted accounting principles applied on a consistent basis.  The preparation of financial statements in conformity 
with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that 
affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of 
the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
We  regularly  evaluate  the  accounting  policies  and  estimates  that  we  use  to  prepare  our  financial  statements.    In 
general, management’s estimates are based on historical experience, on information from third party professionals, 
and  on  various  other  assumptions  that  are  believed  to  be  reasonable  under  the  facts  and  circumstances.    Actual 
results could differ from those estimates made by management.
We believe the following critical accounting policies require us to make significant judgments and estimates in the 
preparation of our consolidated financial statements.   
Mineral Property Costs 
The Company has been in the exploration stage since its inception on January 5, 2004 and has not yet realized any 
revenues from its planned operations. It is primarily engaged in the acquisition and exploration of mining properties. 
Mineral  property  exploration  costs  are  expensed  as  incurred.  Mineral  property  acquisition  costs  are  initially 
capitalized.  The  Company  assesses  the  carrying  costs  for  impairment  under  ASC  360,  Property,  Plant,  and 
Equipment at each fiscal quarter end. When it has been determined that a  mineral property can be economically 
developed as a result of establishing proven and probable reserves, the costs then incurred to develop such property, 
are  capitalized.  Such  costs will  be  amortized using  the  units-of-production  method over  the  estimated  life of  the 
probable  reserve.  If  mineral  properties  are  subsequently  abandoned  or  impaired,  any  capitalized  costs  will  be 
charged to operations. 
Long-lived Assets 
In accordance with ASC 360, Property Plant and Equipment the Company tests long-lived assets or asset groups for 
recoverability when events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying amount may not be recoverable. 
Circumstances which could trigger a review include, but are not limited to: significant decreases in the market price 
of the asset; significant adverse changes in the business climate or legal factors; accumulation of costs significantly 
in excess of the amount originally expected for the acquisition or construction of the asset; current period cash flow 
or operating losses combined with a history of losses or a forecast of continuing losses associated with the use of the 
asset; and current expectation that the asset will more likely than not be sold or disposed significantly before the end 
of its estimated useful life. Recoverability is assessed based on the carrying amount of the asset and its fair value 
which is generally determined based on the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and
3841349.2
22
the eventual disposal of the asset, as well as specific appraisal in certain instances. An impairment loss is recognized 
when the carrying amount is not recoverable and exceeds fair value. 
Asset Retirement Obligations 
The  Company  accounts  for  asset  retirement  obligations  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  ASC  440  Asset 
Retirement  and  Environmental    Obligations    which  requires  the  Company  to  record  the  fair  value  of  an  asset 
retirement obligation as a liability in the period in which it incurs a legal obligation associated with the retirement of 
tangible long-lived assets that result from the acquisition, construction, development and/or normal use of the assets. 
The Company did not have any assets retirement obligations as of May 31, 2010 and May 31, 2009.  
Financial Instruments 
ASC 825, Financial Instruments requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and the fair value of 
financial instruments, which include cash, bank indebtedness, accounts payable, amounts due to related parties, and 
deferred option payments were estimated to approximate their carrying values due to the immediate or short-term 
maturities of these financial instruments. The Company’s operations are in Canada, China and Africa, which results 
in exposure to market risks from changes in foreign currency rates. The financial risk is the risk to the Company’s 
operations that arise from fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and the degree of volatility of these rates. Currently, 
the Company does not use derivative instruments to reduce its exposure to foreign currency risk. 
Income Taxes 
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method in accordance with ASC 740, Income 
Taxes. The asset and liability method provides that deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected 
future  tax  consequences  of  temporary  differences  between  the  financial  reporting  and  tax  bases  of  assets  and 
liabilities, and for operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using 
the  currently  enacted  tax  rates  and  laws  that  will  be  in  effect  when  the  differences  are  expected  to  reverse.  The 
Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than 
not to be realized. 
Stock-based Compensation 
The  Company  records  stock-based  compensation  in  accordance  with  ASC  718,  Compensation  –  Stock  Based 
Compensation  and  ASC  505,  Equity  Based  Payments  to  Non-Employees,  which  requires  the  measurement  and 
recognition of compensation expense based on estimated fair values for all share-based awards made to employees 
and directors, including stock options.  
ASC 718 requires companies to estimate the fair value of share-based awards on the date of grant using an option-
pricing model. The Company uses the Black-Scholes option-pricing model as its method of determining fair value. 
This  model  is  affected  by  the  Company’s  stock  price  as  well  as  assumptions  regarding  a  number  of  subjective 
variables. These subjective variables include, but are not limited to the Company’s expected stock price volatility 
over the term of the awards, and actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviours. The value of the 
portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as an expense in the statement of operations 
over the requisite service period. 
All transactions in which goods or services are the consideration received for the issuance of equity instruments are 
accounted for based on the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instrument issued, 
whichever is more reliably measurable.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements  
In May 2009, FASB issued ASC 855, Subsequent Events, which establishes general standards of for the evaluation, 
recognition and disclosure of events and transactions that occur after the balance sheet date and through the date that 
the financial statements are issued. Although there is new terminology, the standard is based on the same principles 
as those that currently exist in the auditing standards. The standard, which includes a new required disclosure of the 
date through which an entity has evaluated subsequent events, is effective for interim or annual periods ending after 
June 15, 2009.  The adoption of ASC 855 did not have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements. 
In June 2009, the FASB issued guidance now codified as ASC 105, Generally Accepted Accounting Principles as 
the single source of authoritative accounting principles recognized by the FASB to be applied by nongovernmental 
entities in the preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP, aside from those issued by the 
SEC. ASC 105 does not change current U.S. GAAP, but is intended to simplify user access to all authoritative U.S. 
GAAP by providing all authoritative literature related to a particular topic in one place.  The adoption of ASC 105 
did  not  have  a  material  impact  on  the  Company’s  financial  statements,  but  did  eliminate  all  references  to  pre-
codification standards. 
3841349.2
23
The  Company  has  implemented  all  new  accounting  pronouncements  that  are  in  effect  and  that  may  impact  its 
financial statements and does not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been 
issued that might have a material impact on its financial position or results of operations.
ITEM 7A.
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act and are not required to provide 
the information required under this item.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
ITEM 8.
Index
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm...................................................................................... F-1 
 
Consolidated Balance Sheets..................................................................................................................................... F-2 
 
Consolidated Statements of Operations..................................................................................................................... F-3 
 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.................................................................................................................... F-4 
 
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’ Deficit...................................................................................................... F-5 
 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements........................................................................................................ F-8
3841349.2
24
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Stockholders  
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. (An Exploration Stage Company) 
as of May 31, 2010 and 2009 and the related consolidated statements of operations, cash flows and stockholders’ deficit for the 
years then ended and accumulated for the period from January 5, 2004 (Date of Inception) to May 31, 2010. These financial 
statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial 
statements based on our audits.  
 
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). 
Those  standards  require  that  we  plan  and  perform  the  audits  to  obtain  reasonable  assurance  about  whether  the  financial 
statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and 
disclosures in the financial statements. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its 
internal control over financial reporting. An audit includes consideration of internal control over financial reporting as a basis for 
designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the 
effectiveness  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting.  Accordingly,  we  express  no  such  opinion.  An  audit  also  includes 
assessing  the  accounting  principles  used  and  significant  estimates  made  by  management,  as  well  as  evaluating  the  overall 
financial statement presentation.  
 
In  our  opinion,  the  consolidated  financial  statements  referred  to  above  present  fairly,  in  all  material  respects,  the  financial 
position of Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. (An Exploration Stage Company) as of May 31, 2010 and 2009, and the results of its 
operations and its cash flows for the years then ended and accumulated for the period from January 5, 2004 (Date of Inception) to 
May 31, 2010 in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States.  
 
The  accompanying  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  assuming  the  Company  will  continue  as  a  going  concern.  As 
discussed in Note 1 to the financial statements, the Company has not generated any revenues and has incurred operating losses 
since inception. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. Management’s 
plans in regard to these matters are also discussed in Note 1. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might 
result from the outcome of this uncertainty.  
 
/s/ “Manning Elliott LLP” 
 
CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
Vancouver, Canada
September 13, 2010
3841349.2
F-1
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Balance Sheets 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
ASSETS
Current Assets
Cash 
Prepaid expenses (Note 3)
Total Current Assets
Property and Equipment (Note 4)
Total Assets
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS’ DEFICIT
Current Liabilities
Bank indebtedness 
Accounts payable 
Accrued liabilities (Note 7) 
Due to related parties (Note 5)
Total Liabilities
Commitments and Contingencies (Notes 1, 6 and 11) 
Subsequent Events (Note 14) 
Stockholders’ Deficit 
Common Stock  
   Authorized: 500,000,000 shares (2009 - 500,000,000), $0.001 par value  
   Issued and outstanding: 72,313,282 shares (2009 - 66,646,282 shares)
Additional Paid-in Capital
Common Stock Subscribed (Notes 6, 8 and 11(a))  
Donated Capital 
Deficit Accumulated During the Exploration Stage 
Total Stockholders’ Deficit 
Total Liabilities and Stockholders’ Deficit
May 31,
2010
$
May 31,
2009
$
– 
13,490
13,490
33,299
46,789
3,313 
530,838 
281,258 
738,059 
1,553,468
197,030 
15,665
212,695
58,249
270,944
– 
513,379 
273,599 
487,323 
1,274,301
72,313
66,646
26,154,556
24,291,241
2,253,000 
109,000 
(30,095,548) 
(1,506,679) 
46,789
2,576,000 
109,000 
(28,046,244) 
(1,003,357) 
270,944
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
F-2
3841349.2
Accumulated
from January 5, 2004 (Date
of Inception) to
For the Year Ended For the Year Ended
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Statements of Operations 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Revenue 
 
Expenses
Amortization 
Consulting 
General and administrative  
Mineral property costs 
Professional  
Travel 
Rent
Total Expenses 
Loss Before Other Income 
Other Income (Expense)
Mineral property option receipts (Note 6(g)) 
Loss on sale of investment securities
Net Loss  
Net Loss Per Share – Basic and Diluted
Weighted Average Shares Outstanding
May 31,
2010
$
– 
 
 
42,753 
7,550,389 
1,000,826 
19,529,413 
1,119,545 
1,167,830 
133,738 
30,544,494 
(30,544,494) 
 
506,017 
(57,071) 
(30,095,548)
May 31,
2010
$
– 
 
 
24,950 
1,710,134 
178,083 
98,361 
209,481 
122,291 
56,004 
2,399,304 
(2,399,304) 
 
350,000 
– 
(2,049,304) 
(0.03)
May 31,
2009
$
– 
 
 
16,216 
1,934,253 
304,311 
1,661,186 
353,687 
440,014 
49,343 
4,759,010 
(4,759,010) 
 
– 
– 
(4,759,010) 
(0.08)
71,839,000
57,781,000
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
F-3
3841349.2
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Operating Activities
Net loss 
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in operating
activities: 
Amortization 
Donated services and rent 
Impairment of mineral property costs 
Loss on sale of investment securities 
Mineral property option payments 
Stock-based compensation
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
Prepaid deposit 
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 
Due to related parties
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities 
Investing Activities
Mineral property acquisition costs 
Proceeds from mineral property options 
Purchase of property and equipment 
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities 
Financing Activities 
Bank indebtedness 
Proceeds from issuance of common stock 
Repayment of loan payable 
Share issuance costs
Net Cash Provided By Financing Activities 
Increase (Decrease) in Cash 
Cash - Beginning of Year 
Cash - End of Year 
Non-cash Investing and Financing Activities
Amount owing pursuant to mineral license acquisition agreements
included in accrued liabilities
Common shares subscribed for mineral licenses acquired 
Common shares issued for mineral licenses acquired 
Shares gifted to the Company to settle accounts payable 
Investment securities received and sold by the President of the
Company on behalf of the Company
Supplemental Disclosures
Interest paid 
Income taxes paid
Accumulated
from January 5, 2004 
(Date of Inception) to
May 31,
2010
$
For the Year
Ended 
May 31,
2010
$
(30,095,548)
42,753 
9,000 
17,492,074 
57,071 
(156,017) 
5,346,836 
 
(13,490) 
113,138 
975,816 
(6,228,367) 
 
(697,677) 
600,000 
(76,052) 
(173,729) 
 
3,313 
6,733,532 
– 
(334,749) 
6,402,096 
– 
– 
–
250,000 
2,203,000 
14,796,750 
100,000
79,603 
 
– 
–
(2,049,304)
24,950 
– 
– 
– 
– 
1,519,382 
 
2,175 
25,118 
250,736 
(226,943) 
 
– 
– 
– 
– 
 
3,313 
40,000 
– 
(13,400) 
29,913 
(197,030) 
197,030 
–
– 
– 
– 
–
– 
 
– 
–
For the Year
Ended 
May 31,
2009
$
(4,759,010)
16,216 
– 
– 
– 
– 
1,188,706 
 
147,627 
(291,842) 
109,423 
(3,588,880) 
 
– 
– 
(73,300) 
(73,300) 
 
– 
3,966,600 
(20,000) 
(141,000) 
3,805,600 
143,420 
53,610 
197,030
(275,000) 
(245,000) 
– 
–
– 
 
– 
–
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
F-4
3841349.2
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Statement of Stockholders’ Deficit 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Shares
#
Amount
$
Additional
Paid-in 
Capital
$
Common
Stock
Subscribed
$
Deficit
Accumulated 
During the 
Exploration
Stage
$
Donated 
Capital
$
Balance – January 5, 
2004 (Date of Inception) 
Issuance of common shares
for cash:
At $0.001 per share 
   At $0.05 per share 
   At $0.25 per share 
Share issuance costs
Donated services
Net loss for the period
Balance – May 31, 2004  
Issuance of common shares
for cash:
At $0.01 per share 
   At $0.25 per share
–
–
–
2,000,000 
1,050,000 
41,000 
–
–
–
2,000 
1,050 
41 
–
–
–
– 
51,450 
10,209 
(6,475)
–
–
3,091,000
3,091
55,184
22,000 
945,400
22 
945
198 
228,217
–
– 
– 
– 
–
–
–
–
– 
–
Common stock subscribed
Donated services
Net loss for the year
Balance – May 31, 2005 
Issuance of common shares 
for cash at $0.30 per share
Share issuance costs 
Issuance of common shares 
to acquire mineral properties 
Shares gifted to the 
Company to settle accounts 
payable
Net loss for the year
Balance – May 31, 2006
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
336,766
–
–
4,058,400
4,058
283,599
336,766
1,322,332 
–
1,323 
–
395,377 
(2,974)
(336,766) 
–
16,000,000
16,000
5,604,000
–
–
–
–
–
–
21,380,732
21,381
6,280,002
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
2,500
–
2,500
–
–
–
3,500
–
6,000
–
–
–
100,000
Total
$
–
2,000 
52,500 
10,250 
(6,475)
2,500
–
– 
– 
– 
–
–
(36,874)
(36,874)
(36,874)
23,901
– 
–
–
–
220 
229,162
336,766
3,500
(430,090)
(430,090)
(466,964)
163,459
– 
–
–
–
59,934 
(2,974)
5,620,000
100,000
–
(5,985,395)
(5,985,395)
106,000
(6,452,359)
(44,976)
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
F-5
3841349.2
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Statement of Stockholders’ Deficit 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Shares
#
Amount
$
Additional
Paid-in 
Capital
$
Common
Stock
Subscribed
$
Deficit
Accumulated 
During the 
Exploration
Stage
$
Total
$
Donated 
Capital
$
Balance – May 31, 2006 
Issuance of common shares 
for cash at $0.70 per share
Share issuance costs 
Common shares issued for 
consulting services 
Common shares issued for 
mineral licenses acquired 
Common shares subscribed 
for mineral licenses acquired 
Common shares subscribed 
for consulting services 
Fair value of stock options 
granted
Donated rent
Net loss for the year
Balance – May 31, 2007 
Shares issued for mineral 
licenses acquired 
Issuance of common shares 
for cash at $0.30 per share
Share issuance costs 
Common shares issued upon 
cashless exercise of options 
Common shares subscribed 
for cash at $0.10 per share 
Common shares subscribed 
for cash at $0.15 per share
Net loss for the year
Balance – May 31, 2008
21,380,732
21,381
6,280,002
2,430,133 
–
2,430 
–
1,698,670 
(143,900)
150,000
150
105,600
11,650,000
11,650
8,265,100
–
– 
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
2,837,500
50,000
2,482,998
–
–
–
–
–
106,000
(6,452,359)
(44,976)
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
3,000
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
1,701,100 
(143,900)
105,750
8,276,750
2,837,500
50,000
2,482,998
3,000
–
(16,342,946)
(16,342,946)
35,610,865
35,611  18,688,470
2,887,500
109,000
(22,795,305)
(1,074,724)
900,000
900
633,600
(634,500)
300,000
300
89,700
–
–
(27,000)
4,575,000
4,575
(4,575)
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
50,000
195,000
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
90,000
(27,000)
–
50,000
195,000
(491,929)
(491,929)
41,385,865
41,386  19,380,195
2,498,000
109,000
(23,287,234)
(1,258,653)
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
F-6
3841349.2
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Statement of Stockholders’ Deficit 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Balance – May 31, 2008 
Issuance of common shares 
for cash at $0.10 per share 
Issuance of common shares 
for cash at $0.15 per share 
Issuance of common shares 
for cash at $0.20 per share 
Issuance of common shares 
for cash at $0.25 per share 
Issuance of common shares 
for cash at $0.30 per share 
Issuance of common shares 
for cash at $0.40 per share 
Share issuance costs 
Common shares issued upon 
cashless exercise of options 
Issuance of common shares 
upon the exercise of options 
at $0.30 per share 
Common shares subscribed 
for cash at $0.25 per share 
Stock-based compensation 
Net loss for the year  
Balance – May 31, 2009 
 
Issuance of common shares 
for cash at $0.20 per share 
 
Issuance of common shares 
for cash at $0.25 per share 
 
Share issuance costs 
 
Common shares issued upon 
cashless exercise of options 
 
Stock-based compensation 
 
Net loss for the year  
 
Balance – May 31, 2010
Shares
#
Amount
$
Additional
Paid-in 
Capital
$
Common
Stock
Subscribed
$
41,385,865
41,386  19,380,195
2,498,000
1,000,000
1,000
99,000
(50,000)
12,000,013
12,001
1,787,999
(195,000)
6,462,500
6,462
1,286,038
1,400,404
1,400
348,700
500,000
500
149,500
362,500 
–
362 
–
144,638 
(141,000)
3,365,000
3,365
(3,365)
170,000
170
50,830
–
–
–
– 
–
–
–
Deficit
Accumulated 
During the 
Exploration
Stage
$
Donated 
Capital
$ 
109,000
Total
$
(23,287,234)
(1,258,653)
–
–
–
–
–
– 
–
–
–
50,000
1,605,000
1,292,500
350,100
150,000
145,000 
(141,000)
–
51,000
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
– 
– 
– 
66,646,282
75,000
1,392,000 
 
–
4,200,000 
 
– 
 
– 
 
72,313,282
– 
– 
–
– 
1,188,706 
– 
66,646  24,291,241
75
1,392 
 
–
14,925
346,608 
 
(13,400)
4,200 
 
– 
 
–
(4,200) 
 
1,519,382 
 
– 
 
72,313  26,154,556
323,000 
– 
– 
2,576,000
–
(323,000) 
 
–
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
2,253,000
–
–
–
109,000
– 
– 
(4,759,010) 
(28,046,244)
323,000 
1,188,706 
(4,759,010)
(1,003,357)
–
–
–
–
–
–
109,000
–
– 
 
–
15,000
25,000 
 
(13,400)
– 
 
– 
 
(2,049,304) 
 
(30,095,548)
– 
 
1,519,382 
 
(2,049,304)
 
(1,506,679)
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
F-7
3841349.2
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2010 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars) 
 
1.  Nature of Operations and Continuance of Business
The Company was incorporated in the State of Nevada on January 5, 2004. The Company is an Exploration Stage Company, 
as defined by Statement of Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 
915, Development Stage Entities. The Company’s principal business is the acquisition and exploration of mineral resources 
located in Tanzania, Africa. The Company has not presently determined whether its properties contain mineral reserves that 
are economically recoverable.  To date, the Company has not incurred any asset retirement obligations. 
These  consolidated  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  on  a  going  concern  basis,  which  implies  the  Company  will 
continue to realize its assets and discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company has never generated 
revenues  since  inception  and  has  never  paid  any  dividends  and  is  unlikely  to  pay  dividends  or  generate  earnings  in  the 
immediate  or  foreseeable  future.  The  continuation  of  the Company  as  a  going concern  is  dependent  upon  the  continued 
financial  support  from  its  shareholders  and  officers,  the  ability  of  the  Company  to  obtain  necessary  equity  financing  to 
continue  operations  and  to  determine  the  existence,  discovery  and  successful  exploitation  of  economically  recoverable 
reserves in its resource properties, confirmation of the Company’s interests in the underlying properties, and the attainment 
of profitable operations. As at May 31, 2010, the Company has a working capital deficit of $1,539,978 and has accumulated 
losses of $30,095,548 since inception. These factors raise substantial doubt regarding the Company’s ability to continue as a 
going  concern.  These  consolidated  financial  statements  do  not  include  any  adjustments  to  the  recoverability  and 
classification  of  recorded  asset  amounts  and  classification  of  liabilities  that  might  be  necessary  should  the  Company  be 
unable to continue as a going concern. 
The Company’s plans for the next twelve months are to focus on the exploration of its mineral properties in Tanzania and 
estimates that cash requirements of approximately $2,600,000 will be required for exploration and administration costs and 
to  fund  working  capital.  There  can  be  no  assurance  that  the  Company  will  be  able  to  raise  sufficient  funds  to  pay  the 
expected expenses for the next twelve months.
2.  Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
a)  Basis of Presentation
These  consolidated  financial  statements  and  related  notes  are  presented  in  accordance  with  accounting  principles 
generally  accepted  in  the  United  States,  and  are  expressed  in  U.S.  dollars.  These  consolidated  financial  statements 
include the accounts of the Company and its wholly-owned subsidiary, Beijing Dao Hu Investment Consulting, Ltd., a 
Chinese company. The Company’s fiscal year-end is May 31.
b)  Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting 
principles  requires  management  to  make  estimates  and  assumptions  that  affect  the  reported  amounts  of  assets  and 
liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses in the 
reporting period. The Company regularly evaluates estimates and assumptions related to the recoverability and useful 
life of long-lived assets, stock-based compensation, and deferred income tax asset valuation allowances. The Company 
bases its estimates and assumptions on current facts, historical experience and various other factors that it believes to be 
reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values 
of assets and liabilities and the accrual of costs and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. The 
actual results experienced by the Company may differ materially and adversely from the Company’s estimates. To the 
extent there are material differences between the estimates and the actual results, future results of operations will be 
affected.
c)  Basic and Diluted Net Income (Loss) Per Share
The Company computes net income (loss) per share in accordance with ASC 260, Earnings per Share which requires 
presentation  of  both  basic  and  diluted  earnings  per  share  (EPS)  on  the  face  of  the  income  statement.  Basic  EPS  is 
computed  by  dividing  net  income  (loss)  available  to  common  shareholders  (numerator)  by  the  weighted  average 
number  of  shares  outstanding  (denominator)  during  the  period.  Diluted  EPS  gives  effect  to  all  dilutive  potential 
common shares outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method and convertible preferred stock using the 
if-converted  method.  In  computing  diluted  EPS,  the  average  stock  price  for  the  period  is  used  in  determining  the 
number of shares assumed to be purchased from the exercise of stock options or warrants. Diluted EPS excludes all 
potentially dilutive shares if their effect is anti dilutive.
3841349.2
F-8
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2010 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars) 
 
2.  Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
d)  Comprehensive Loss
ASC  220,  Comprehensive  Income  establishes  standards  for  the  reporting  and  display  of  comprehensive  loss  and  its 
components in the consolidated financial statements. As at May 31, 2010 and 2009, the Company had no items that 
represent  other  comprehensive  loss,  and  therefore  has  not  included  a  schedule  of  comprehensive  loss  in  the 
consolidated financial statements.
e)  Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid instruments with maturity of three months or less at the time of issuance to be 
cash equivalents.
f)  Property and Equipment
Property and equipment consists of office equipment and automobiles recorded at cost and amortized on a straight-line 
basis over their estimated useful lives of three years.
g)  Mineral Property Costs
The Company has been in the exploration stage since its inception on January 5, 2004 and has not yet realized any 
revenues from its planned operations. It is primarily engaged in the acquisition and exploration of mining properties. 
Mineral property exploration costs are expensed as incurred. Mineral property acquisition costs are initially capitalized. 
The  Company  assesses  the  carrying  costs  for  impairment  under  ASC  360,  Property,  Plant,  and  Equipment  at  each 
fiscal quarter end. When it has been determined that a mineral property can be economically developed as a result of 
establishing proven and probable reserves, the costs then incurred to develop such property, are capitalized. Such costs 
will  be  amortized  using  the  units-of-production  method  over  the  estimated  life  of  the  probable  reserve.  If  mineral 
properties are subsequently abandoned or impaired, any capitalized costs will be charged to operations.
h)  Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with ASC 360, Property Plant and Equipment the Company tests long-lived assets or asset groups for 
recoverability when events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying amount may not be recoverable. 
Circumstances which could trigger a review include, but are not limited to: significant decreases in the market price of 
the asset; significant adverse changes in the business climate or legal factors; accumulation of costs significantly in 
excess of the amount originally expected for the acquisition or construction of the asset; current period cash flow or 
operating losses combined with a history of losses or a forecast of continuing losses associated with the use of the asset; 
and current expectation that the asset will more likely than not be sold or disposed significantly before the end of its 
estimated useful life. Recoverability is assessed based on the carrying amount of the asset and its fair value which is 
generally determined based on the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and the eventual 
disposal  of  the  asset,  as  well  as  specific  appraisal  in  certain  instances.  An  impairment  loss  is  recognized  when  the 
carrying amount is not recoverable and exceeds fair value.
i)  Asset Retirement Obligations
The Company accounts for asset retirement obligations in accordance with the provisions of ASC 440 Asset Retirement 
and Environmental  Obligations  which requires the Company to record the fair value of an asset retirement obligation 
as a liability in the period in which it incurs a legal obligation associated with the retirement of tangible long-lived 
assets that result from the acquisition, construction, development and/or normal use of the assets. The Company did not 
have any assets retirement obligations as of May 31, 2010 and May 31, 2009.
3841349.2
F-9
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2010 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars) 
 
2.  Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
j)  Financial Instruments
ASC  825,  Financial  Instruments  requires  an  entity  to  maximize  the  use  of  observable  inputs  and  the  fair  value  of 
financial instruments, which include cash, bank indebtedness, accounts payable, amounts due to related parties, and 
deferred  option  payments  were  estimated  to  approximate  their  carrying  values  due  to  the  immediate  or  short-term 
maturities of these financial instruments. The Company’s operations are in Canada, China and Africa, which results in 
exposure  to  market  risks  from  changes  in  foreign  currency  rates.  The  financial  risk  is  the  risk  to  the  Company’s 
operations that arise from fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and the degree of volatility of these rates. Currently, 
the Company does not use derivative instruments to reduce its exposure to foreign currency risk. 
Income Taxes 
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method in accordance with ASC 740, Income 
Taxes. The asset and liability method provides that deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected 
future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, 
and for operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently 
enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. The Company records a 
valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized.
k)
l)  Foreign Currency Translation
The  functional  and  reporting  currency  of  the  Company  is  the  United  States  dollar.  Monetary  assets  and  liabilities 
denominated  in  foreign  currencies  are  translated  to  United  States  dollars  in  accordance  with  ASC  740  Foreign 
Currency Translation Matters, using the exchange rate prevailing at the balance sheet date. Gains and losses arising on 
translation or settlement of foreign currency denominated transactions or balances are included in the determination of 
income.  The  Company  has  not,  to  the  date  of  these  consolidated  financial  statements,  entered  into  derivative 
instruments to offset the impact of foreign currency fluctuations.
To  the  extent  that  the  Company  incurs  transactions  that  are  not  denominated  in  its  functional  currency,  they  are 
undertaken in Canadian dollars, Chinese Yuan Renminbi (“RMB”), and Tanzanian Schilling. The Company has not, to 
the  date  of  these  financials  statements,  entered  into  derivative  instruments  to  offset  the  impact  of  foreign  currency 
fluctuations.
m)  Stock-based Compensation
The  Company  records  stock-based  compensation  in  accordance  with  ASC  718,  Compensation  –  Stock  Based 
Compensation  and  ASC  505,  Equity  Based  Payments  to  Non-Employees,  which  requires  the  measurement  and 
recognition of compensation expense based on estimated fair values for all share-based awards made to employees and 
directors, including stock options.  
ASC 718 requires companies to estimate the fair value of share-based awards on the date of grant using an option-
pricing model. The Company uses the Black-Scholes option-pricing model as its method of determining fair value. This 
model is affected by the Company’s stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of subjective variables. 
These subjective variables include, but are not limited to the Company’s expected stock price volatility over the term of 
the awards, and actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviours. The value of the portion of the award 
that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as an expense in the statement of operations over the requisite service 
period. 
All transactions in which goods or services are the consideration received for the issuance of equity instruments are 
accounted for based on the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instrument issued, 
whichever is more reliably measurable.
3841349.2
F-10
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2010 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars) 
 
2.
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
n)  Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In May 2009, FASB issued ASC 855, Subsequent Events, which establishes general standards of for the evaluation, 
recognition and disclosure of events and transactions that occur after the balance sheet date and through the date that 
the financial statements are issued. Although there is new terminology, the standard is based on the same principles as 
those that currently exist in the auditing standards. The standard, which includes a new required disclosure of the date 
through which an entity has evaluated subsequent events, is effective for interim or annual periods ending after June 15, 
2009.  The adoption of ASC 855 did not have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
In June 2009, the FASB issued guidance now codified as ASC 105, Generally Accepted Accounting Principles as the 
single source of authoritative accounting principles recognized by the FASB to be applied by nongovernmental entities 
in the preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP, aside from those issued by the SEC. ASC 105 
does  not  change  current  U.S.  GAAP,  but  is  intended  to  simplify  user  access  to  all  authoritative  U.S.  GAAP  by 
providing all authoritative literature related to a particular topic in one place.  The adoption of ASC 105 did not have a 
material impact on the Company’s financial statements, but did eliminate all references to pre-codification standards.
The Company has implemented all new accounting pronouncements that are in effect and that may impact its financial 
statements and does not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that 
might have a material impact on its financial position or results of operations.
o)  Reclassification
Certain reclassifications have been made to the prior period’s financial statements to conform to the current period’s 
presentation.
3.  Prepaid Expenses
The components of prepaid expenses are as follows:
General and administrative 
Rent 
Travel and exploration expenses
4.  Property and Equipment
Automobiles 
Office equipment
5.  Related Party Transactions and Balances
Cost
$ 
54,000 
22,051 
76,051
May 31,
2010
$
May 31,
2009
$
4,083 
2,194 
7,213 
13,490
9,273 
3,098 
3,294 
15,665
May 31,
2010
Net Book
Value
$
May 31,
2009
Net Book
Value
$
24,750 
   8,549 
33,299
42,750 
15,499 
58,249
Accumulated 
Amortization
$ 
29,250 
13,502 
42,752
During  the  year  ended  May  31,  2010,  the  Company  incurred  $177,859  (2009  -  $196,435)  of  consulting  fees,  and 
reimbursed $125,617 (2009 - $285,015) of expenses incurred on behalf of the Company, by various directors and officers. 
As at May 31, 2010, the Company was indebted to the Chief Executive and Chief Financial Officer of the Company for a 
total  of  $738,059  (2009  –  $487,323).  The  amounts  due  are  non-interest  bearing,  unsecured  and  due  on  demand.  All 
transactions were in the normal course of operations and have been recorded at the exchange amount, being the amount 
agreed upon by the related parties.
3841349.2
F-11
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2010 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars) 
 
6.  Mineral Properties
Tanzania, Africa 
a)  On  August  4,  2005,  the  Company  entered  into  an  Asset  Purchase  Agreement  (the  “KBT  Agreement”)  with  KBT 
Discovery Group Tanzania Ltd. (“KBT”) to acquire three Prospecting Licenses, which cover an area of approximately 
621  square  kilometres  in  Tanzania,  for  an  aggregate  purchase  price  of  $75,000  and  2,800,000  restricted  shares  of 
common stock. On November 10, 2005, the Company entered into an Amendment Agreement in which the number of 
shares to be issued was increased to 5,600,000 restricted shares of common stock. On October 16, 2006, the Company 
entered into an Amendment Agreement in which the aggregate purchase price was increased to $225,000. On April 26, 
2006, the Company issued 5,600,000 restricted shares of common stock at a fair value of $1,960,000.  By the end of the 
fiscal year ended May 31, 2006, the Company had completed its due diligence and closed the agreement. At the first 
closing,  Prospecting  Licence  No.  2810/2004,  known  as  “Tabora”,  was  transferred  to  the  Company’s  name  and  the 
Company issued 5,600,000 restricted shares of common stock to KBT. The Prospecting Licence No. 3117/2005, known 
as “Morogoro”, and Prospecting Licence No. 3118/2005, known as “KM 7”, were in the name of Atlas Africa Limited 
(“Atlas”), a Tanzanian company. KBT had entered into an agreement with Atlas which gave KBT the right to prospect 
minerals under the Morogoro and KM 7 Prospecting Licenses and an option to enter into a joint venture with Atlas to 
prospect and mine minerals under the Morogoro and KM 7 Prospecting Licenses. KBT caused Atlas to terminate the 
joint venture agreements and transferred the Morogoro and KM 7 Prospecting Licenses to the Company’s name and the 
Company  paid  KBT  $75,000.  On  July  19,  2006,  the  Company  entered  into  a  Letter  of  Amendment,  whereby  the 
Company paid $50,000 directly to Atlas. During the year ended May 31, 2007, the Company paid the $50,000 to Atlas 
and  recognized  an  impairment  loss  of  $50,000  as  there  are  no  proven  or  probable  reserves  on  any  of  the  Tanzania 
properties. The prospecting licenses expire three years after their initial issuance.  The Company can apply to reacquire 
50% of the area covered by the original prospecting license.  As at May 31, 2010, the Company has decided to focus on 
other properties and has let the Tabora, KM7 and Morogoro licenses lapse.
b)  On April 27, 2006, the Company entered into a Strategic Alliance Agreement with Canaco Resources Inc. (“Canaco”), 
a Canadian public company. Under the terms of the agreement, Canaco paid $350,000 (received during fiscal 2007) to 
the  Company,  and  will  provide  technical  management  and  fund  the  initial  assessment  of  each  of  the  prospects  in 
Tanzania, in order to earn up to a 70% undivided interest in the prospects. The $350,000 payment can be allocated at 
Canaco’s  discretion  to  cash  payments  owing  under  subsequent  option  agreements.    On  November  1,  2007,  Canaco 
allocated $75,000 of the payment as the cash consideration owed under the Morogoro option agreement which was 
subsequently abandoned by Morogoro.  In connection with this agreement, the Company is required to issue 200,000 
restricted shares of common stock. The Company determined the fair value of the 200,000 shares to be $88,000. The 
200,000 shares have not been issued as at May 31, 2010, and $88,000 is included in common stock subscribed. 
 
c)  On November 17, 2006, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with Atlas to acquire Prospecting 
License No. 3920/2006, which covers an area of approximately 46 square kilometres in Tanzania. The Licenses were 
transferred to the Company’s name on signing the agreement for an aggregate purchase price of $200,000 (paid) and 
4,500,000 restricted shares of common stock. The Company determined the fair value of the shares to be $3,172,500. 
As at May 31, 2007, the Company issued 1,500,000 shares at the fair value of $1,057,500 and at May 31, 2010, the 
remaining 3,000,000 shares at the fair value of $2,115,000 is included in common stock subscribed.  Refer to Note 6(e). 
d)  On November 17, 2006, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with Hydro-Geos Consulting Group 
Tanzania Limited (“HG”) to acquire nine Prospecting Licenses, which cover an area of approximately 2,388.79 square 
kilometres  in  Tanzania.  Prospecting  License  No.’s  3868/2006,  3671/2005,  3398/2005,  3105/2005,  3211/2005,  and 
2961/2004  were  transferred  to  the  Company’s  name  on  signing  the  agreement  for  an  aggregate  purchase  price  of 
$600,000 (“Cash Payment”) and issuance of 4,000,000 restricted shares of common stock (issued) at a fair value of 
$2,820,000. The Cash Payment is to be made as follows: $150,000 (paid) on signing of the agreement and $150,000 
payments at the end of each ninety day period thereafter until the consideration is paid in full. As at May 31, 2010, 
$250,000 is included in accrued liabilities.  The Company has let Prospecting License No.’s 3868/2006, 3671/2005, 
3398/2005, 3105/2005, 3211/2005, and 2961/2004 lapse.
3841349.2
F-12
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2010 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars) 
 
6.
Mineral Properties (continued)
Tanzania, Africa (continued) 
e)  On March 2, 2007, the Company entered into an option agreement with Canaco whereby the Company granted Canaco 
the  right  to  earn  up  to  a  75%  interest  in  Prospecting  License  3920/2006  in  Tanzania  known  as  “Shinyanga  or 
Magembe” held by the Company (see Note 6(c)). Under the option agreement Canaco has agreed to: 
i)  make cash payments to the Company of $200,000, of which $100,000 (received) is payable upon the approval of 
the  Board  of  Directors  of  both  companies  and  the  TSX  Venture  Exchange,  (such  date  is  referred  to  as  the 
“Effective Date”). An additional $100,000 is payable on the first anniversary of the Effective Date (received); 
issue up to 750,000 of its common shares to the Company, of which 250,000 shares are issuable on the second 
anniversary  of  the  Effective  Date,  an  additional  500,000  shares  are  issuable  on  the  third  anniversary  of  the 
Effective Date; and
ii)
iii)  commit to spend up to $2,500,000 in exploration expenses on the subject property prior to the fourth anniversary 
of the Effective Date ($250,000 in cumulative exploration expense prior to the first anniversary of the Effective 
Date, up to $500,000 in cumulative exploration expense prior to the second anniversary of the Effective Date, and 
up to $750,000 in cumulative exploration expense prior to the third anniversary of the Effective Date, and up to 
$1,000,000 in cumulative exploration expense prior to the fourth anniversary of the Effective Date).
If  the  Company  fails  to  reacquire  the  Prospecting  Licenses  by  March  31,  2008  the  Company  will  not  receive  the 
additional cash payments.  On June 29, 2007, the Company entered into an option agreement with Canaco whereby the 
Company granted Canaco the right to earn up to a 70% interest in Prospecting License 2987/2005 in Tanzania known 
as “Kwadijava”.  The Company received a $100,000 option payment pursuant to the option agreement.  The Company 
failed to reacquire Prospecting License 2987/2005 and pursuant to the agreement the $100,000 option payment received 
was applied to the Magembe property (Prospecting License 3920/2006). As at May 31, 2010, the Company has decided 
to focus on other properties and has let the Magembe prospecting license lapse.
f)  On June 27, 2008, the Company entered into a Joint Venture Agreement that grants the Company the right to explore 
for  minerals  on  properties  in  Liwale  and  Nachigwea  Districts  of  Tanzania  in  consideration  for  the  payment  of 
$1,000,000 (paid) upon signing the agreement and $540,000 over five years beginning July 15, 2008. The $540,000 is 
payable in stages on a quarterly basis of which $80,000 must be paid in the first year, and $460,000 over the next five 
years.  The holder of the property licenses retains a net smelter royalty return of 3%.     
On  June  5,  2009,  the  Company  entered  into  a  new  joint  venture  which  reduced  the  area  covered  by  the  original 
agreement to approximately 380 square kilometres. Pursuant to the new joint venture agreement, the Company was 
required to pay $40,000 upon the signing of the new agreement.  In addition, the joint venture partner is still entitled to 
receive  a  perpetual  net  smelter  royalty  return  of  3%  from  any  product  realized  from  the  property  underlying  the 
prospecting licenses. By entering into the new joint venture agreement, the Company is no longer required to pay the 
balance  of  the  $460,000  previously  due  under  the  prior  joint  venture  agreement.  The  new  joint  venture  agreement 
covers  prospecting  licenses  No.  5673/2009,  No.  5669/2009,  No.  5664/2009,  and  No.  5662/2009,  all  of  which  were 
renewed on June 12, 2009 for a period of three years.
g)  On November 7, 2009, the Company entered into its first agreement with Ruby Creek Resources Inc. (“RCR”) in which 
RCR  has  the  right  to  acquire  a  70%  interest  in  125  square  kilometres  of  the  Company’s  interest  in  the  380  square 
kilometres covered by the Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project (Note 6(f)) in consideration for $3,000,000 that is payable as 
follows: 
i) 
$100,000 within 5 business days of signing the agreement (received); 
ii)  $150,000 within 15 business days of signing the agreement (received); 
iii)  $100,000 upon satisfactory completion of RCR due diligence (received); 
iv)  $400,000 upon closing and receipt the first mining license; 
v)  $750,000 payable within 12 months of closing; 
vi)  $750,000 payable within 24 months of closing; and
3841349.2
F-13
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2010 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars) 
 
6.
Mineral Properties (continued)
Tanzania, Africa (continued) 
g)  vii)  $750,000 payable within 36 months of closing.  This payment may be made in common shares of RCR.   The
shares will be valued at the 10 day average trading price of RCR’s common stock prior to the payment date.
RCR can increase its ownership from 70% to 75% by paying an additional $1,000,000 within 12 months of closing.
h)  On May 24, 2010, in a second agreement between RCR and the Company, RCR has the right to earn a 70% interest in the 
remaining  255  square  kilometres  of  the  380  square  kilometre  Mkuvia  Alluvial  Gold  Project  by  making  additional 
payments  totalling  $6,000,000  to  the  Company.  Also  refer  to  Note  14(a)  concerning  compliance  with  the  scheduled 
payments (i) and (ii) below.
The schedule by which RCR is to pay such $6,000,000 to the Company is as follows:
i)
$200,000  due  within  seven  days  of  execution  of  the  Agreement  with  $100,000  applied  towards  costs  of 
environmental permitting and the initial mining license;
ii)  $150,000 plus the issuance of 4 million restricted shares of common stock of RCR, with an agreed upon value of 
$0.80  per  share  for  a  stated  valuation  of  $3,200,000,  within  30  days  of  the  receipt  of  Certificates  of 
Acknowledgement for all underlying and related Agreements from the Commissioner for Minerals in Tanzania 
as required by the Mining Act of Tanzania;
iii)  $450,000 on June 1, 2011; 
iv)  $1,000,000 on June 1, 2012; and 
v)  $1,000,000 on June 1, 2013 (which may be satisfied by the issuance of stock by RCR).
Thus,  the  combined  payments  under  the  November  7,  2009  and  the  May  24,  2010  agreements  provide  for  a  total 
commitment of $9,000,000 payable to the Company by RCR to earn a 70% interest in the entire 380 square kilometre 
Mkuvia  Alluvial  Gold  Project.  The  ownership  structure  of  the  interest  in  the  Mkuvia  Alluvial  Gold  Project  is  a  70% 
interest for RCR, a 25% interest for Douglas Lake, and a 5% interest for Mr. Mkuvia Maita, the original owner of the 
underlying prospecting licenses. In addition, Mr. Maita retains a 3% net smelter royalty. RCR may increase its ownership 
position from a 70% interest to 75%, reducing the Company’s position to 20%, by giving Notice to the Company and 
paying $1,000,000 to the Company by June 1, 2011.
3841349.2
F-14
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2010 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
7.  Accrued Liabilities
The components of accrued liabilities are as follows:
Consulting fees 
Mineral property expenditures 
Professional fees 
Total Accrued Liabilities
8.  Common Stock
May 31,
2009
$
May 31,
2010
$
30,000 
250,623 
635 
281,258
– 
250,000 
23,599 
273,599
a)  On August 26, 2009, the Company completed a non-brokered private placement pursuant to which the Company issued 
75,000 units at $0.20 per unit for proceeds of $15,000. Each unit consists of one share of common stock and one half 
share purchase warrant.  Each whole warrant entitles the holder to acquire an additional share of common stock at an 
exercise price of $0.30 per share for a period of one year from closing.
b)  On June 23, 2009, the Company completed a non-brokered private placement pursuant to which the Company issued 
1,392,000 units at $0.25 per unit for proceeds of $348,000. Each unit consists of one share of common stock and one 
half share purchase warrant.  Each whole warrant entitles the holder to acquire an additional share of common stock at 
an exercise price of $0.40 per share for a period of one year from closing.  At May 31, 2009, $323,000 of proceeds was 
included in common stock subscribed.  The Company incurred $13,400 of share issuance costs in connection with this 
private placement.
c)  On July 2, 2009, the Company issued 4,200,000 shares of common stock upon the cashless exercise of 4,200,000 stock
options.
9.   Stock Options
The Company adopted a Stock Option Plan dated April 27, 2007, (the “2007 Stock Option Plan”), under which the Company 
is authorized to grant stock options to acquire up to a total of 10,000,000 shares of common stock.  At May 31, 2010, the 
Company had no shares of common stock available to be issued under the 2007 Stock Option Plan. 
The Company adopted an additional Stock Option Plan dated October 20, 2008 (the “2008 Stock Option Plan”), under which 
the Company is authorized to grant stock options to acquire up to a total of 10,000,000 shares of common stock. At May 31, 
2010, the Company had 3,800,000 shares of common stock available to be issued under the 2008 Stock Option Plan.  
During the year ended May 31, 2010, the Company granted stock options to acquire 4,200,000 common shares at a price of 
$0.15 per share exercisable for 5 years and 300,000 shares at a price of $0.30 for five years.  During the year ended May 31, 
2010, the Company recorded stock-based compensation of $1,519,382 as consulting expense. 
During the year ended May 31, 2009, the Company granted stock options to acquire 2,910,000 common shares at a price of 
$0.30  per  share  exercisable  for  5  years.  During  the  year  ended  May  31,  2009,  the  Company  recorded  stock-based 
compensation of $1,188,706 as consulting expense. 
The fair value for stock options granted was estimated at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and 
the weighted average fair value of stock options granted during the year ended May 31, 2010 was $0.35 per share (2009 - 
$0.41). The weighted average assumptions used are as follows:
Expected dividend yield 
Risk-free interest rate 
Expected volatility 
Expected option life (in years)
3841349.2
15
Year Ended
May 31,
2010
0% 
2.71% 
177% 
5.00
May 31,
2009
0% 
2.59% 
167% 
5.00
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2010 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars) 
 
9.  Stock Options (continued)
The total intrinsic value of stock options exercised during the year ended May 31, 2010, was $966,000 (2009 - $537,300). 
The following table summarizes the continuity of the Company’s stock options:
Outstanding, May 31, 2009 
Granted 
Exercised 
Outstanding, May 31, 2010 
Exercisable, May 31, 2010
Weighted 
Average 
Exercise 
Price 
$ 
0.30 
0.16 
0.15 
0.30 
0.30
Weighted 
Average 
Remaining 
Contractual 
Term (years) 
 
 
 
3.44 
3.44
Aggregate 
Intrinsic 
Value 
$ 
 
 
 
– 
–
Number of 
Options 
2,823,333 
4,500,000 
(4,200,000) 
3,123,333 
3,123,333
At May 31, 2010, the Company had no unvested stock options and no unrecognized compensation costs. 
The stock options outstanding are exercisable for cash at $0.30 per share, or on a cashless exercise basis using a prorated 
formula whereby the number of shares issuable is equal to (a) the average closing price for the five days prior to exercise 
date (“ACP”) in excess of the $0.30 exercise price, divided by (b) the exercise price multiplied by (c) the number of options 
exercised.   During the year ended May 31, 2010, 4,200,000 cashless stock options were exercised (2009 - 3,365,000).
10.  Share Purchase Warrants
The following table summarizes the continuity of the Company’s share purchase warrants:
Balance, May 31, 2009 
Issued 
Expired 
Balance, May 31, 2010
11.  Commitments
Number of 
Warrants 
3,700,200 
733,500 
(3,700,200) 
733,500
Weighted Average
Exercise Price
$
0.37 
0.39 
0.37 
0.39
a)  On January 9, 2006, the Company entered into a consulting agreement for a term of three months for consideration of 
$75,000  cash  (paid  in  fiscal  2006  by  a  director  on  behalf  of  the  Company)  and  150,000  shares  of  common  stock 
(100,000 shares transferred to the consultant by related parties during fiscal 2006). As at May 31, 2008, 50,000 shares 
of common stock are owed to the consultant. As at May 31, 2010, the fair value of $50,000 for these shares owed is 
included in common stock subscribed. 
In August 2008, the Company entered into a two year lease agreement for the provision of office space.  Under the 
lease agreement, the Company is obligated to make the following annual payments:
b)
Fiscal Period
2011
$6,588 (RMB 45,000)
During the year ended May 31, 2010, the Company incurred rent expense of $26,330 (RMB 180,000) pursuant to the 
agreement.
c)  On September 20, 2009, the Company agreed to pay the CFO $6,176 (Cdn$6,500) per month for six months. On April
1, 2010, the Company extended the contract for three years.
3841349.2
F-16
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2010 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars) 
 
12.
Fair Value Measurements
ASC 820 requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when 
measuring fair value. ASC 820  establishes a fair value hierarchy based on the level of independent, objective evidence 
surrounding the inputs used to measure fair value. A financial instrument’s categorization within the fair value hierarchy is 
based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. ASC 820 prioritizes the inputs into 
three levels that may be used to measure fair value:
Level 1 
Level 1 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities. 
Level 2 
Level 2 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset 
or liability such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical assets or 
liabilities  in  markets  with  insufficient  volume  or  infrequent  transactions  (less  active  markets);  or  model-derived 
valuations in which significant inputs are observable or can be derived principally from, or corroborated by, observable 
market data. 
Level 3 
Level  3  applies  to  assets  or  liabilities  for  which  there  are  unobservable  inputs  to  the  valuation  methodology  that  are 
significant to the measurement of the fair value of the assets or liabilities.
Pursuant to ASC 820, the fair value of our cash equivalents is determined based on “Level 1” inputs, which consist of 
quoted prices in active markets for identical assets.  
Management  believes  that  the  recorded  values  of  all  of  the  Company’s  other  financial  instruments  approximate  their 
current fair values because of their nature and respective maturity dates or durations.
Income Taxes
The  Company  accounts  for  income  taxes  under  ASC  740,  Income  Taxes.  Deferred  income  tax  assets  and  liabilities  are 
determined based upon differences between financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using 
the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. Income tax expense differs 
from the amount that would result from applying the U.S federal and state income tax rates to earnings before income taxes. 
The Company has net operating losses carried forward of approximately $8,129,200 available to offset taxable income in 
future years which begin expiring in fiscal 2025. Pursuant to ASC 740, the potential benefits of the net operating losses 
carried forward has not been recognized in the financial statements since the Company cannot be assured that it is more likely 
than not that such benefit will be utilized in future years. 
The income tax benefit differs from the amount computed by applying the federal income tax rate of 35% to net loss before 
income taxes for the years ended May 31, 2010 and 2009 as a result of the following:
13.
May 31,
2010
$
(2,049,304) 
35% 
(717,256) 
531,784 
2,950 
182,522 
–
Loss before taxes 
Statutory rate 
Computed expected tax (recovery) 
Permanent differences 
Temporary differences 
Valuation allowance change 
Provision for income taxes
3841349.2
F-17
May 31,
2009
$
(4,759,010) 
35% 
(1,665,654) 
416,047 
(4,020) 
1,253,627 
–
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2010 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars) 
 
13.
Income Taxes (continued)
The significant components of deferred income tax assets and liabilities at May 31, 2010 and 2009, after applying enacted 
corporate income tax rates, are as follows:
Net operating losses carried forward 
Valuation allowance 
Net deferred income tax asset 
 
The Company has recognized a valuation allowance for the deferred income tax asset since the Company cannot be assured 
that it is more likely than not that such benefit will be utilized in future years.
2,662,692 
(2,662,692) 
–
2,845,214 
(2,845,214) 
–
$
May 31,
2010
$
May 31,
2009
14.  Subsequent Events
a)  Subsequent to May 31, 2010, the Company received cash payments from RCR pursuant to the scheduled payments (i) and 
(ii) in the agreement dated May 24, 2010 as described in Note 6(h); however the 4 million shares of RCR were not issued 
to the Company as required by the agreement. Therefore, RCR is not in compliance with the May 24, 2010 agreement.
b)  On June 1, 2010, the Company entered into a consulting agreement with China Quantum Investment Ltd. for consulting
services related to the Company’s China operation for a fee of $10,000 per month for three years.
c)  On June 23, 2010, a total of 733,500 warrants expired unexercised. 
d)  On August 11, 2010, the Company adopted the 2010 Stock Incentive Plan authorizing an additional 10,000,000 common
shares for issuance.
e)  On August 11, 2010, the Company granted 9,800,000 stock options exercisable at $0.05 per share, expiring August 11,
2020.
f)  On August 23, 2010, the Company issued 6,000,000 restricted common shares and 3,800,000 unrestricted common shares
upon the cashless exercise of stock options.
3841349.2
F-18
ITEM 9.
CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING 
AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
We have had no disagreements with our principal independent accountants.
ITEM 9A.
CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Harpreet  Singh  Sangha,  our  principal  executive  officer  and  Herminder  Rai,  our  principal  financial  officer,  have 
concluded  that  our  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  (as  defined  in  Rules  13a-15(e)  and  15d-15(e)  under  the 
Exchange Act) were not effective as of the end of the period covered by this report, based on their evaluation of 
these controls and procedures required by paragraph (b) of Rules 13a-15 and 15d-15, due to the deficiencies in our 
internal control over financial reporting as described below.
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting, 
as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) under the Exchange Act.
The  management  of  the  Company  assessed  the  effectiveness  of  the  Company’s  internal  control  over  financial 
reporting based on the criteria for effective internal control over financial reporting established in Internal Control—
Integrated  Framework  issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the  Treadway  Commission 
(“COSO”) and SEC guidance on conducting such assessments.  Based on this assessment, management determined 
that, during the year ended May 31, 2010, our internal controls and procedures were not effective due to material 
weaknesses, as more fully described below.
Management identified the following material weaknesses in internal control over financial reporting:
1.  The  Company  does  not  have  a  separate  Audit  Committee  -  the  entire  Board  of  Directors  acts  as  the 
Company’s Audit Committee.  As of May 31, 2010 there was a lack of a majority of independent directors 
on the Company’s the Board of Directors, and the Company had not identified an “expert”, one who is 
knowledgeable about reporting and financial statement requirements.
2.  There was lack of oversight by the Company’s audit committee and board of directors in timely review and
approval of the certain financial expenses incurred by the Company.
3.  Certain  entity  level  controls  establishing  a  “tone  at  the  top”  were  considered  material  weaknesses.  The 
Company has an audit committee however it is not independent.  There is no policy on fraud and no code 
of ethics at this time. A whistleblower policy is not necessary given the small size of the organization.
4.  The  Company  has  limited  segregation  of  duties  which  is  not  consistent  with  good  internal  control
procedures.
5.  The Company does not have a written internal control procedurals manual which outlines the duties and 
reporting  requirements  of  the  Directors  and  any  staff  to  be  hired  in  the  future.    This  lack  of  a  written 
internal control procedurals manual does not constitute effective internals controls over financial reporting.
Management believes that the material weaknesses set forth above  did not have a material affect on the Company’s 
financial  results.  However,  management  believes  that  the  lack  of  a  functioning  audit  committee  and  lack  of  a 
majority  of  independent  directors  on  the  Company’s  board  of  directors,  resulting  in  ineffective  oversight  in  the 
establishment  and  monitoring  of  required  internal  controls  and  procedures,  can  impact  the  Company’s  financial 
statements for the future years. As a result material errors could occur.
The Company and its management will endeavor to correct the above noted weaknesses in internal control once it 
has adequate funds to do so.  We intend to establish an audit committee, appoint sufficient independent members 
thereto and identify an “expert” for the committee to advise other members as to correct accounting and reporting
3841349.2
47
procedures.  In addition, we intend to establish a written policy manual outlining the duties of each of the officers 
and staff of the Company to facilitate better internal control procedures.
Management  will  continue  to  monitor  and  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  the  Company’s  internal  controls  and 
procedures and its internal controls over financial reporting on an ongoing basis and are committed to taking further 
action and implementing additional enhancements or improvements, as necessary and as funds allow.
Changes in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
There were no changes to our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the last quarter of our 
fiscal  year  ended  May  31,  2010  that  have  materially  affected,  or  are  reasonably  likely  to  materially  affect,  our 
internal control over financial reporting.
ITEM 9B.
OTHER INFORMATION
Not applicable.
ITEM 10.
DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Our executive officers and directors and their respective ages as of the date of this annual report are as follows: 
Name
Position Held
Age
Harpreet Singh Sangha 
Honorable Joseph Rugumyamheto 
Wenqin Zhang 
Herminder Rai
46 
64 
57 
38
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director 
Chairman of the Board and Director 
Director 
Secretary, Treasurer and Chief Financial Officer
The  following  describes  the  business  experience  of  each  of  our  directors  and  executive  officers,  including  other 
directorships held in reporting companies:
Harpreet S. Sangha has been our director and Chief Executive Officer since April 2006. In addition, Mr. Sangha 
has also previously served as our President, Secretary and Treasurer from April 2006 until he resigned from those 
positions on July 3, 2009.  Mr. Sangha was reappointed as our President on November 4, 2009.  Mr. Sangha has 
over 18 years experience in business financing with specific interest in public company development. Mr. Sangha is 
an  investment  advisor  at  Global  Securities  Corporation,  and possesses  a  unique  combination of fund  raising  and 
managerial  skills  that  will  be  instrumental  in  advancing  the  Company  toward  a  prominent  global  position.    Mr. 
Sangha has served as Chief Executive Officer, Secretary and as a Director of Artepharm Global Corp., a reporting 
company under the Exchange Act, since September 19, 2009.  The Company has determined that Mr. Sangha should 
serve  as  a  director  of  the  Company  given  his  involvement  with  the  Company  since  2006  and  his  experience  in 
business financing and public company development.
Honorable Joseph Rugumyamheto has served on our board of directors since April 2006, and as of August 11, 
2006, he has served as Chairman of our board of directors. Hon. Rugumyamheto retired in January 2006 after 30 
years  of  public  service.  For  the  past  five  years,  Hon.  Rugumyamheto  has  been  the  Permanent  Secretary  in  the 
President’s Office of Tanzania, reporting directly to the President of Tanzania. Hon. Rugumyamheto graduated from 
Ivy  League  schools  in  the  US.  He  was  responsible  for  all  civil  servants  in  the  government.    The  Company  has 
determined  that  Mr.  Rugumyamheto  should  serve  as  a  director  of  the  Company  given  his  involvement  with  the 
Company since 2006 and his many years of public service in Tanzania, where the Company’s main mineral property 
interest is located.
Wenqin Zhang has served on our board of directors since November 21, 2008.  Dr. Zhang began his career as a 
student in the Mining Department of the University of Qinghai. He subsequently was part of the scholars exchange 
programs  in  Newfoundland  and  the  University  of  British  Columbia,  Canada,  where  he  continued  his  geological 
studies. From there he went on the become the Deputy Chief Geologist and Chief Geologist in Earth Geochemistry 
Technology  at  the  Institute  of  Qinghai  Province.  In  1996,  he  was  appointed  Deputy  Chief  Geologist,  Bureau  of
3841349.2
48
Geologic  Exploration  and  Mining  Development  of  Qinghai  Province,  and  in  1999  he  became  Director  of  the 
Northern  China  Project  Administration.  Since  2002,  he  has  been  Deputy  Chief  Director  of  Tianjin  Institute  of 
Geology  and  Minerals  Research.  He  is  also  currently  a  member  of  the  China  Geochemistry  Committee.    The 
Company has determined that Dr. Zhang should serve as a director of the Company given his involvement with the 
Company since 2008 and his knowledge and experience in the mining sector.
Herminder Rai has served as our Secretary, Treasurer and Chief Financial Officer since July 3, 2009.  Mr. Rai has 
been an investment advisor with Global Securities Corporation, of Vancouver, British Columbia for the past five 
years. Mr. Rai is a graduate of many Canadian Securities Institute securities-related courses, and recently passed 
Level I of the CFA program and is currently enrolled as a Level II candidate. Mr. Rai is not a director or officer of 
any other reporting company.
Term of Office
Our  directors  are  appointed  for  a  one-year  term  to  hold  office  until  the  next  annual  general  meeting  of  our 
stockholders or until removed from office in accordance with our bylaws.  Our officers are appointed by our board 
of directors and hold office until removed by the board.
Significant Employees
We have no significant employees other than the officers and directors described above.
Family Relationships
There are no family relationships among our directors or officers.
Involvement in Certain Legal Proceedings
To the best of our knowledge and belief, none of our directors or executive officers have been involved in any of the 
following events during the past ten years that is material to an evaluation of the ability of such person to serve as an 
executive officer or director of our Company:
1.
2.
3.
a petition under the Federal bankruptcy laws or any state insolvency law was filed by or against, or 
a receiver, fiscal agent or similar officer was appointed by a court for the business or property of 
such person, or any partnership in which he was a general partner at or within two years before the 
time of such filing, or any corporation or business association of which he was an executive 
officer at or within two years before the time of such filing;
such person was convicted in a criminal proceeding or is a named subject of a pending criminal 
proceeding (excluding traffic violations and other minor offenses);
such person was the subject of any order, judgment, or decree, not subsequently reversed, 
suspended or vacated, of any court of competent jurisdiction, permanently or temporarily 
enjoining him from, or otherwise limiting, the following activities:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
acting as a futures commission merchant, introducing broker, commodity trading advisor, 
commodity pool operator, floor broker, leverage transaction merchant, any other person 
regulated by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, or an associated person of 
any of the foregoing, or as an investment adviser, underwriter, broker or dealer in 
securities, or as an affiliated person, director or employee of any investment company, 
bank, savings and loan association or insurance company, or engaging in or continuing 
any conduct or practice in connection with such activity;
engaging in any type of business practice; or
engaging in any activity in connection with the purchase or sale of any security or 
commodity or in connection with any violation of Federal or State securities laws or 
Federal commodities laws;
3841349.2
49
4.
5.
6.
such person was the subject of any order, judgment or decree, not subsequently reversed, 
suspended or vacated, of any Federal or State authority barring, suspending or otherwise limiting 
for more than 60 days the right of such person to engage in any activity described in paragraph 3(i) 
above, or to be associated with persons engaged in any such activity;
such person was found by a court of competent jurisdiction in a civil action or by the Commission 
to have violated any Federal or State securities law, and the judgment in such civil action or 
finding by the Commission has not been subsequently reversed, suspended, or vacated;
such person was found by a court of competent jurisdiction in a civil action or by the Commodity 
Futures Trading Commission to have violated any Federal commodities law, and the judgment in 
such civil action or finding by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission has not been 
subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated;
7.
such person was the subject of, or a party to, any Federal or State judicial or administrative order, 
judgment, decree, or finding, not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, relating to an 
alleged violation of:
(i)
(ii)
any Federal or State securities or commodities law or regulation;
any law or regulation respecting financial institutions or insurance companies including, 
but not limited to, a temporary or permanent injunction, order of disgorgement or 
restitution, civil money penalty or temporary or permanent cease-and-desist order, or 
removal or prohibition order; or
(iii)
any law or regulation prohibiting mail or wire fraud or fraud in connection with any 
business entity; or
8.
such person was the subject of, or a party to, any sanction or order, not subsequently reversed, 
suspended or vacated, of any self-regulatory organization (as defined in Section 3(a)(26) of the 
Exchange Act), any registered entity (as defined in Section 1(a)(29) of the United States 
Commodity Exchange Act), or any equivalent exchange, association, entity or organization that has 
disciplinary authority over its members or persons associated with a member.
The  Company  is  not  aware  of  any  material  legal  proceedings  in  which  any  of  the  following  persons  is  a  party 
adverse  to  the  Company  or  has  a  material  interest  adverse  to  the  Company:  (a)  any  current  director,  officer,  or 
affiliate of the Company, or any owner of record or beneficial owner of more than five percent of any class of voting 
securities  of  the  Company;  (b)  any  person  proposed  for  appointment  or  election  as  a  director  or  officer  of  our 
Company; or (c) any associate of any such person.
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance
Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act requires our directors and officers, and the persons who beneficially own more 
than ten percent of our common stock, to file reports of ownership and changes in ownership with the SEC. Copies 
of all filed reports are required to be furnished to us pursuant to Rule 16a-3 promulgated under the Exchange Act. 
Based solely on the reports received by us and on the representations of the reporting persons, we believe that these 
persons have complied with all applicable filing requirements during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2010.
Code of Ethics
We have adopted a code of ethics applicable to our principal executive officer, principal financial officer, principal 
accounting officer or controller, or persons performing similar functions.  Our code of ethics was filed as an exhibit 
to our annual report on Form 10-KSB for our fiscal year ended May 31, 2005, and is incorporated by reference as an 
exhibit to this annual report.
3841349.2
50
Committees
Our  Board  of  Directors  acts  as  our  nominating  committee  and  our  audit  committee;  we  do  not  have  separate 
committees that perform these functions nor do we have nominating committee or audit committee charters.  The 
Company has not identified an financial expert that serving on the Board.  The Company intends to establish an 
audit  committee,  appoint  sufficient  independent  members  thereto  and  identify  an  “expert”  for  the  committee  to 
advise other members as to correct accounting and reporting procedures.
ITEM 11.
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Compensation Discussion and Analysis
The table below summarizes all compensation awarded to, earned by or paid to our executive officers by any person 
for all services rendered in all capacities to us during our fiscal years ended May 31, 2009 and 2010.
Summary Compensation Table
Name and Principal 
Position 
Harpreet Sangha 
President & Chief 
Executive Officer 
Sylvia Tang 
(Former) Chief 
Financial Officer 
Herminder Rai 
Chief Financial 
Officer, Secretary 
and Treasurer  
Charles Mnguto 
(Former) President
Year
2009 
2010
2009(1)  
2010
2009 (2) 
2010
Salary
($)
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
N/A 
Nil
2009 (2)
N/A
2010
Nil
Bonus
($)
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
N/A 
Nil
N/A
Nil
Stock 
Awards
($)
Nil 
Nil
Option
Awards
($)
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
N/A 
Nil
N/A
Nil
Nil 
Nil
N/A 
Nil
N/A
Nil
Non-
Equity 
Incentive
Plan
Compen-
sation
($)
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
N/A 
Nil
N/A
Nil
Nonqualified
Deferred 
Compen-
sation
Earnings
($)
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
N/A 
Nil
N/A
Nil
All 
Other 
Compen-
sation
($)
$120,000 
$120,000
Total  
($)
$120,000 
$120,000
$13,435 
Nil
$13,435 
Nil
N/A 
$57,859
N/A 
$57,859
N/A
Nil
N/A
Nil
(1)  Ms. Tang resigned as our Chief Financial Officer on July 3, 2009. 
(2)  Mr. Rai was appointed as our Chief Financial Officer, Secretary and Treasurer on July 3, 2009.   
(3)  Mr. Mnguto was appointed as our President on July 3, 2009 and resigned on November 4, 2009.
Outstanding Equity Awards
As at May 31, 2010 there were no unexercised options, stock that had not vested or outstanding equity incentive 
plan awards with respect to any of our officers or directors.
Compensation of Directors
Except as disclosed below, we did pay our directors any fees or other compensation for acting as directors during 
our fiscal year ended May 31, 2010.  Certain of our current or former directors serve or have served as officers of 
the Company, and any compensation they received due to their service as an officer is disclosed in the table above 
and is not included in the table below.
3841349.2
51
Director Compensation
Fees earned 
or paid in
Stock 
Awards
($)
Option 
Awards
($)
N/A
N/A
N/A
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
cash 
($)
Name and 
Principal Position 
Harpreet Singh 
Sangha (1)  
Honorable Joseph 
Rugumyamheto 
Wenqin Zhang 
Charles Xavier 
Mnguto(1) , (2) 
Medard M.C. 
Kalemani (3)  
Abdulkarim 
Hamisi Mruma (4)   Nil 
Nil 
(1)  See summary compensation table above. 
(2)  Mr. Mnguto resigned as a Director on November 4, 2009. 
(3)  Mr. Kalemani resigned as a Director on July 3, 2009. 
(4)
Mr. Mruma resigned as a Director on July 3, 2009.
Nil
Nil
Nil 
Nil
N/A
Nil
N/A
Nil
N/A
Non-Equity 
Incentive
Plan
Compen-
sation
($)
Nonqualified
Deferred 
Compen-
sation
Earnings
($)
N/A
Nil 
Nil
N/A
Nil
Nil
N/A
Nil 
Nil
N/A
Nil
Nil
All Other 
Compen-
sation
($)
Total  
($)
N/A
Nil 
Nil
N/A
Nil
Nil
N/A
Nil 
Nil
N/A
Nil
Nil
ITEM 12.
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT 
AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
The following table sets forth certain information concerning the number of shares of our common stock owned 
beneficially as of the date of this annual report by: (i) each person (including any group) known to us to own more 
than 5% of any class of our voting securities, (ii) each of our directors, (iii) each of our officers and (iv) our officers 
and directors as a group.  Each stockholder listed possesses sole voting and investment power with respect to the 
shares shown.
Title of class 
Officers and Directors
Common Stock 
Common Stock 
Common Stock 
Common Stock 
Common Stock
Name and address of beneficial owner(1) 
 
Harpreet Singh Sangha(1) 
Honorable Joseph Rugumyamheto(1) 
Wenqin Zhang(1) 
Herminder Rai(1) 
All executive officers and directors as a 
group (four persons)
Shareholders of Greater than 5% of Issued and Outstanding Stock
Common Stock
Yanmei Lin 
Suite 501, Sheng-Jing Yuan Building 
3, East District, Guandong Province 
Zhongshan City, China
Amount and nature 
of beneficial owner(2)
Percentage of
class(3)
1,659,000 
1,000,000(4)
Nil 
Nil
2,659,000
5,000,000
2.0% 
1.2% 
Nil 
Nil 
3.2%
6.1%
(1)  The  address  of  our  officers  and  directors  our  company’s  address,  which  is  Suite  222,  6820  188th  Street,  Surrey,  British
Columbia, Canada,V4N 3G6.
(2)  Under Rule 13d-3 of the Exchange Act a beneficial owner of a security includes any person who, directly or indirectly, 
through any contract, arrangement, understanding, relationship or otherwise has or shares: (i) voting power, which includes 
the power to vote or to direct the voting of shares; and (ii) investment power, which includes the power to dispose or direct 
the disposition of shares.  Certain shares may be deemed to be beneficially owned by more than one person (if, for example, 
persons share the power to vote or the power to dispose of the shares).  In addition, shares are deemed to be beneficially
3841349.2
52
owned by a person if the person has the right to acquire the shares (for example, upon exercise of an option) within 60 days 
of the date as of which the information is provided.  In computing the percentage ownership of any person, the amount of 
shares outstanding is deemed to include the amount of shares beneficially owned by such person (and only such person) by 
reason of these acquisition rights.
(3)  Based on 82,113,281  shares of our common stock issued and outstanding as of September 10, 2010. 
(4)  250,000 shares held by Mr. Rugumyamheto’s son and 750,000 held by Sika Holdings Ltd.
Changes in Control
We are unaware of any contract, or other arrangement or provision of our Articles, the operation of which may at 
any subsequent date result in a change in control of the Company.
ITEM 13.
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS AND DIRECTOR 
INDEPENDENCE
Except as described below, none of the following parties has, in the last two fiscal years, had any material interest, 
direct or indirect, in any transaction with us or in any presently proposed transaction that has or will materially affect 
us:
1.  any of our directors or officers; 
2.  any person proposed as a nominee for election as a director; 
3.  any  person  who  beneficially  owns,  directly  or  indirectly,  shares  carrying  more  than  10%  of  the  voting
rights attached to our outstanding shares of common stock; or
4.  any member of the immediate family (including spouse, parents, children, siblings and in-laws) of any of
the above persons.
During the year ended May 31, 2010, the Company incurred $177,859 of consulting fees included in general and 
administrative expenses ($120,000 with respect to Harpreet Sangha and $57,859 with respect to Herminder Rai). 
During the year ended May 31, 2009, the Company incurred $196,435 of consulting fees and director fees included 
in  general  and  administrative  expenses  ($151,435  with  respect  to  Harpreet  Sangha,  $27,000  to  Joseph 
Rugumyamheto, $9,000 to Medard M.C. Kalemani and $9,000 to Abdulkarim Hamisi Mruma).
During the year ended May 31, 2010, the Company reimbursed $125,617 (2009 - $285,015) of expenses incurred on 
behalf of the Company, in each case to Harpreet Sangha.
As at May 31, 2010, the Company was indebted to Harpreet Sangha for $738,059 (2009 – $487,323). The amount 
due is non-interest bearing, unsecured and due on demand.
Joseph  Rugumyamheto  and  Wenqin  Zhang  are  independent  directors  of  the  Company  as  provided  in  the  listing 
standards of the American Stock Exchange.
ITEM 14.
PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES
Manning Elliott served as our independent registered public accounting firm and audited our financial statements for 
the  fiscal  years  ended  May  31,  2010  and  2009.    Aggregate  fees  for  professional  services  rendered  to  us  by  our 
auditor are set forth below:
Year Ended 
May 31, 2010
Year Ended 
May 31, 2009
Audit Fees 
Audit-Related Fees 
Tax Fees 
All Other Fees 
Total
3841349.2
$51,200 
$2,700 
Nil 
Nil 
$53,900
$55,850 
$Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
$55,850
53
Audit Fees
Audit fees are the aggregate fees billed for professional services rendered by our independent auditors for the audit 
of our annual financial statements, the review of the financial statements included in each of our quarterly reports 
and services provided in connection with statutory and regulatory filings or engagements.
Audit Related Fees
Audit related fees are the aggregate fees billed by our independent auditors for assurance and related services that 
are reasonably related to the performance of the audit or review of our financial statements and are not described in 
the preceding category.
Tax Fees
Tax fees are billed by our independent auditors for tax compliance, tax advice and tax planning.
All Other Fees
All other fees include fees billed by our independent auditors for products or services other than as described in the 
immediately preceding three categories.
Policy on Pre-Approval of Services Performed by Independent Auditors
It is our Board of Directors’ policy to pre-approve all audit and permissible non-audit services performed by the 
independent  auditors.  We  approved  all  services  that  our  independent  accountants  provided  to  us  in  the  past  two 
fiscal years. 
ITEM 15.
EXHIBITS
Description of Exhibit 
Articles of Incorporation
The following exhibits are filed with this Annual Report on Form 10-K: 
Exhibit Number 
3.1(1) 
3.2(12) 
3.3(2) 
10.1(3) 
10.2(3) 
10.3(3) 
10.4(4)
Certificate of Amendment to Articles of Incorporation 
Bylaws, as amended on September 5, 2006 
Asset Purchase Agreement with KBT Discovery Group Tanzania Ltd. 
Asset Purchase Agreement with Hydro-Geos Consulting Group Tanzania Ltd. 
Asset Purchase Agreement with Megadeposit Explorers Ltd.
Amendment No. 1 to Asset Purchase Agreement with KBT Discovery Group 
Tanzania Ltd.
10.5(4)
10.6(4) 
10.7(5)
10.8(5)
3841349.2
Amendment No. 1 to Asset Purchase Agreement with Hydro-Geos Consulting 
Group Tanzania Ltd. 
Amendment No. 1 to Asset Purchase Agreement with Megadeposit Explorers Ltd.
Amendment No. 2 to Asset Purchase Agreement with KBT Discovery Group 
Tanzania Ltd.
Amendment No. 2 to Asset Purchase Agreement with Hydro-Geos Consulting 
Group Tanzania Ltd.
54
10.9(5) 
10.10(6) 
10.11(7) 
10.12(8)
10.13(8) 
10.14(8) 
10.15(9) 
10.16(10) 
10.17(14) 
10.18(10) 
10.19(10) 
10.20(13)
10.21(15)
10.22(16)
10.22* 
14.1(11) 
23.1* 
31.1*
31.2*
32.1*
Amendment No. 2 to Asset Purchase Agreement with Megadeposit Explorers Ltd. 
Strategic Alliance Agreement between the Company and Canaco 
Option Agreement between the Company and Canaco
Amendment Not. 1 to Strategic Alliance Agreement between the Company and 
Canaco 
Kwadijava Option Agreement 
Negero Option Agreement 
Joint Venture Agreement with Mkuvia Maita 
2007 Stock Incentive Plan
2008 Stock Incentive Plan 
Consulting Agreement with Harpreet Sangha 
Consulting Agreement with Rovingi
Joint Venture Agreement with Mkuvia Maita dated June 5, 2009
Purchase Agreement with Ruby Creek Resources, Inc. dated November 7, 2009
Purchase Agreement with Ruby Creek Resources, Inc., dated for reference May 19, 
2010
2010 Stock Incentive Plan 
Code of Ethics 
Consent of Auditor
Certifications of Chief Executive Officer Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act of 2002
Certifications of Chief Financial Officer Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act of 2002
Certifications of Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer Pursuant to 
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
*     Filed herewith. 
(1)   Incorporated by reference to Form SB-2 Registration Statement filed on July 22, 2004. 
(2)   Original Bylaws incorporated by reference to Form SB-2 Registration Statement filed on July 22, 2004, and amendment 
thereto incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 10-KSB for year ended May 31, 2006. 
(3)   Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 23, 2005. 
(4)   Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 21, 2005. 
(5)   Incorporated by reference to Quarterly Report on Form 10-SB for quarterly period ended November 30, 2005. 
(6)   Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on May 4, 2006. 
(7)   Incorporated by reference to Quarterly Report on Form 10-SB for quarterly period ended August 31, 2006. 
(8)   Incorporated by reference to Quarterly Report on Form 10-SB for quarterly period ended August 31, 2007. 
(9)   Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 6, 2008. 
(10) Incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 10-KSB for year ended May 31, 2007. 
(11) Incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 10-KSB for year ended May 31, 2005. 
(12) Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on January 27, 2009.
3841349.2
55
(13) Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on July 16, 2009. 
(14) Incorporated by reference to Registration Statement Form S-8 filed on December 30, 2008. 
(15) Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 13, 2009. 
(16) Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on June 21, 2010.
3841349.2
56
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 and 15 (d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly 
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
SIGNATURES
DOUGLAS LAKE MINERALS INC.
By:
By:
“Harpreet Singh Sangha” 
Harpreet Singh Sangha 
Chief Executive Officer and a director  
Date:   September 13, 2010
“Herminder Rai” 
Herminder Rai 
Chief Financial Officer, Secretary and Treasurer  
Date:   September 13, 2010
Title 
 
President, Chief Executive Officer and a director
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the 
following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated. 
Signature 
 
“Harpreet Singh Sangha” 
Harpreet Singh Sangha 
 
“Joseph Rugumyamheto” 
Honorable Joseph Rugumyamheto 
 
“Herminder Rai” 
Herminder Rai
Chairman of the Board and Director
Chief Financial Officer, Secretary and Treasurer
September 13, 2010
Date
September 13, 2010
September 13, 2010
__________
3841349.2
Exhibit 10.22
__________
2010 STOCK INCENTIVE PLAN
For:
DOUGLAS LAKE MINERALS INC.
Dated August 11, 2010
Unit #222, 6820 188th Street, Surrey, British Columbia, Canada, V4N 3G6
Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.
__________
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  --
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
DOUGLAS LAKE MINERALS INC.
2010 STOCK INCENTIVE PLAN
1.
PURPOSE
1.1 
The purpose of this Stock Incentive Plan (the “Plan”) is to advance the interests 
of Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. (the “Company”) by encouraging Eligible Participants (as herein 
defined) to acquire shares of the Company, thereby increasing their proprietary interest in the 
Company,  encouraging  them  to  remain  associated  with  the  Company  and  furnish  them  with 
additional incentive in their efforts on behalf of the Company in the conduct of their affairs.
1.2 
This Plan is specifically designed for Eligible Participants of the Company who 
are  residents  of  the  United  States  and/or  subject  to  taxation  in  the  United  States,  although 
Awards (as herein defined) under this Plan may be issued to other Eligible Participants.
1.3 
This  Plan  is  in  addition  to,  and  in  no  manner  either  alters,  amends  or  is  in 
substitution for, each of the Company’s existing“2007 Stock Incentive Plan” and “2008 Stock 
Incentive Plan” as dated as originally ratified by the Board of Directors of the Company on each 
of April 27, 2007 and October 20, 2008, respectively.
2.
2.1
DEFINITIONS
As used herein, the following definitions shall apply:
“Administrator” means the Committee or otherwise the Board;
“Affiliate”  and  “Associate”  have  the  meanings  ascribed  to  such  terms  in  Rule 
12b-2 promulgated under the Exchange Act;
“Applicable Laws” means the legal requirements relating to the administration of 
stock  incentive  plans,  if  any,  under  applicable  provisions  of  federal  securities 
laws, state corporate laws, state or provincial securities laws, the Code, the rules 
of any applicable stock exchange or national market system, and the rules of any 
foreign jurisdiction applicable to Awards granted to residents therein;
“Award”  means  the  grant  of  an  Option,  SAR,  Restricted  Stock,  unrestricted 
Shares, Restricted Stock Unit, Deferred Stock Unit or other right or benefit under 
this Plan;
“Award  Agreement”  means  the  written  agreement  evidencing  the  grant  of  an 
Award  executed  by  the  Company  and  the  Grantee,  including  any  amendments 
thereto;
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
“Award Right” means each right to acquire a Share pursuant to an Award;
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 2 -
(g)
(h)
“Board” means the Board of Directors of the Company;
“Cause”  means,  with  respect  to  the  termination  by  the  Company  or  a  Related 
Entity of the Grantee’s Continuous Service, that such termination is for “Cause” 
as such term is expressly defined in a then-effective written agreement between 
the Grantee and the Company or such Related Entity, or in the absence of such 
then-effective written agreement and definition, is based on, in the determination 
of the Administrator, the Grantee’s:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
refusal or failure to act in accordance with any specific, lawful direction or 
order of the Company or a Related Entity;
unfitness or unavailability for service or unsatisfactory performance (other 
than as a result of Disability);
performance of any act or failure to perform any act in bad faith and to the 
detriment of the Company or a Related Entity;
dishonesty,  intentional  misconduct  or  material  breach  of  any  agreement 
with the Company or a Related Entity; or
commission of a crime involving dishonesty, breach of trust, or physical 
or emotional harm to any person;
(i)
“Change of Control” means, except as provided below, a change in ownership or 
control of the Company effected through any of the following transactions:
(i)
the direct or indirect acquisition by any person or related group of persons 
(other  than  an  acquisition  from  or  by  the  Company  or  by  a  Company-
sponsored employee benefit plan or by a person that directly or indirectly 
controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with, the Company) 
of  beneficial  ownership  (within  the  meaning  of  Rule  13d-3  of  the 
Exchange  Act)  of  securities  possessing  more  than  50%  of  the  total 
combined voting power of the Company’s outstanding securities pursuant 
to a tender or exchange offer made directly to the Company’s shareholders 
which  a  majority  of  the  Continuing  Directors  who  are  not  Affiliates  or 
Associates of the offeror do not recommend such shareholders accept;
(ii)
a change in the composition of the Board over a period of 36 months or 
less such that a majority of the Board members (rounded up to the next 
whole number) ceases, by reason of one or more contested elections for 
Board  membership,  to  be  comprised  of  individuals  who  are  Continuing 
Directors;
(iii)
the sale or exchange by the Company (in one or a series of transactions) of 
all or substantially all of its assets to any other person or entity; or
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 3 -
(iv)
approval  by  the  shareholders  of  the  Company  of  a  plan  to  dissolve  and 
liquidate the Company.
Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  the  following  transactions  shall  not  constitute  a 
“Change of Control”:
(i)
(ii)
the closing of any public offering of the Company’s securities pursuant to 
an effective registration statement filed under the United States Securities 
Act of 1933, as amended;
the closing of a public offering of the Company’s securities through the 
facilities of any stock exchange; or
(iii)  with respect to an Award that is subject to Section 409A of the Code, and 
payment or settlement of such Award is to be accelerated in connection 
with  an  event  that  would  otherwise  constitute  a  Change  of  Control,  no 
event  set  forth  previously  in  this  definition  shall  constitute  a  Change  of 
Control  for  purposes  of  this  Plan  or  any  Award  Agreement  unless  such 
event  also  constitutes  a  “change  in  the  ownership”,  a  “change  in  the 
effective  control”  or  a  “change  in  the  ownership  of  a  substantial 
portion of the assets of the corporation” as defined under Section 409A 
of the Code and Treasury guidance formulated thereunder, which guidance 
currently provides that:
(A)
a  change  in  ownership  of  a  corporation  shall  be  deemed  to  have 
occurred  if  any  one  person  or  more  than  one  person  acting  as  a 
group  acquires  stock  of  a  corporation  that  constitutes  more  than 
50%  of  the  total  Fair  Market  Value  or  total  voting  power  of  the 
stock of the corporation. Stock acquired by any person or group of 
people who already owns more than 50% of such total Fair Market 
Value or total voting power of stock shall not trigger a change in 
ownership;
(B)
a change in the effective control of a corporation generally shall be 
deemed to have occurred if within a 12-month period either:
(I)
(II)
any one person or more than one person acting as a group 
acquires ownership of stock possessing 35% or more of the 
total voting power of the stock of the corporation; or
a  majority  of  the  members  of  the  corporation’s  board  of 
directors  is  replaced  by  directors  whose  appointment  or 
election  is  not  endorsed  by  a  majority  of  the  members  of 
the corporation’s board of directors prior to the date of the 
appointment or election; and
(C)
a  change  in  the  ownership  of  a  substantial  portion  of  the 
corporation’s  assets  generally  is  deemed  to  occur  if  within  a  12-
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 4 -
month  period  any  person,  or  more  than  one  person  acting  as  a 
group, acquires assets from the corporation that have a total gross 
fair  market  value  at  least  equal  to  40%  of  the  total  gross  fair 
market  value  of  all  the  corporation’s  assets  immediately  prior  to 
such  acquisition.    The  gross  fair  market  value  of  assets  is 
determined without regard to any liabilities;
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
“Code” means the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended;
“Committee”  means  the  Compensation  Committee  or  any  other  committee 
appointed by the Board to administer this Plan in accordance with the provisions 
of this Plan; provided, however, that:
(i)
(ii)
where available, the Committee shall consist of two or more members of 
the Board;
where available, the directors appointed to serve on the Committee shall 
be  “non-employee  directors”  (within  the  meaning  of  Rule  16b-3 
promulgated under the Exchange Act) and “outside directors” (within the 
meaning of Section 162(m) of the Code) to the extent that Rule 16b-3 and, 
if  necessary  for  relief  from  the  limitation  under  Section  162(m)  of  the 
Code  and  such  relief  is  sought  by  the  Company,  Section  162(m)  of  the 
Code, respectively, are applicable;
(iii)
the mere fact that a Committee member shall fail to qualify under either of 
the  foregoing  requirements  set  forth  in  Section  2.1(k)(ii)  shall  not 
invalidate any Award made by the Committee which Award is otherwise 
validly made under the Plan; and
(iv)  members of the Committee may be appointed from time to time by, and
shall serve at the pleasure of, the Board;
“Common Stock” means the common stock of the Company;
“Company” means Douglas Lake Minerals Inc., a Nevada corporation;
“Consultant” means any person (other than an Employee) who is engaged by the 
Company or any Related Entity to render consulting or advisory services to the 
Company or such Related Entity;
“Continuing Directors” means members of the Board who either (i) have been 
Board members continuously for a period of at least 36 months, or (ii) have been 
Board  members  for  less  than  36  months  and  were  appointed  or  nominated  for 
election as Board members by at least a majority of the Board members described 
in clause (i) who were still in office at the time such appointment or nomination 
was approved by the Board;
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 5 -
(p)
“Continuous Service” means that the provision of services to the Company or a 
Related  Entity  in  any  capacity  of  Employee,  Director  or  Consultant  that  is  not 
interrupted or terminated. Continuous Service shall not be considered interrupted 
in the case of (i) any approved leave of absence, (ii) transfers between locations of 
the  Company  or  among  the  Company,  any  Related  Entity,  or  any  successor,  in 
any capacity of Employee, Director or Consultant, or (iii) any change in status as 
long as the individual remains in the service of the Company or a Related Entity 
in  any  capacity  of  Employee,  Director  or  Consultant  (except  as  otherwise 
provided in the Award Agreement). An approved leave of absence shall include 
sick  leave,  maternity  or  paternity  leave,  military  leave,  or  any  other  authorized 
personal  leave.  For  purposes  of  Incentive  Stock  Options,  no  such  leave  may 
exceed 90 calendar days, unless reemployment upon expiration of such leave is 
guaranteed by statute or contract;
(q)
“Corporate Transaction” means any of the following transactions:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
a  merger  or  consolidation  in  which  the  Company  is  not  the  surviving 
entity, except for a transaction the principal purpose of which is to change 
the jurisdiction in which the Company is organized;
the sale, transfer or other disposition of all or substantially all of the assets 
of the Company (including the capital stock of the Company’s subsidiary 
corporations) in connection with the complete liquidation or dissolution of 
the Company; or
any reverse merger in which the Company is the surviving entity but in 
which securities possessing more than 50% of the total combined voting 
power of the Company’s outstanding securities are transferred to a person 
or persons different from those who held such securities immediately prior 
to such merger;
“Covered Employee” means an Employee who is a “covered employee” under 
Section 162(m)(3) of the Code;
“Deferred  Stock  Units”  means  Awards  that  are  granted  to  Directors  and  are 
subject to the additional provisions set out in Subpart A which is attached hereto 
and which forms a material part hereof;
“Director” means a member of the Board or the board of directors of any Related 
Entity;
“Disability”  or  “Disabled”  means  that  a  Grantee  is  unable  to  carry  out  the 
responsibilities and functions of the position held by the Grantee by reason of any 
medically determinable physical or mental impairment.  A Grantee shall not be 
considered to have incurred a Disability unless he or she furnishes proof of such 
impairment 
its  discretion.  
Notwithstanding  the  above,  (i)  with  respect  to  an  Incentive  Stock  Option, 
Disability  or  Disabled  shall  mean  permanent  and  total  disability  as  defined  in
the  Administrator
satisfy
sufficient
to
in
(r)
(s)
(t)
(u)
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 6 -
Section 22(e)(3) of the Code and (ii) to the extent an Option is subject to Section 
409A of the Code, and payment or settlement of the Option is to be accelerated 
solely as a result of the Eligible Participant’s Disability, Disability shall have the 
meaning  ascribed  thereto  under  Section  409A  of  the  Code  and  the  Treasury 
guidance promulgated thereunder;
“Disinterested  Shareholder  Approval”  means  approval  by  a  majority  of  the 
votes cast by all the Company’s shareholders at a duly constituted shareholders’ 
meeting, excluding votes attached to shares beneficially owned by Insiders;
“Eligible  Participant”  means  any  person  who  is  an  Officer,  a  Director,  an 
Employee or a Consultant, including individuals who are foreign nationals or are 
employed or reside outside the United States;
“Employee” means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the 
Company or any Related Entity;
“Exchange  Act”  means  the  United  States  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  as 
amended;
“Fair Market Value” means, as of any date, the value of a Share determined in 
good faith by the Administrator.  By way of illustration, but not limitation, for the 
purpose of this definition, good faith shall be met if the Administrator employs 
the following methods:
(v)
(w)
(x)
(y)
(z)
(i)
Listed  Stock.    If  the  Common  Stock  is  traded  on  any  established  stock 
exchange or quoted on a national market system, Fair Market Value shall 
be  (A)  the  closing  sales  price  for  the  Common  Stock  as  quoted  on  that 
stock exchange or system for the date the value is to be determined (the 
“Value  Date”)  as  reported  in  The  Wall  Street  Journal  or  a  similar 
publication, or (B) if the rules of the applicable stock exchange require, 
the volume-weighted average trading price for five days prior to the date 
the  Board  approves  the  grant  of  the  Award.    If  no  sales  are  reported  as 
having  occurred  on  the  Value  Date,  Fair  Market  Value  shall  be  that 
closing  sales  price  for  the  last  preceding  trading  day  on  which  sales  of 
Common Stock is reported as having occurred.  If no sales are reported as 
having occurred during the five trading days before the Value Date, Fair 
Market  Value  shall  be  the  closing  bid  for  Common  Stock  on  the  Value 
Date.  If the Common Stock is listed on multiple exchanges or systems, 
Fair Market Value shall be based on sales or bids on the primary exchange 
or system on which Common Stock is traded or quoted.  If the rules of any 
applicable  stock  exchange  or  system  require  a  different  method  of 
calculating Fair Market Value, then such method as is required by those 
rules;
(ii)
Stock Quoted by Securities Dealer.  If Common Stock is regularly quoted 
by a recognized securities dealer but selling prices are not reported on any
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 7 -
established  stock  exchange  or  quoted  on  a  national  market  system,  Fair 
Market Value shall be the mean between the high bid and low asked prices 
on the Value Date.  If no prices are quoted for the Value Date, Fair Market 
Value shall be the mean between the high bid and low asked prices on the 
last preceding trading day on which any bid and asked prices were quoted;
(iii)  No Established Market.  If Common Stock is not traded on any established 
stock exchange or quoted on a national market system and is not quoted 
by  a  recognized  securities  dealer,  the  Administrator  will  determine  Fair 
Market  Value  in  good  faith.    The  Administrator  will  consider  the 
following factors, and any others it considers significant, in determining 
Fair Market Value: (A) the price at which other securities of the Company 
have  been  issued  to  purchasers  other  than  Employees,  Directors,  or 
Consultants;  (B)  the  Company’s  net  worth,  prospective  earning  power, 
dividend-paying  capacity,  and  non-operating  assets,  if  any;  and  (C)  any 
other  relevant  factors,  including  the  economic  outlook  for  the  Company 
and the Company’s industry, the Company’s position in that industry, the 
Company’s  goodwill  and  other  intellectual  property,  and  the  values  of 
securities of other businesses in the same industry;
(iv)  Additional  Valuation.    For  publicly  traded  companies,  any  valuation 
method permitted under Section 20.2031-2 of the Estate Tax Regulations; 
or
(v)
Non-Publicly  Traded  Stock.    For  non-publicly  traded  stock,  the  Fair 
Market  Value  of  the  Common  Stock  at  the  Grant  Date  based  on  an 
average of the Fair Market Values as of such date set forth in the opinions 
of  completely  independent  and  well-qualified  experts  (the  Participant’s 
status  as  a  majority  or  minority  shareholder  may  be  taken  into 
consideration).
Regardless  of  whether  the  Common  Stock  offered  under  the  Award  is  publicly 
traded, a good faith attempt under this definition shall not be met unless the Fair 
Market Value of the Common Stock on the Grant Date is determined with regard 
to  nonlapse  restrictions  (as  defined  in  Section  1.83-3(h)  of  the  Treasury 
Regulations) and without regard to lapse restrictions (as defined in Section 1.83-
3(i) of the Treasury Regulations);
“Grantee” means an Eligible Participant who receives an Award pursuant to an 
Award Agreement;
“Grant Date” means the date the Administrator approves that grant of an Award.  
However,  if  the  Administrator  specifies  that  an  Award’s  Grant  Date  is  a  future 
date or the date on which a condition is satisfied, the Grant Date for such Award 
is that future date or the date that the condition is satisfied;
(aa)
(bb)
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 8 -
(cc)
“Incentive Stock Option” means an Option within the meaning of Section 422 of 
the Code;
(dd)
“Insider” means:
(i)
(ii)
a Director or Senior Officer of the Company;
a  Director  or  Senior  Officer  of  a  person  that  is  itself  an  Insider  or 
Subsidiary of the Company;
(iii)
a person that has
(A)
(B)
(C)
direct or indirect beneficial ownership of,
control or direction over, or
a  combination  of  direct  or  indirect  beneficial  ownership  of  and 
control or direction over,
securities  of  the  Company  carrying  more  than  10%  of  the  voting  rights 
attached to all the Company’s outstanding voting securities, excluding, for 
the purpose of the calculation of the percentage held, any securities held 
by the person as underwriter in the course of a distribution; or
(iv)
the Company itself, if it has purchased, redeemed or otherwise acquired 
any securities of its own issue, for so long as it continues to hold those 
securities;
“Named Executive Officer” means, if applicable, an Eligible Participant who, as 
of the date of vesting and/or payout of an Award, is one of the group of Covered 
Employees as defined;
“Non-Qualified Stock Option” means an Option which is not an Incentive Stock 
Option;
“Officer”  means  a  person  who  is  an  officer,  including  a  Senior  Officer,  of  the 
Company or a Related Entity within the meaning of Section 16 of the Exchange 
Act and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder;
(ee)
(ff)
(gg)
(hh)
“Option” means an option to purchase Shares pursuant to an Award Agreement 
granted under the Plan;
(ii)
(jj)
“Parent”  means  a  “parent  corporation”,  whether  now  or  hereafter  existing,  as 
defined in Section 424(e) of the Code;
“Performance-Based  Compensation”  means  compensation  qualifying  as 
“performance-based compensation” under Section 162(m) of the Code;
(kk)
“Plan” means this 2010 Stock Incentive Plan as amended from time to time;
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 9 -
(ll)
“Related  Entity”  means  any  Parent  or  Subsidiary,  and  includes  any  business, 
corporation,  partnership,  limited  liability  company  or  other  entity  in  which  the 
Company, a Parent or a Subsidiary holds a greater than 50% ownership interest, 
directly or indirectly;
(mm)  “Related Entity Disposition” means the sale, distribution or other disposition by 
the Company of all or substantially all of the Company’s interests in any Related 
Entity effected by a sale, merger or consolidation or other transaction involving 
that  Related  Entity  or  the  sale  of  all  or  substantially  all  of  the  assets  of  that 
Related Entity;
(nn)
(oo)
(pp)
(qq)
(rr)
(ss)
“Restricted Stock” means Shares issued under the Plan to the Grantee for such 
consideration,  if  any,  and  subject  to  such  restrictions  on  transfer,  rights  of  first 
refusal,  repurchase  provisions,  forfeiture  provisions,  and  other  terms  and 
conditions as, established by the Administrator and specified in the related Award 
Agreement;
“Restricted  Stock  Unit”  means  a  notional  account  established  pursuant  to  an 
Award granted to a Grantee, as described in this Plan, that is (i) valued solely by 
reference to Shares, (ii) subject to restrictions specified in the Award Agreement, 
and (iii) payable only in Shares;
“Restriction  Period”  means  the  period  during  which  the  transfer  of  Shares  of 
Restricted  Stock  is  limited  in  some  way  (based  on  the  passage  of  time,  the 
achievement  of  performance  objectives,  or  the  occurrence  of  other  events  as 
determined by the Administrator, in its sole discretion) or the Restricted Stock is 
not vested;
“SAR” means a stock appreciation right entitling the Grantee to Shares or cash 
compensation, as established by the Administrator, measured by appreciation in 
the value of Common Stock;
“SEC” means the United States Securities Exchange Commission;
“Senior Officer” means:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
the  chair  or  vice  chair  of  the  Board,  the  president,  the  chief  executive 
officer,  the  chief  financial  officer,  a  vice-president,  the  secretary,  the 
treasurer or the general manager of the Company or a Related Entity;
any  individual  who  performs  functions  for  a  person  similar  to  those 
normally  performed  by  an  individual  occupying  any  office  specified  in 
Section 2.1(ss)(i) above; and
the  five  highest  paid  employees  of  the  Company  or  a  Related  Entity, 
including any individual referred to in Section 2.1(ss)(i) or 2.1(ss)(ii) and 
excluding a commissioned salesperson who does not act in a managerial 
capacity;
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 10 -
(tt)
“Share” means a share of the Common Stock; and
(uu)
“Subsidiary”  means  a  “subsidiary  corporation”,  whether  now  or  hereafter 
existing, as defined in Section 424(f) of the Code.
3.
STOCK SUBJECT TO THE PLAN
Number of Shares Available
3.1
(a)
Subject to the provisions of Section 18, the maximum aggregate number of Shares 
which may be issued pursuant to all Awards (including Incentive Stock Options) 
under  this  Plan  is  10,000,000  (the  “Maximum  Number”).    See  Section  29 for 
Reservation of Shares.
(b)
(c)
Shares that have been issued under the Plan pursuant to an Award shall not be 
returned to the Plan and shall not become available for future issuance under the 
Plan except that Shares (i) covered by an Award (or portion of an Award) which 
is forfeited or cancelled, expires or is settled in cash, or (ii) withheld to satisfy a 
Grantee’s  minimum  tax  withholding  obligations,  shall  be  deemed  not  to  have 
been issued for purposes of determining the Maximum Number of Shares which 
may  be  issued  under  the  Plan.    Also,  only  the  net  numbers  of  Shares  that  are 
issued  pursuant  to  the  exercise  of  an  Award  shall  be  counted  against  the 
Maximum Number.
However,  in  the  event  that  prior  to  the  Award’s  cancellation,  termination, 
expiration, forfeiture or lapse, the holder of the Award at any time received one or 
more elements of beneficial ownership pursuant to such Award (as defined by the 
SEC, pursuant to any rule or interpretations promulgated under Section 16 of the 
Exchange  Act),  the  Shares  subject  to  such  Award  shall  not  again  be  made 
available for regrant under the Plan.
Shares to Insiders
3.2 
receive an Award where:
Subject to Section 15.1(b) and 15.1(c), no Insider of the Company is eligible to
(a)
(b)
the Insider is not a Director or Senior Officer of the Company;
any  Award,  together  with  all  of  the  Company’s  other  previously  established  or 
proposed Awards under the Plan could result at any time in:
(i)
(ii)
the number of Shares reserved for issuance pursuant to Options granted to 
Insiders exceeding 50% of the outstanding issue of Common Stock; or
the issuance to Insiders pursuant to the exercise of Options, within a one 
year period of a number of Shares exceeding 50% of the outstanding issue 
of the Common Stock;
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 11 -
provided, however, that this restriction on the eligibility of Insiders to receive an Award shall 
cease to apply if it is no longer required under any Applicable Laws.
Limitations on Award
3.3 
Unless and until the Administrator determines that an Award to a Grantee is not 
designed  to  qualify  as  Performance-Based  Compensation,  the  following  limits  (the  “Award 
Limits”) shall apply to grants of Awards to Grantees subject to the Award Limits by Applicable 
Laws under this Plan:
(a)
(b)
Options  and  SARs.    Notwithstanding  any  provision  in  the  Plan  to  the  contrary 
(but subject to adjustment as provided in Section 18), the maximum number of 
Shares with respect to one or more Options and/or Stock Appreciation Rights that 
may be granted during any one calendar year under the Plan to any one Grantee 
shall be 5,000,000; all of which may be granted as Incentive Stock Options); and
Other  Awards.    The  maximum  aggregate  grant  with  respect  to  Awards  of 
Restricted Stock, unrestricted Shares, Restricted Stock Units and Deferred Stock 
Units (or used to provide a basis of measurement for or to determine the value of 
Restricted Stock Units and Deferred Stock Units) in any one calendar year to any 
one Grantee (determined on the date of payment of settlement) shall be 5,000,000.
4.
ADMINISTRATION
Authority of Plan Administrator
4.1 
shall be vested in the Administrator.
Authority  to  control  and  manage  the  operation  and  administration  of  this  Plan
Powers of the Administrator
4.2 
Subject  to  Applicable  Laws  and  the  provisions  of  the  Plan  or  subplans  hereof 
(including  any  other  powers  given  to  the  Administrator  hereunder),  and  except  as  otherwise 
provided  by  the  Board,  the  Administrator  shall  have  the  exclusive  power  and  authority,  in  its 
discretion:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
to  construe  and  interpret  this  Plan  and  any  agreements  defining  the  rights  and 
obligations of  the Company and Grantees under this Plan;
to select the Eligible Participants to whom Awards may be granted from time to 
time hereunder;
to determine whether and to what extent Awards are granted hereunder;
to  determine  the  number  of  Shares  or  the  amount  of  other  consideration  to  be 
covered by each Award granted hereunder;
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 12 -
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
to approve forms of Award Agreements for use under the Plan, which need not be 
identical for each Grantee;
to  determine  the  terms  and  conditions  of  any  Award  granted  under  the  Plan, 
including,  but  not  limited  to,  the  exercise  price,  grant  price  or  purchase  price 
based on the Fair Market Value of the same, any restrictions or limitations on the 
Award,  any  schedule  for  lapse  of  forfeiture  restrictions  or  restrictions  on  the 
exercisability  of  the  Award,  and  acceleration  or  waivers  thereof,  based  in  each 
case on such considerations as the Committee in its sole discretion determines that 
is not inconsistent with any rule or regulation under any tax or securities laws or 
includes  an  alternative  right  that  does  not  disqualify  an  Incentive  Stock  Option 
under applicable regulations;
to amend the terms of any outstanding Award granted under the Plan, provided 
that  any  amendment  that  would  adversely  affect  the  Grantee’s  rights  under  an 
existing Award shall not be made without the Grantee’s consent unless as a result 
of a change in Applicable Law;
to suspend the right of a holder to exercise all or part of an Award for any reason 
that the Administrator considers in the best interest of the Company;
subject to regulatory approval, amend or suspend the Plan, or revoke or alter any 
action  taken  in  connection  therewith,  except  that  no  general  amendment  or 
suspension of the Plan, shall, without the written consent of all Grantees, alter or 
impair  any  Award  granted  under  the  Plan  unless  as  a  result  of  a  change  in  the 
Applicable Law;
to establish additional terms, conditions, rules or procedures to accommodate the 
rules or laws of applicable foreign jurisdictions and to afford Grantees favorable 
treatment  under  such  laws;  provided,  however,  that  no  Award  shall  be  granted 
under  any  such  additional  terms,  conditions,  rules  or  procedures  with  terms  or 
conditions which are inconsistent with the provisions of the Plan;
to further define the terms used in this Plan;
to correct any defect or supply any omission or reconcile any inconsistency in this 
Plan or in any Award Agreement;
to provide for rights of refusal and/or repurchase rights;
to amend outstanding Award Agreements to provide for, among other things, any 
change or modification which the Administrator could have provided for upon the 
grant of an Award or in furtherance of the powers provided for herein that does 
not disqualify an Incentive Stock Option under applicable regulations unless the 
Grantee so consents;
(o)
to  prescribe,  amend  and  rescind  rules  and  regulations  relating 
administration of this Plan; and
to
the
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 13 -
(p)
to  take  such  other  action,  not  inconsistent  with  the  terms  of  the  Plan,  as  the 
Administrator deems appropriate.
Effect of Administrator’s Decision
4.3 
All  decisions,  determinations  and  interpretations  of  the  Administrator  shall  be 
conclusive and binding on all persons.  The Administrator shall not be liable for any decision, 
action or omission respecting this Plan, or any Awards granted or Shares sold under this Plan.  In 
the event an Award is granted in a manner inconsistent with the provisions of this Section 4, such 
Award shall be presumptively valid as of its grant date to the extent permitted by the Applicable 
Laws.
Action by Committee
4.4 
Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  committee  charter  or  other  similar  corporate 
governance documents, for purposes of administering the Plan, the following rules of procedure 
shall govern the Committee.  A majority of the Committee shall constitute a quorum. The acts of 
a  majority  of  the  members  present  at  any  meeting  at  which  a  quorum  is  present,  and  acts 
approved unanimously in writing by the members of the Committee in lieu of a meeting, shall be 
deemed the acts of the Committee.  Each member of the Committee is entitled to, in good faith, 
rely or act upon any report or other information furnished to that member by any officer or other 
employee of the Company or any Parent or Affiliate, the Company’s independent certified public 
accountants,  or  any  executive  compensation  consultant  or  other  professional  retained  by  the 
Company to assist in the administration of the Plan.
Limitation on Liability
4.5 
To the extent permitted by applicable law in effect from time to time, no member 
of  the  Administrator  shall  be  liable  for  any  action  or  omission  of  any  other  member  of  the 
Administrator  nor  for  any  act  or  omission  on  the  member’s  own  part,  excepting  only  the 
member’s own wilful misconduct or gross negligence, arising out of or related to this Plan.  The 
Company  shall  pay  expenses  incurred  by,  and  satisfy  a  judgment  or  fine  rendered  or  levied 
against,  a  present  or  former  member  of  the  Administrator  in  any  action  against  such  person 
(whether or not the Company is joined as a party defendant) to impose liability or a penalty on 
such person for an act alleged to have been committed by such person while a member of the 
Administrator arising with respect to this Plan or administration thereof or out of membership on 
the Administrator or by the Company, or all or any combination of the preceding, provided, the 
member was acting in good faith, within what such member reasonably believed to have been 
within  the  scope  of  his  or  her  employment  or  authority  and  for  a  purpose  which  he  or  she 
reasonably believed to be in the best interests of the Company or its stockholders.  Payments 
authorized hereunder include amounts paid and expenses incurred in settling any such action or 
threatened  action.    The  provisions  of  this  Section  4.5  shall  apply  to  the  estate,  executor, 
administrator,  heirs,  legatees  or  devisees  of  a  member  of  the  Administrator,  and  the  term 
“person”  as  used  on  this  Section  4.5  shall  include  the  estate,  executor,  administrator,  heirs, 
legatees, or devisees of such person.
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
5.
ELIGIBILITY
- 14 -
Except  as  otherwise  provided,  all  types  of  Awards  may  be  granted  to  Eligible 
Participants.  An  Eligible  Participant  who  has  been  granted  an  Award  may  be,  if  he  or  she 
continues to be eligible, granted additional Awards.
6.
AWARDS
Type of Awards
6.1 
The Administrator is authorized to award any type of arrangement to an Eligible 
Participant that is not inconsistent with the provisions of the Plan and that by its terms involves 
or might involve the issuance of:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Shares, including unrestricted Shares;
Options;
SARs or similar rights with a fixed or variable price related to the Fair Market 
Value of the Shares and with an exercise or conversion privilege related to the 
passage  of  time,  the  occurrence  of  one  or  more  events,  or  the  satisfaction  of 
performance criteria or other conditions;
any other security with the value derived from the value of the Shares, such as 
Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units;
Deferred Stock Units;
Dividend Equivalent Rights, as defined in Section 13; or
any combination of the foregoing.
Designation of Award
6.2 
Each type of Award shall be designated in the Award Agreement.  In the case of 
an Option, the Option shall be designated as either an Incentive Stock Option or a Non-Qualified 
Stock Option.  But see Section 7.3(a) regarding exceeding the Incentive Stock Option threshold.
7.
GRANT OF OPTIONS; TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF GRANT
Grant of Options
7.1
(a)
One or more Options may be granted to any Eligible Participant.  Subject to the
express  provisions  of  this  Plan,  the  Administrator  shall  determine  from  the 
Eligible Participants those individuals to whom Options under this Plan may be
granted.    The  Shares  underlying  a  grant  of  an  Option  may  be  in  the  form  of
Restricted Stock or unrestricted Stock.
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 15 -
(b)
Further,  subject  to  the  express  provisions  of  this  Plan,  the  Administrator  shall 
specify the Grant Date, the number of Shares covered by the Option, the exercise 
price  and  the  terms  and  conditions  for  exercise  of  the  Options.    As  soon  as 
practicable after the Grant Date, the Company shall provide the Grantee with a 
written Award Agreement in the form approved by the Administrator, which sets 
out  the  Grant  Date,  the  number  of  Shares  covered  by  the  Option,  the  exercise 
price and the terms and conditions for exercise of the Option.
(c)
The Administrator may, in its absolute discretion, grant Options under this Plan at 
any time and from time to time before the expiration of this Plan.
General Terms and Conditions
7.2 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Options shall be subject to the following 
terms and conditions and such other terms and conditions not inconsistent with this Plan as the 
Administrator may impose:
(a)
(b)
(c)
Exercise of Option.  The Administrator may determine in its discretion whether 
any Option shall be subject to vesting and the terms and conditions of any such 
vesting.  The Award Agreement shall contain any such vesting schedule;
Option Term.  Each Option and all rights or obligations thereunder shall expire on 
such date as shall be determined by the Administrator, but not later than ten years 
after the Grant Date (five years in the case of an Incentive Stock Option when the 
Optionee beneficially owns more than 10% of the total combined voting power of 
all classes of stock of the Company or any Parent or Subsidiary (a “Ten Percent 
Stockholder”), as determined with reference to Rule 13d-3 of the Exchange Act), 
and shall be subject to earlier termination as hereinafter provided;
Exercise  Price.    The  Exercise  Price  of  any  Option  shall  be  determined  by  the 
Administrator  when  the  Option  is  granted,  at  such  Exercise  Price  as  may  be 
determined  by  the  Administrator  in  the  Administrator’s  sole  and  absolute 
discretion; provided, however, that the Exercise Price may not be less than 100% 
of  the  Fair  Market  Value  of  the  Shares  on  the  Grant  Date  with  respect  to  any 
Incentive Stock Options which are granted and, provided further, that the Exercise 
Price of any Incentive Stock Option granted to a Ten Percent Stockholder shall 
not be less than 110% of the Fair Market Value of the Shares on the Grant Date.  
Payment for the Shares purchased shall be made in accordance with Section 16 of 
this  Plan.    The  Administrator  is  authorized  to  issue  Options,  whether  Incentive 
Stock Options or Non-qualified Stock Options, at an option price lower than or in 
excess of the Fair Market Value on the Grant Date, to determine the terms and 
conditions of any Award granted under the Plan, including, but not limited to, the 
exercise price, grant price or purchase price, any restrictions or limitations on the 
Award,  any  schedule  for  lapse  of  forfeiture  restrictions  or  restrictions  on  the 
exercisability  of  the  Award,  and  acceleration  or  waivers  thereof,  based  in  each 
case on such considerations as the Committee in its sole discretion determines that 
is not inconsistent with any rule or regulation under any tax or securities laws or
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 16 -
includes  an  alternative  right  that  does  not  disqualify  an  Incentive  Stock  Option 
under applicable regulations;
(d)  Method of Exercise.  Options may be exercised only by delivery to the Company 
of  a  stock  option  exercise  agreement  (the  “Exercise  Agreement”)  in  a  form 
approved by the Administrator (which need not be the same for each Grantee), 
stating  the  number  of  Shares  being  purchased,  the  restrictions  imposed  on  the 
Shares  purchased  under  such  Exercise  Agreement, 
if  any,  and  such 
representations  and  agreements  regarding  the  Grantee’s  investment  intent  and 
access to information and other matters, if any, as may be required or desirable by 
the Company to comply with applicable securities laws, together with payment in 
full of the exercise price for the number of Shares being purchased;
(e)
Exercise After Certain Events.
(i)
Termination of Continuous Services.
(A)  Options.
(I)
(II)
Termination  of  Continuous  Services.    If  for  any  reason 
other  than  Disability  or  death,  a  Grantee  terminates 
Continuous  Services  with  the  Company  or  a  Subsidiary, 
vested Options held at the date of such termination may be 
exercised, in whole or in part, either (i) at any time within 
three  months  after  the  date  of  such  termination,  or  (ii) 
during  any  greater  or  lesser  period  as  specified  in  the 
Award  Agreement  or  (iii)  during  any  greater  or  lesser 
period  as  may  be  determined  by  the  Administrator,  in  its 
sole  and  absolute  discretion,  prior  the  date  of  such 
termination  (but  in  no  event  after  the  earlier  of  (A)  the 
expiration  date  of  the  Option  as  set  forth  in  the  Award 
Agreement  and  (B)  ten  years  from  the  Grant  Date  (five 
years  for  a  Ten  Percent  Stockholder  if  the  Option  is  an 
Incentive Stock Option)).
Continuation  of  Services  as  Consultant/Advisor.    If  a 
Grantee  granted  an  Incentive  Stock  Option  terminates 
employment but continues as a Consultant (no termination 
of Continuous Services), the Grantee need not exercise an 
Incentive  Stock  Option  within  either  of  the  termination 
periods provided for immediately hereinabove but shall be 
entitled  to  exercise,  in  whole  or  in  part,  either  (i)  at  any 
time within three months after the then date of termination 
of Continuous Services to the Company or a Subsidiary, or 
(ii)  during  any  greater  or  lesser  period  as  specified  in  the 
Award  Agreement  or  (iii)  during  any  greater  or  lesser 
period  as  may  be  determined  by  the  Administrator,  in  its
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 17 -
sole  and  absolute  discretion,  prior  the  date  of  such  then 
termination of Continuous Services to the Company or the 
Subsidiary  (one  year  in  the  event  of  Disability  or  death) 
(but in no event after the earlier of (A) the expiration date 
of the Option as set forth in the Award Agreement and (B) 
ten years from the Grant Date (five years for a Ten Percent 
Stockholder  if  the  Option  is  an  Incentive  Stock  Option)).  
However,  if  the  Grantee  does  not  exercise  within  three 
months of termination of employment, pursuant to Section 
422 of the Code the Option shall not qualify as an Incentive 
Stock Option.
(B)  Disability  and  Death.    If  a  Grantee  becomes  Disabled  while 
rendering Continuous Services to the Company or a Subsidiary, or 
dies while employed by the Company or Subsidiary or within three 
months thereafter, vested Options then held may be exercised by 
the Grantee, the Grantee’s personal representative, or by the person 
to  whom  the  Option  is  transferred  by  the  laws  of  descent  and 
distribution, in whole or in part, at any time within one year after 
the  termination  because  of  the  Disability  or  death  or  any  lesser 
period specified in the Award Agreement (but in no event after the 
earlier  of  (i)  the  expiration  date  of  the  Option  as  set  forth  in  the 
Award  Agreement,  and  (ii)  ten  years  from  the  Grant  Date  (five 
years for a Ten Percent Stockholder if the Option is an Incentive 
Stock Option).
Limitations on Grant of Incentive Stock Options
7.3
(a)
Threshold.  The aggregate Fair Market Value (determined as of the Grant Date) of
the  Shares  for  which  Incentive  Stock  Options  may  first  become  exercisable  by
any Grantee during any calendar year under this Plan, together with that of Shares
subject  to  Incentive  Stock  Options  first  exercisable  by  such  Grantee  under  any
other  plan  of  the  Company  or  any  Parent  or  Subsidiary,  shall  not  exceed 
$100,000.    For  purposes  of  this  Section  7.3(a),  all  Options  in  excess  of  the 
$100,000 
treated  as  Non-Qualified  Stock  Options 
notwithstanding  the  designation  as  Incentive  Stock  Options.    For  this  purpose,
Options shall be taken into account in the order in which they were granted, and
the Fair Market Value of the Shares shall be determined as of the date the Option
with respect to such Shares is granted.
threshold  shall  be
(b)
Compliance with Section 422 of the Code.  There shall be imposed in the Award 
Agreement relating to Incentive Stock Options such terms and conditions as are 
required in order that the Option be an “incentive stock option” as that term is 
defined in Section 422 of the Code.
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 18 -
(c)
Requirement of Employment.  No Incentive Stock Option may be granted to any 
person who is not an Employee of the Company or a Parent or Subsidiary of the 
Company.
8.
RESTRICTED STOCK AWARDS
Grant of Restricted Stock Awards
8.1 
Subject to the terms and provisions of this Plan, the Administrator is authorized to 
make awards of Restricted Stock to any Eligible Participant in such amounts and subject to such 
terms  and  conditions  as  may  be  selected  by  the  Administrator.    The  restrictions  may  lapse 
separately or in combination at such times, under such circumstances, in such instalments, time-
based  or  upon  the  satisfaction  of  performance  goals  or  otherwise,  as  the  Administrator 
determines at the time of the grant of the Award or thereafter. (See Performance Goals, Section 
14.4).  All awards of Restricted Stock shall be evidenced by Award Agreements.
8.2
Consideration
Restricted Stock may be issued in connection with:
(a)
(b)
Services.  Services rendered to the Company or an Affiliate (i.e. bonus); and/or
Purchase Price.  A purchase price, as specified in the Award Agreement related to 
such Restricted Stock, equal to not be less than 100% of the Fair Market Value of 
the Shares underlying the Restricted Stock on the date of issuance.
Voting and Dividends
8.3 
Unless the Administrator in its sole and absolute discretion otherwise provides in 
an Award Agreement, holders of Restricted Stock shall have the right to vote such Restricted 
Stock  and  the  right  to  receive  any  dividends  declared  or  paid  with  respect  to  such  Restricted 
Stock.    The  Administrator  may  provide  that  any  dividends  paid  on  Restricted  Stock  must  be 
reinvested in shares of Stock, which may or may not be subject to the same vesting conditions 
and  restrictions  applicable  to  such  Restricted  Stock.    All  distributions,  if  any,  received  by  a 
Grantee  with  respect  to  Restricted  Stock  as  a  result  of  any  stock  split,  stock  dividend, 
combination of shares, or other similar transaction shall be subject to the restrictions applicable 
to the original Award.
Forfeiture
8.4 
In the case of an event of forfeiture pursuant to the Award Agreement, including 
failure  to  satisfy  the  restriction  period  or  a  performance  objective  during  the  applicable 
restriction period, any Restricted Stock that has not vested prior to the event of forfeiture shall 
automatically expire, and all of the rights, title and interest of the Grantee thereunder shall be 
forfeited in their entirety including but not limited to any right to vote and receive dividends with 
respect to the Restricted Stock.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Administrator may provide 
in  any  Award  Agreement  that  restrictions  or  forfeiture  conditions  relating  to  Restricted  Stock 
shall be waived in whole or in part in the event of terminations resulting from specified causes,
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 19 -
and  the  Administrator  may  in  other  cases  waive  in  whole  or  in  part  restrictions  or  forfeiture 
conditions  relating  to  Restricted  Stock,  provided  such  waiver  is  in  accordance  with  the 
Applicable Laws.
Certificates for Restricted Stock
8.5 
Restricted Stock granted under this Plan may be evidenced in such manner as the 
Administrator shall determine, including by way of certificates.  The Administrator may provide 
in an Award Agreement that either (i) the Secretary of the Company shall hold such certificates 
for the Grantee’s benefit until such time as the Restricted Stock is forfeited to the Company or 
the restrictions lapse, (see Escrow; Pledge of Shares, Section 23) or (ii) such certificates shall be 
delivered to the Grantee, provided, however, that such certificates shall bear a legend or legends 
that comply with the applicable securities laws and regulations and make appropriate reference 
to the restrictions imposed under this Plan and the Award Agreement.
9.
UNRESTRICTED STOCK AWARDS
The Administrator may, in its sole discretion, grant (or sell at not less than 100% 
of the Fair Market Value or such other higher purchase price determined by the Administrator in 
the Award Agreement) an Award of unrestricted Shares to any Grantee pursuant to which such 
Grantee may receive Shares free of any restrictions under this Plan.
10.
RESTRICTED STOCK UNITS
Grant of Restricted Stock Units
10.1 
Subject to the terms and provisions of this Plan, the Administrator is authorized to 
make awards of Restricted Stock Units to any Eligible Participant in such amounts and subject to 
such terms and conditions as may be selected by the Administrator.  These restrictions may lapse 
separately or in combination at such times, under such circumstances, in such instalments, time-
based  or  upon  the  satisfaction  of  performance  goals  or  otherwise,  as  the  Administrator 
determines at the time of the grant of the Award or thereafter. (See Performance Goals, Section 
14.4).  All awards of Restricted Stock Units shall be evidenced by Award Agreements.
Number of Restricted Stock Units
10.2 
and such other provisions as the Administrator determines.
The Award Agreement shall specify the number of Share equivalent units granted
Consideration
10.3
Restricted Stock Units may be issued in connection with:
(a)
(b)
Services.  Services rendered to the Company or an Affiliate (i.e. bonus); and/or
Purchase Price.  A purchase price as specified in the Award Agreement related to 
such Restricted Stock Units, equal to not be less than 100% of the Fair Market 
Value of the Shares underlying the Restricted Stock Units on the date of issuance.
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 20 -
No Voting Rights
10.4 
Company.
The holders of Restricted Stock Units shall have no rights as stockholders of the
Dividend Equivalency
10.5 
The Administrator, in its sole and absolute discretion, may provide in an Award 
Agreement  evidencing  a  grant  of  Restricted  Stock  Units  that  the  holder  shall  be  entitled  to 
receive,  upon  the  Company’s  payment  of  a  cash  dividend  on  its  outstanding  Shares,  a  cash 
payment for each Restricted Stock Unit.  (See Section 13, Dividend Equivalent Right).  Such 
Award  Agreement  may  also  provide  that  such  cash  payment  shall  be  deemed  reinvested  in 
additional Restricted Stock Units at a price per unit equal to the Fair Market Value of a Share on 
the date that such dividend is paid.
Creditor’s Rights
10.6 
A  holder  of  Restricted  Stock  Units  shall  have  no  rights  other  than  those  of  a 
general creditor of the Company.  Restricted Stock Units represent an unfunded and unsecured 
obligation  of  the  Company,  subject  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  applicable  Award 
Agreement.
Settlement of Restricted Stock Units
10.7 
Each Restricted Stock Unit shall be paid and settled by the issuance of Restricted 
Stock or unrestricted Shares in accordance with the Award Agreement and if such settlement is 
subject to Section 409A of the Code only upon any one or more of the following as provided for 
in the Award Agreement:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
a specific date or date determinable by a fixed schedule;
upon the Eligible Participant’s termination of Continuous Services to the extent 
the same constitutes a separation from services for purposes of Section 409A of 
the Code except that if an Eligible Participant is a “key employee” as defined in 
Section  409A  of  the  Code  for  such  purposes,  then  payment  or  settlement  shall 
occur 6 months following such separation of service;
as a result of the Eligible Participant’s death or Disability; or
in  connection  with  or  as  a  result  of  a  Change  of  Control  in  compliance  with 
Section 409A of the Code.
Forfeiture
10.8 
Upon failure to satisfy any requirement for settlement as set forth in the Award 
Agreement,  including  failure  to  satisfy  any  restriction  period  or  performance  objective,  any 
Restricted Stock Units held by the Grantee shall automatically expire, and all of the rights, title
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 21 -
and interest of the Grantee thereunder shall be forfeited in their entirety including but not limited 
to any right to receive dividends with respect to the Restricted Stock Units.
11.
DIRECTOR SHARES AND DIRECTOR DEFERRED STOCK UNITS
The grant of Awards of Shares to Directors and the election by Directors to defer 
the  receipt  of  the  Awards  of  Shares  (the  “Deferred  Stock  Units”)  shall  be  governed  by  the 
provisions  of  Subpart  A  which  is  attached  hereto.    The  provisions  of  Subpart  A  are  attached 
hereto as part of this Plan and are incorporated herein by reference.
12.
STOCK APPRECIATION RIGHTS
Awards of SARs
12.1 
An  SAR  is  an  award  to  receive  a  number  of  Shares  (which  may  consist  of 
Restricted Stock), or cash, or Shares and cash, as determined by the Administrator in accordance 
with  Section  12.4  below,  for  services  rendered  to  the  Company.    A  SAR  may  be  awarded 
pursuant to an Award Agreement that shall be in such form (which need not be the same for each 
Grantee) as the Administrator shall from time to time approve, and shall comply with and be 
subject to the terms and conditions of this Plan.  A SAR may vary from Grantee to Grantee and 
between groups of Grantees, and may be based upon performance objectives (See Performance 
Goals in Section 14.4).
Term
12.2 
the Administrator.
The term of a SAR shall be set forth in the Award Agreement as determined by
Exercise
12.3 
A Grantee desiring to exercise a SAR shall give written notice of such exercise to 
the Company, which notice shall state the proportion of Shares and cash that the Grantee desires 
to receive pursuant to the SAR exercised, subject to the discretion of the Administrator.  Upon 
receipt  of  the  notice  from  the  Grantee,  subject  to  the  Administrator’s  election  to  pay  cash  as 
provided in Section 12.4 below, the Company shall deliver to the person entitled thereto (i) a 
certificate or certificates for Shares and/or (ii) a cash payment, in accordance with Section 12.4 
below.  The date the Company receives written notice of such exercise hereunder is referred to in 
this Section 12 as the “exercise date”.
Number of Shares or Amount of Cash
12.4 
Subject  to  the  discretion  of  the  Administrator  to  substitute  cash  for  Shares,  or 
some portion of the Shares for cash, the amount of Shares that may be issued pursuant to the 
exercise of a SAR shall be determined by dividing: (i) the total number of Shares as to which the 
SAR is exercised, multiplied by the amount by which the Fair Market Value of the Shares on the 
exercise date exceeds the Fair Market Value of a Share on the date of grant of the SAR; by (ii) 
the Fair Market Value of a Share on the exercise date; provided, however, that fractional Shares 
shall not be issued and in lieu thereof, a cash adjustment shall be paid.  In lieu of issuing Shares
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 22 -
upon the exercise of a SAR, the Administrator in its sole discretion may elect to pay the cash 
equivalent of the Fair Market Value of the Shares on the exercise date for any or all of the Shares 
that would otherwise be issuable upon exercise of the SAR.
Effect of Exercise
12.5 
A partial exercise of a SAR shall not affect the right to exercise the remaining 
SAR from time to time in accordance with this Plan and the applicable Award Agreement with 
respect to the remaining shares subject to the SAR.
Forfeiture
12.6 
In the case of an event of forfeiture pursuant to the Award Agreement, including 
failure to satisfy any restriction period or a performance objective, any SAR that has not vested 
prior to the date of termination shall automatically expire, and all of the rights, title and interest 
of the Grantee thereunder shall be forfeited in their entirety.
13.
DIVIDEND EQUIVALENT RIGHT
A dividend equivalent right is an Award entitling the recipient to receive credits 
based on cash distributions that would have been paid on the Shares specified in the dividend 
equivalent right (or other Award to which it relates) if such Shares had been issued to and held 
by  the  recipient  (a  “Dividend  Equivalent  Right”).    A  Dividend  Equivalent  Right  may  be 
granted hereunder to any Grantee as a component of another Award or as a freestanding Award.  
The terms and conditions of Dividend Equivalent Right shall be specified in the grant.  Dividend 
equivalents credited to the holder of a Dividend Equivalent Right may be paid currently or may 
be  deemed  to  be  reinvested  in  additional  Shares,  which  may  thereafter  accrue  additional 
equivalents.  Any such reinvestment shall be at Fair Market Value on the date of reinvestment. 
Dividend Equivalent Rights may be settled in cash or Shares or a combination thereof, in a single 
instalment or instalments, all determined in the sole discretion of the Administrator.  A Dividend 
Equivalent  Right  granted  as  a  component  of  another  Award  may  provide  that  such  Dividend 
Equivalent Right shall be settled upon exercise, settlement, or payment of, or lapse of restrictions 
on, such other Award, and that such Dividend Equivalent Right shall expire or be forfeited or 
annulled under the same conditions as such other Award.  A Dividend Equivalent Right granted 
as  a  component  of  another  Award  may  also  contain  terms  and  conditions  different  from  such 
other Award.
14.
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF AWARDS
In General
14.1 
Subject  to  the  terms  of  the  Plan  and  Applicable  Laws,  the  Administrator  shall 
determine the provisions, terms, and conditions of each Award including, but not limited to, the 
Award vesting schedule, repurchase provisions, rights of first refusal, forfeiture provisions, form 
of  payment  (cash,  Shares,  or  other  consideration)  upon  settlement  of  the  Award,  payment 
contingencies, and satisfaction of any performance criteria.
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
14.2
14.3
(a)
(b)
- 23 -
Term of Award
The term of each Award shall be the term stated in the Award Agreement.
Transferability
Limits  on  Transfer.    No  right  or  interest  of  a  Grantee  in  any  unexercised  or
restricted Award may be pledged, encumbered or hypothecated to or in favor of 
any party other than to the Company or a Related Entity or Affiliate.  No Award
shall be sold, assigned, transferred or disposed of by a Grantee other than by the 
laws  of  descent  and  distribution  or,  in  the  case  of  an  Incentive  Stock  Option, 
pursuant to a domestic relations order that would satisfy Section 414(p)(1)(A) of 
the Code if such Section applied to an Award under the Plan; provided, however,
that  the  Administrator  may  (but  need  not)  permit  other  transfers  where  the 
Administrator concludes that such transferability (i) does not result in accelerated
taxation  or  other  adverse  tax  consequences,  (ii)  does  not  cause  any  Option
intended to be an Incentive Stock Option to fail to be described in Section 422(b) 
of the Code, and (iii) is otherwise appropriate and desirable, taking into account
any factors deemed relevant, including, without limitation, state or federal tax or
securities laws applicable to transferable Awards.
Beneficiaries.    Notwithstanding  Section  14.3(a),  a  Grantee  may,  in  the  manner 
determined by the Administrator, designate a beneficiary to exercise the rights of 
the Grantee and to receive any distribution with respect to any Award upon the 
Grantee’s  death.    A  beneficiary,  legal  guardian,  legal  representative  or  other 
person claiming any rights under the Plan is subject to all terms and conditions of 
the Plan and any Award Agreement applicable to the Grantee, except to the extent 
the  Plan  and  such  Award  Agreement  otherwise  provide,  and  to  any  additional 
restrictions  deemed  necessary  or  appropriate  by  the  Administrator.    If  no 
beneficiary has been designated or survives the Grantee, payment shall be made 
to the Grantee’s estate. Subject to the foregoing, a beneficiary designation may be 
changed or revoked by a Grantee at any time, provided the change or revocation 
is filed with the Administrator.
Performance Goals
14.4 
In order to preserve the deductibility of an Award under Section 162(m) of the 
Code,  the  Administrator  may  determine  that  any  Award  granted  pursuant  to  this  Plan  to  a 
Grantee that is or is expected to become a Covered Employee shall be determined solely on the 
basis of (a) the achievement by the Company or Subsidiary of a specified target return, or target 
growth  in  return,  on  equity  or  assets,  (b)  the  Company’s  stock  price,  (c)  the  Company’s  total 
shareholder  return  (stock  price  appreciation  plus  reinvested  dividends)  relative  to  a  defined 
comparison  group  or  target  over  a  specific  performance  period,  (d)  the  achievement  by  the 
Company or a Parent or Subsidiary, or a business unit of any such entity, of a specified target, or 
target growth in, net income, earnings per share, earnings before income and taxes, and earnings 
before income, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or (e) any combination of the goals set forth 
in (a) through (d) above.  If an Award is made on such basis, the Administrator shall establish
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 24 -
goals prior to the beginning of the period for which such performance goal relates (or such later 
date as may be permitted under Section 162(m) of the Code or the regulations thereunder but not 
later than 90 days after commencement of the period of services to which the performance goal 
relates),  and  the  Administrator  has  the  right  for  any  reason  to  reduce  (but  not  increase)  the 
Award, notwithstanding the achievement of a specified goal.  Any payment of an Award granted 
with performance goals shall be conditioned on the written certification of the Administrator in 
each case that the performance goals and any other material conditions were satisfied.
In addition, to the extent that Section 409A is applicable, (i) performance-based 
compensation  shall  also  be  contingent  on  the  satisfaction  of  pre-established  organizational  or 
individual  performance  criteria  relating  to  a  performance  period  of  at  least  12  consecutive 
months in which the Eligible Participant performs services and (ii) performance goals shall be 
established  not  later  than  90  calendar  days  after  the  beginning  of  any  performance  period  to 
which the performance goal relates, provided that the outcome is substantially uncertain at the 
time the criteria are established.
Acceleration
14.5 
The Administrator may, in its sole discretion (but subject to the limitations of and 
compliance with Section 409A of the Code and Section 14.7 in connection therewith), at any 
time  (including,  without  limitation,  prior  to,  coincident  with  or  subsequent  to  a  Change  of 
Control) determine that (a) all or a portion of a Grantee’s Awards shall become fully or partially 
exercisable,  and/or  (b)  all  or  a  part  of  the  restrictions  on  all  or  a  portion  of  the  outstanding 
Awards shall lapse, in each case, as of such date as the Administrator may, in its sole discretion, 
declare.  The Administrator may discriminate among Grantees and among Awards granted to a 
Grantee in exercising its discretion pursuant to this Section 14.5.
Compliance with Section 162(m) of the Code
14.6 
Notwithstanding any provision of this Plan to the contrary, if the Administrator 
determines that compliance with Section 162(m) of the Code is required or desired, all Awards 
granted  under  this  Plan  to  Named  Executive  Officers  shall  comply  with  the  requirements  of 
Section 162(m) of the Code.  In addition, in the event that changes are made to Section 162(m) 
of the Code to permit greater flexibility with respect to any Award or Awards under this Plan, the 
Administrator may make any adjustments it deems appropriate.
Compliance with Section 409A of the Code
14.7 
Notwithstanding any provision of this Plan to the contrary, if any provision of this 
Plan  or  an  Award  Agreement  contravenes  any  regulations  or  Treasury  guidance  promulgated 
under  Section  409A  of  the  Code  or  could  cause  an  Award  to  be  subject  to  the  interest  and 
penalties under Section 409A of the Code, such provision of this Plan or any Award Agreement 
shall  be  modified  to  maintain,  to  the  maximum  extent  practicable,  the  original  intent  of  the 
applicable provision without violating the provisions of Section 409A of the Code.  In addition, 
in the event that changes are made to Section 409A of the Code to permit greater flexibility with 
respect  to  any  Award  under  this  Plan,  the  Administrator  may  make  any  adjustments  it  deems 
appropriate.
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 25 -
Section 280G of the Code
14.8 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Plan to the contrary, unless expressly 
provided otherwise in the Award Agreement, if the right to receive or benefit from an Award 
under this Plan, either alone or together with payments that a Grantee has a right to receive from 
the Company, would constitute a “parachute payment” (as defined in Section 280G of the Code), 
all  such  payments  shall  be  reduced  to  the  largest  amount  that  shall  result  in  no  portion  being 
subject to the excise tax imposed by Section 4999 of the Code.
Exercise of Award Following Termination of Continuous Service
14.9 
An Award may not be exercised after the termination date of such Award set forth 
in  the  Award  Agreement  and  may  be  exercised  following  the  termination  of  a  Grantee’s 
Continuous  Service  only  to  the  extent  provided  in  the  Award  Agreement.    Where  the  Award 
Agreement permits a Grantee to exercise an Award following the termination of the Grantee’s 
Continuous Service for a specified period, the Award shall terminate to the extent not exercised 
on  the  last  day  of  the  specified  period  or  the  last  day  of  the  original  term  of  the  Award, 
whichever occurs first.
Cancellation of Awards
14.10 
In the event a Grantee’s Continuous Services has been terminated for “Cause”, he 
or she shall immediately forfeit all rights to any and all Awards outstanding.  The determination 
that termination was for Cause shall be final and conclusive.  In making its determination, the 
Board shall give the Grantee an opportunity to appear and be heard at a hearing before the full 
Board and present evidence on the Grantee’s behalf.  Should any provision to this Section 14.10. 
be held to be invalid or illegal, such illegality shall not invalidate the whole of this Section 14, 
but, rather, this Plan shall be construed as if it did not contain the illegal part or narrowed to 
permit  its  enforcement,  and  the  rights  and  obligations  of  the  parties  shall  be  construed  and 
enforced accordingly.
15.
ADDITIONAL  TERMS  IF  THE  COMPANY  BECOMES  LISTED  ON  A 
STOCK EXCHANGE
15.1 
In  the  event  the  Shares  become  listed  on  a  stock  exchange,  and  to  the  extent 
required by the rules of such stock exchange, then the following terms and conditions shall apply 
to an Award in addition to those contained herein, as applicable:
(a)
(b)
the exercise price of an Award must not be lower than 100% of the Fair Market 
Value  (without  discount)  of  the  Shares  on  the  stock  exchange  at  the  time  the 
Award is granted;
the  number  of  securities  issuable  to  Insiders,  at  any  time,  under  all  of  the 
Company’s security based compensation arrangements (whether entered into prior 
to  or  subsequent  to  such  listing),  cannot  exceed  10%  of  the  Company’s  total 
issued and outstanding Common Stock, unless the Company obtains Disinterested 
Shareholder Approval; and
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 26 -
16.
16.1
(c)
the number of securities issued to Insiders, within any one year period, under all 
of  the  Company’s  security  based  compensation  arrangements  (whether  entered 
into prior to or subsequent to such listing), cannot exceed 10% of the issued and 
outstanding  Common  Stock,  unless 
the  Company  obtains  Disinterested 
Shareholder Approval.
PAYMENT FOR SHARE PURCHASES
Payment
Payment for Shares purchased pursuant to this Plan may be made:
(a)
(b)
(c)
Cash.  By cash, cashier’s check or wire transfer or, at the discretion of the Administrator 
expressly for the Grantee and where permitted by law as follows:
Surrender of Shares.  By surrender of shares of Common Stock of the Company 
that have been owned by the Grantee for more than six months, or lesser period if 
the surrender of shares is otherwise exempt from Section 16 of the Exchange Act, 
(and, if such shares were purchased from the Company by use of a promissory 
note, such note has been fully paid with respect to such shares);
Deemed  Net-Stock  Exercise.    By  forfeiture  of  Shares  equal  to  the  value  of  the 
exercise  price  pursuant  to  a  “deemed  net-stock  exercise”  by  requiring  the 
Grantee  to  accept  that  number  of  Shares  determined  in  accordance  with  the 
following formula, rounded down to the nearest whole integer:
where:
a
×=
b
dc
⎛ −
⎜
d
⎝
⎞
⎟
⎠
a  =
b  =
c  =
d  =
net Shares to be issued to Grantee;
number of Awards being exercised;
Fair Market Value of a Share; and
Exercise price of the Awards;
(d)
Cashless Exercise.  By a “cashless exercise”, in which event the Company shall 
issue  to  the  Grantee  the  number  of  Shares  of  Common  Stock  determined  as 
follows:
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
where:
a  =
b  =
c  =
- 27 -
a
×=
b
dc
⎛ −
⎜
d
⎝
⎞
⎟
⎠
the net Shares to be issued to Grantee;
the number of Awards being exercised;
the  average  of  the  “Closing  Sale  Prices”  of  the  Shares  of 
Common  Stock  (as  reported  by  Bloomberg  Financial 
Markets)  for  at  least  the  two  trading  days  ending  on  the 
date immediately preceding the Exercise Date; and
d  =
the Exercise price of the Award.
For purposes of such an Award, “Closing Sale Price” means, for any security as 
of  any  date,  the  last  trade  price  for  such  security  on  the  principal  securities 
exchange or trading market for such security, as reported by Bloomberg Financial 
Markets, or, if such exchange or trading market begins to operate on an extended 
hours basis and does not designate the last trade price, then the last trade price of 
such security prior to 4:00 p.m., New York City time, as reported by Bloomberg 
Financial Markets, or if the foregoing do not apply, the last trade price of such 
security in the over-the-counter market on the electronic bulletin board for such 
security as reported by Bloomberg Financial Markets, or, if no last trade price is 
reported for such security by Bloomberg Financial Markets, the average of the bid 
prices, or the ask prices, respectively, of any market makers for such security as 
reported  in  the  “pink  sheets”  by  Pink  Sheets  LLC.    If  the  Closing  Sale  Price 
cannot be calculated for a security on a particular date on any of the foregoing 
bases, the Closing Sale Price of such security on such date shall be the fair market 
value as mutually determined by the Company and the Grantee.  If the Company 
and the Grantee are unable to agree upon the fair market value of such security, 
then  the  Company  shall,  within  two  business  days  submit  via  facsimile  (a)  the 
disputed  determination  of  the  Closing  Sale  Price  to  an  independent,  reputable 
investment bank selected by the Company and approved by the Grantee or (b) the 
disputed arithmetic calculation of the Shares of Common Stock to the Company's 
independent,  outside  accountant.    The  Company  shall  cause  at  its  expense  the 
investment  bank  or  the  accountant,  as  the  case  may  be,  to  perform  the 
determinations  or  calculations  and  notify  the  Company  and  the  Grantee  of  the 
results  no  later  than  ten  business  days  from  the  time  it  receives  the  disputed 
determinations  or  calculations. 
  Such  investment  bank’s  or  accountant's 
determination or calculation, as the case may be, shall be binding upon all parties 
absent  demonstrable  error.    All  such  determinations  shall  be  appropriately 
adjusted  for  any  stock  dividend,  stock  split,  stock  combination  or  other  similar 
transaction  during  the  applicable  calculation  period.    For  purposes  of  Rule  144 
promulgated  under 
intended,  understood  and 
acknowledged  that  the  Shares  of  Common  Stock  issued  in  a  cashless  exercise
the  Securities  Act,
it
is
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 28 -
transaction shall be deemed to have been acquired by the Grantee, and the holding 
period for the shares shall be deemed to have commenced, on the date the Award 
was  originally  issued  (provided  that  the  United  States  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission  continues  to  take  the  position  that  such  treatment  is  proper  at  the 
time of such exercise); or
(e)
Broker-Assisted.    By  delivering  a  properly  executed  exercise  notice  to  the 
Company together with a copy of irrevocable instructions to a broker to deliver 
promptly to the Company the amount of sale or loan proceeds necessary to pay 
the  exercise  price  and  the  amount  of  any  required  tax  or  other  withholding 
obligations.
Combination of Methods
16.2 
consideration or method of payment as shall be permitted by applicable corporate law.
By  any  combination  of  the  foregoing  methods  of  payment  or  any  other
17.
WITHHOLDING TAXES
Withholding Generally
17.1 
Whenever  Shares  are  to  be  issued  in  satisfaction  of  Awards  granted  under  this 
Plan or Shares are forfeited pursuant to a deemed net-stock exercise, the Company may require 
the Grantee to remit to the Company an amount sufficient to satisfy the foreign, federal, state, 
provincial,  or  local  income  and  employment  tax  withholding  obligations,  including,  without 
limitation,  on  exercise  of  an  Award.    When,  under  applicable  tax  laws,  a  Grantee  incurs  tax 
liability in connection with the exercise or vesting of any Award, the disposition by a Grantee or 
other person of an Award or an Option prior to satisfaction of the holding period requirements of 
Section 422 of the Code, or upon the exercise of a Non-Qualified Stock Option, the Company 
shall have the right to require such Grantee or such other person to pay by cash, or check payable 
to the Company, the amount of any such withholding with respect to such transactions.  Any 
such  payment  must  be  made  promptly  when  the  amount  of  such  obligation  becomes 
determinable.
Stock for Withholding
17.2 
To  the  extent  permissible  under  applicable  tax,  securities  and  other  laws,  the 
Administrator  may,  in  its  sole discretion  and  upon  such  terms  and  conditions  as  it  may  deem 
appropriate, permit a Grantee to satisfy his or her obligation to pay any withholding tax, in whole 
or  in  part,  with  Shares  up  to  an  amount  not  greater  than  the  Company’s  minimum  statutory 
withholding rate for federal and state tax purposes, including payroll taxes, that are applicable to 
such  supplemental  taxable  income.    The  Administrator  may  exercise  its  discretion,  by  (i) 
directing the Company to apply Shares to which the Grantee is entitled as a result of the exercise 
of an Award, or (ii) delivering to the Company Shares that have been owned by the Grantee for 
more than six months, unless the delivery of Shares is otherwise exempt from Section 16 of the 
Exchange Act.  A Grantee who has made an election pursuant to this Section 17.2 may satisfy 
his  or  her  withholding  obligation  only  with  Shares  that  are  not  subject  to  any  repurchase, 
forfeiture, unfulfilled vesting or other similar requirements.  The Shares so applied or delivered
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 29 -
for  the  withholding  obligation  shall  be  valued  at  their  Fair  Market  Value  as  of  the  date  of 
measurement of the amount of income subject to withholding.
18.
ADJUSTMENTS UPON CHANGES IN CAPITALIZATION
In General
18.1 
Subject to any required action by the shareholders of the Company, the number of 
Shares  covered  by  each  outstanding  Award,  and  the  number  of  Shares  which  have  been 
authorized  for  issuance  under  the  Plan  but  as  to  which  no  Awards  have  yet  been  granted  or 
which have been returned to the Plan, the exercise or purchase price of each such outstanding 
Award, as well as any other terms that the Administrator determines require adjustment shall be 
proportionately adjusted for (i) any increase or decrease in the number of issued Shares resulting 
from  a  stock  split,  reverse  stock  split,  stock  dividend,  combination  or  reclassification  of  the 
Shares, or (ii) any other increase or decrease in the number of issued Shares effected without 
receipt of consideration by the Company; provided, however that conversion of any convertible 
securities  of  the  Company  shall  not  be  deemed  to  have  been  effected  without  receipt  of 
consideration.  The  Administrator  shall  make  the  appropriate  adjustments  to  (i)  the  maximum 
number and/or class of securities issuable under this Plan; and (ii) the number and/or class of 
securities and the exercise price per Share in effect under each outstanding Award in order to 
prevent the dilution or enlargement of benefits thereunder; provided, however, that the number 
of  Shares  subject  to  any  Award  shall  always  be  a  whole  number  and  the  Administrator  shall 
make  such  adjustments  as  are  necessary  to  insure  Awards  of  whole  Shares.  Such  adjustment 
shall be made by the Administrator and its determination shall be final, binding and conclusive.
Company’s Right to Effect Changes in Capitalization
18.2 
The  existence  of  outstanding  Awards  shall  not  affect  the  Company’s  right  to 
effect  adjustments,  recapitalizations,  reorganizations  or  other  changes  in  its  or  any  other 
corporation’s capital structure or business, any merger or consolidation, any issuance of bonds, 
debentures, preferred or prior preference stock ahead of or affecting the Shares, the dissolution or 
liquidation of the Company’s or any other corporation’s assets or business or any other corporate 
act whether similar to the events described above or otherwise.
19.
CORPORATE  TRANSACTIONS/CHANGES  IN  CONTROL/RELATED 
ENTITY DISPOSITIONS
Company is Not the Survivor
19.1 
Subject  to  Section  19.3  and  except  as  may  otherwise  be  provided  in  an  Award 
Agreement,  the  Administrator  shall  have  the  authority,  in  its  absolute  discretion,  exercisable 
either  in  advance  of  any  actual  or  anticipated  Corporate  Transaction,  Change  in  Control  or 
Related Entity Disposition in which the Company is not the surviving corporation, or at the time 
of an actual Corporate Transaction, Change in Control or Related Entity Disposition in which the 
Company is not the surviving corporation (a) to cancel each outstanding Award upon payment in 
cash to the Grantee of the amount by which any cash and the Fair Market Value of any other 
property which the Grantee would have received as consideration for the Shares covered by the 
Award if the Award had been exercised before such Corporate Transaction, Change in Control or
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 30 -
Related Entity Disposition exceeds the exercise price of the Award, or (b) to negotiate to have 
such  Award  assumed  by  the  surviving  corporation.    The  determination  as  to  whether  the 
Company is the surviving corporation is at the sole and absolute discretion of the Administrator.
In  addition  to  the  foregoing,  in  the  event  of  a  dissolution  or  liquidation  of  the 
Company, or a Corporate Transaction or Related Entity Disposition in which the Company is not 
the surviving corporation, the Administrator, in its absolute discretion, may accelerate the time 
within which each outstanding Award may be exercised.  Section 19.3 shall control with respect 
to any acceleration in vesting in the event of Change of Control.
(a)
(b)
The Administrator shall also have the authority:
to  release  the  Awards  from  restrictions  on transfer  and  repurchase  or  forfeiture 
rights  of  such  Awards  on  such  terms  and  conditions  as  the  Administrator  may 
specify; and
to  condition  any  such  Award’s  vesting  and  exercisability  or  release  from  such 
limitations  upon  the  subsequent  termination  of  the  Continuous  Service  of  the 
Grantee  within  a  specified  period  following  the  effective  date  of  the  Corporate 
Transaction, Change in Control or Related Entity Disposition.
Effective upon the consummation of a Corporate Transaction, Change in Control 
or Related Entity Disposition governed by this Section 19.1, all outstanding Awards under this 
Plan not exercised by the Grantee or assumed by the successor corporation shall terminate.
Company is the Survivor
19.2 
In  the  event  of  a  Corporate  Transaction,  Change  in  Control  or  Related  Entity 
Disposition  in  which  the  Company  is  the  surviving  corporation,  the  Administrator  shall 
determine the appropriate adjustment of the number and kind of securities with respect to which 
outstanding Awards may be exercised, and the exercise price at which outstanding Awards may 
be exercised.  The Administrator shall determine, in its sole and absolute discretion, when the 
Company shall be deemed to survive for purposes of this Plan.  Subject to any contrary language 
in an Award Agreement evidencing an Award, any restrictions applicable to such Award shall 
apply as well to any replacement shares received by the Grantee as a result.
Change in Control
19.3 
immediately upon the Company’s public announcement of such a Change of Control.
If  there  is  a  Change  of  Control,  all  outstanding  Awards  shall  fully  vest
20.
PRIVILEGES OF STOCK OWNERSHIP
No  Grantee  shall  have  any  of  the  rights  of  a  stockholder  with  respect  to  any 
Shares until the Shares are issued to the Grantee.  After Shares are issued to the Grantee, the 
Grantee  shall  be  a  stockholder  and  have  all  the  rights  of  a  stockholder  with  respect  to  such 
Shares, including the right to vote and receive all dividends or other distributions made or paid 
with respect to such Shares; provided, that if such Shares are Restricted Stock, then any new,
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 31 -
additional or different securities the Grantee may become entitled to receive with respect to such 
Shares by virtue of a stock dividend, stock split or any other change in the corporate or capital 
structure of the Company shall be subject to the same restrictions as the Restricted Stock.  The 
Company shall issue (or cause to be issued) such stock certificate promptly upon exercise of the 
Award.
21.
RESTRICTION ON SHARES
At the discretion of the Administrator, the Company may reserve to itself and/or 
its assignee(s) in the Award Agreement that the Grantee not dispose of the Shares for a specified 
period of time, or that the Shares are subject to a right of first refusal or a right to repurchase by 
the Company at the Shares’ Fair Market Value at the time of sale.  The terms and conditions of 
any such rights or other restrictions shall be set forth in the Award Agreement evidencing the 
Award.
22.
CERTIFICATES
All  certificates  for  Shares  or  other  securities  delivered  under  this  Plan  shall  be 
subject  to  such  stock  transfer  orders,  legends  and  other  restrictions  as  the  Administrator  may 
deem necessary or advisable, including restrictions under any applicable federal, state or foreign 
securities law, or any rules, regulations and other requirements of the SEC or any stock exchange 
or automated quotation system upon which the Shares may be listed or quoted.
23.
ESCROW; PLEDGE OF SHARES
To enforce any restrictions on a Grantee’s Shares, the Administrator may require 
the Grantee to deposit all certificates representing Shares, together with stock powers or other 
instruments of transfer approved by the Administrator, appropriately endorsed in blank, with the 
Company or an agent designated by the Company to hold in escrow until such restrictions have 
lapsed  or  terminated,  and  the  Administrator  may  cause  a  legend  or  legends  referencing  such 
restrictions to be placed on the certificates.
24.
SECURITIES LAW AND OTHER REGULATORY COMPLIANCE
Compliance With Applicable Law
24.1 
An  Award  shall  not  be  effective  unless  such  Award  is  in  compliance  with  all 
applicable federal and state securities laws, rules and regulations of any governmental body, and 
the requirements of any stock exchange or automated quotation system upon which the Shares 
may  then  be  listed  or  quoted,  as  they  are  in  effect  on  the  Grant  Date  and  also  on  the  date  of 
exercise or other issuance.  Notwithstanding any other provision in this Plan, the Company shall 
have no obligation to issue or deliver certificates for Shares under this Plan prior to (i) obtaining 
any  approvals  from  governmental  agencies  that  the  Company  determines  are  necessary  or 
advisable; and/or (ii) completion of any registration or other qualification of such Shares under 
any state or federal laws or rulings of any governmental body that the Company determines to be 
necessary or advisable.  The Company shall be under no obligation to register the Shares with 
the Securities Exchange Commission or to effect compliance with the registration, qualification 
or  listing  requirements  of  any  state  securities  laws,  stock  exchange  or  automated  quotation
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 32 -
system, and the Company shall have no liability for any inability or failure to do so.  Evidences 
of  ownership  of  Shares  acquired  pursuant  to  an  Award  shall  bear  any  legend  required  by,  or 
useful  for  purposes  of  compliance  with,  applicable  securities  laws,  this  Plan  or  the  Award 
Agreement.
During  any  time  when  the  Company  has  a  class  of  equity  security  registered 
under Section 12 of the Exchange Act, it is the intent of the Company that Awards pursuant to 
this Plan and the exercise of Awards granted hereunder shall qualify for the exemption provided 
by Rule 16b-3 under the Exchange Act.  To the extent that any provision of this Plan or action by 
the Board or the Administrator does not comply with the requirements of Rule 16b-3, it shall be 
deemed inoperative to the extent permitted by law and deemed advisable by the Board or the 
Administrator,  and  shall  not  affect  the  validity  of  this  Plan.    In  the  event  that  Rule  16b-3  is 
revised  or  replaced,  the  Administrator  may  exercise  its  discretion  to  modify  this  Plan  in  any 
respect  necessary  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of,  or  to  take  advantage  of  any  features  of,  the 
revised exemption or its replacement.
Investment Representation
24.2 
As a condition to the exercise of an Award, the Company may require the person 
exercising such Award to represent and warrant at the time of any such exercise that the Shares 
are being purchased only for investment and without any present intention to sell or distribute 
such Shares if, in the opinion of counsel for the Company, such a representation is required by 
any Applicable Laws.
25.
NO OBLIGATION TO EMPLOY
Nothing  in  this  Plan  or  any  Award  granted  under  this  Plan  shall  confer  or  be 
deemed to confer on any Grantee any right to continue in the employ of, or to continue any other 
relationship with, the Company or to limit in any way the right of the Company to terminate such 
Grantee’s employment or other relationship at any time, with or without Cause.
26.
EFFECTIVE DATE AND TERM OF PLAN
This Plan shall become effective upon the earlier to occur of its adoption by the 
 
Board or its approval by the shareholders of the Company. It shall continue in effect for a term of 
ten years unless sooner terminated.
27.
SHAREHOLDER APPROVAL
This Plan shall be subject to approval by the shareholders of the Company within 
12 months from the date the Plan is adopted by the Company’s Board for any and all intended 
Incentive Stock Options granted hereunder.  Such shareholder approval shall be obtained in the 
degree  and  manner  required  under  Applicable  Laws.    The  Administrator  may  grant  Awards 
under this Plan prior to approval by the shareholders, however, until such approval is obtained, 
all Option Awards granted under this Plan shall be deemed Non-Qualified Stock Options.  In the 
event that shareholder approval is not obtained within the 12 month period provided above, all 
Incentive  Stock  Option  Awards  previously  granted  under  this  Plan  shall  be  deemed  Non-
Qualified Stock Options.
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 33 -
28.
AMENDMENT,  SUSPENSION  OR  TERMINATION  OF  THIS  PLAN  OR 
AWARDS
The Board may amend, suspend or terminate this Plan at any time and for any 
reason.    To  the  extent  necessary  to  comply  with  Applicable  Laws,  the  Company  shall  obtain 
shareholder approval of any Plan amendment in such a manner and to such a degree as required.  
Shareholder approval shall be required for the following types of amendments to this Plan: (i) 
any change to those persons who are entitled to become participants under the Plan which would 
have the potential of broadening or increasing Insider participation; or (ii) the addition of any 
form  of  financial  assistance  or  amendment  to  a  financial  assistance  provision  which  is  more 
favourable to Grantees.
Further, the Board may, in its discretion, determine that any amendment should be 
effective only if approved by the shareholders even if such approval is not expressly required by 
this  Plan  or  by  law.    No  Award  may  be  granted  during  any  suspension  of  this  Plan  or  after 
termination of this Plan.
Any amendment, suspension or termination of this Plan shall not affect Awards 
already granted, and such Awards shall remain in full force and effect as if this Plan had not been 
amended, suspended or terminated, unless mutually agreed otherwise between the Grantee and 
the  Administrator,  which  agreement  must  be  in  writing  and  signed  by  the  Grantee  and  the 
Company.    At  any  time  and  from  time  to  time,  the  Administrator  may  amend,  modify,  or 
terminate  any  outstanding  Award  or  Award  Agreement  without  approval  of  the  Grantee; 
provided,  however,  that  subject  to  the  applicable  Award  Agreement,  no  such  amendment, 
modification or termination shall, without the Grantee’s consent, reduce or diminish the value of 
such  Award  determined  as  if  the  Award  had  been  exercised,  vested,  cashed  in  or  otherwise 
settled on the date of such amendment or termination.
Notwithstanding  any  provision  herein  to  the  contrary,  the  Administrator  shall 
have  broad  authority  to  amend  this  Plan  or  any  outstanding  Award  under  this  Plan  without 
approval  of  the  Grantee  to  the  extent  necessary  or  desirable:  (i)  to  comply  with,  or  take  into 
account changes in, applicable tax laws, securities laws, accounting rules and other applicable 
laws, rules and regulations; or (ii) to ensure that an Award is not subject to interest and penalties 
under Section 409A of the Code or the excise tax imposed by Section 4999 of the Code.
Further,  notwithstanding  any  provision  herein  to  the  contrary,  and  subject  to 
Applicable Law, the Administrator may, in its absolute discretion, amend or modify this Plan: (i) 
to make amendments which are of a “housekeeping” or clerical nature; (ii) to change the vesting 
provisions  of  an  Award  granted  hereunder,  as  applicable;  (iii)  to  change  the  termination 
provision  of  an  Award  granted  hereunder,  as  applicable,  which  does  not  entail  an  extension 
beyond  the  original  expiry  date  of  such  Award;  and  (iv)  the  addition  of  a  cashless  exercise 
feature,  payable  in  cash  or  securities,  which  provides  for  a  full  deduction  of  the  number  of 
underlying securities from the Maximum Number.
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
29.
RESERVATION OF SHARES
- 34 -
available such number of Shares as shall be sufficient to satisfy the requirements of this Plan.
The Company, during the term of this Plan, shall at all times reserve and keep
The  Shares  to  be  issued  hereunder  upon  exercise  of  an  Award  may  be  either 
authorized but unissued; supplied to the Plan through acquisitions of Shares on the open market; 
Shares  forfeited  back  to  the  Plan;  Shares  surrendered  in  payment  of  the  exercise  price  of  an 
Award;  or  Shares  withheld  for  payment  of  applicable  employment  taxes  and/or  withholding 
obligations resulting from the exercise of an Award.
The inability of the Company to obtain authority from any regulatory body having 
 
jurisdiction, which authority is deemed by the Company’s counsel to be necessary to the lawful 
issuance and sale of any Shares hereunder, shall relieve the Company of any liability in respect 
of the failure to issue or sell such Shares as to which such requisite authority shall not have been 
obtained.
30.
EXCHANGE AND BUYOUT OF AWARDS
The Administrator may, at any time or from time to time, authorize the Company, 
with the consent of the respective Grantees, to issue new Awards in exchange for the surrender 
and cancellation of any or all outstanding Awards.  The Administrator may at any time buy from 
a  Grantee  an  Award  previously  granted  with  payment  in  cash,  Shares  (including  Restricted 
Stock) or other consideration, based on such terms and conditions as the Administrator and the 
Grantee may agree.
31.
APPLICABLE TRADING POLICY
The Administrator and each Eligible Participant will ensure that all actions taken 
and decisions made by the Administrator or an Eligible Participant, as the case may be, pursuant 
to this Plan comply with any Applicable Laws and policies of the Company relating to insider 
trading or “blackout” periods.
32.
GOVERNING LAW
The  Plan  shall  be  governed  by  the  laws  of  the  State  of  Nevada;  provided, 
however, that any Award Agreement may provide by its terms that it shall be governed by the 
laws of any other jurisdiction as may be deemed appropriate by the parties thereto.
33.
MISCELLANEOUS
Except  as  specifically  provided  in  a  retirement  or  other  benefit  plan  of  the 
 
Company  or  a  Related  Entity,  Awards  shall  not  be  deemed  compensation  for  purposes  of 
computing  benefits  or  contributions  under  any  retirement  plan  of  the  Company  or  a  Related 
Entity, and shall not affect any benefits under any other benefit plan of any kind or any benefit 
plan subsequently instituted under which the availability or amount of benefits is related to level 
of  compensation.  The  Plan  is  not  a  “Retirement  Plan”  or  “Welfare  Plan”  under  the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended.
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 35 -
__________
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
STOCK AND DEFERRED STOCK UNITS FOR ELIGIBLE DIRECTORS
SUBPART A
A. 
Director pursuant to an Award Agreement.
Stock  Award.    The  Administrator  shall  pay  Eligible  Remuneration  to  each
Election.    Further,  the  Administrator  may,  in  its  sole  discretion,  permit  each 
B. 
Eligible  Director  to  receive  all  or  any  portion  of  his  Eligible  Remuneration  during  the 
Remuneration Period in the form of Deferred Stock Units under this Plan (an “Election”).  All 
deferrals pursuant to such an Election shall be evidenced by an Award Agreement.
For purposes of this Subpart A, the following definitions shall apply:
“Annual  Retainer”  for  a  particular  Director  means  the  retainer  (including  any  additional 
amounts payable for serving as lead Director or on any committee of the Board), payable to that 
Director for serving as a Director for the relevant Remuneration Period, as determined by the 
Board;
“Attendance Fee” means amounts payable annually to a Director as a Board meeting attendance 
fee or a committee meeting attendance fee, or any portion thereof;
“Canadian  Director”  means  a  Director  who  is  a  resident  of  Canada  for  the  purposes  of  the 
Canadian Tax Act, and whose income from employment by the Company or Related Entity is 
subject  to  Canadian  income  tax,  notwithstanding  any  provision  of  the  Canada-United  States 
Income Tax Convention (1980), as amended;
“Canadian Tax Act” and “Canadian Tax Regulations” means respectively the Income Tax Act 
(Canada), as amended and the Income Tax Regulation promulgated thereunder, as amended;
“Deferred Stock Unit” means a right granted by the Company to an Eligible Director to receive, 
on a deferred payment basis, Shares under this Plan;
“Eligible Director” is any Director of this Company or Related Entity that the Administrator 
determines is eligible to elect to receive Deferred Stock Units under this Plan;
“Eligible  Remuneration”  means  all  amounts  payable  to  an  Eligible  Director  in  Shares, 
including all or part of amounts payable in satisfaction of the Annual Retainer, Attendance Fees 
or any other fees relating to service on the Board which are payable to an Eligible Director or in 
satisfaction of rights or property surrendered by an Eligible Director to the Company; it being 
understood that the amount of Eligible Remuneration payable to any Eligible Director may be 
calculated  by  the  Administrator  in  a  different  manner  than  Eligible  Remuneration  payable  to 
another Eligible Director in its sole and absolute discretion;
“Prescribed  Plan  or  Arrangement”  means  a  prescribed  plan  or  arrangement  as  defined  in 
s.6801(d) of the Canadian Tax Regulation;
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 2 -
“Remuneration Period” means, as applicable, (a) the period commencing on the Effective Date 
of this Plan and ending on the last day of the calendar year in which the Effective Date occurs; 
and (b) thereafter each subsequent calendar year, or where the context requires, any portion of 
such period; and
“Salary  Deferral  Arrangement”  means  a  salary  deferral  arrangement  as  defined  in  the 
Canadian Tax Act.
1. 
Election.  An Eligible Director who desires to defer receipt of all or a portion of 
his or her Eligible Remuneration in any calendar year shall make such election in writing to the 
Company specifying:
(a)
(b)
the dollar amount or percentage of Eligible Remuneration to be deferred; and
the deferral period.
Otherwise, such election must be made before the first day of the calendar year in 
which the Eligible Remuneration shall be payable, however a newly appointed Eligible Director 
shall be eligible to defer payment of future Eligible Remuneration by providing written election 
to the Company within 30 calendar days of his or her appointment to the Board of Directors.  
The  elections  made  pursuant  to  this  Section  shall  be  irrevocable  with  respect  to  Eligible 
Remuneration  to  which  such  elections  pertain  and  shall  also  apply  to  subsequent  Eligible 
Remuneration  payable  in  future  calendar  years  unless  such  Eligible  Director  notifies  the 
Company in writing, before the first day of the applicable calendar year, that he or she desires to 
change such election.
If  the  Eligible  Director  does  not  timely  deliver  an  election  in  respect  of  a 
particular Remuneration Period, the Eligible Director will receive the Eligible Remuneration as 
provided for in the Award Agreement.
2. 
Determination Of Deferred Stock Units.  The Company will maintain a separate 
account for each Eligible Director to which it will quarterly credit Deferred Stock Units at the 
end of March, June, September and December, or as otherwise determined by the Administrator, 
the Deferred Stock Units granted to the Eligible Director for the relevant Remuneration Period.  
The  number  of  Deferred  Stock  Units  (including  fractional  Deferred  Stock  Units,  computed  to 
three digits) to be credited to an account for an Eligible Director will be determined on the date 
approved by the Administrator by dividing the appropriate amount of Eligible Remuneration to 
be deferred into Deferred Stock Units by the Fair Market Value on that date.
3. 
stockholders of the Company.
No Voting Rights.  The holders of Deferred Stock Units shall have no rights as
4. 
Dividend Equivalency.  The Company will, on any date on which a cash or stock 
dividend is paid on its outstanding Shares, credit to each Eligible Director’s account that number 
of additional Deferred Stock Units (including fractional Deferred Stock Units, computed to three 
digits)  calculated  by  (i)  multiplying  the  amount  of  the  dividend  per  Share  by  the  number  of 
Deferred Stock Units in the account as of the record date for payment of the dividend, and (ii)
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 3 -
dividing the amount obtained in (i) by the Fair Market Value on the date on which the dividend 
is paid.  (See Section 13 of the Plan, Dividend Equivalent Right).
5. 
Eligible  Director’s  Account.    A  written  confirmation  of  the  balance  in  each 
Eligible Directors’ Account will be sent by the Company to the Eligible Director upon request of 
the Eligible Director.
6. 
Creditor’s Rights.  A holder of Deferred Stock Units shall have no rights other 
than those of a general creditor of the Company.  Deferred Stock Units represent an unfunded 
and unsecured obligation of the Company, subject to the terms and condition of the applicable 
Award Agreement.
7. 
Settlement of Deferred Stock Units.  Subject to Section 8, each Deferred Stock 
Unit shall be paid and settled by the issuance of Restricted or unrestricted Shares in accordance 
with the Award Agreement and if such settlement is subject to Section 409A of the Code only 
upon any one or more of the following as provided for in the Award Agreement:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
a specific date or date determinable by a fixed schedule;
upon the Eligible Director’s termination of Continuous Services to the extent the 
same constitutes a separation from services for the purposes of Section 409A of 
the  Code  except  that  if  an  Eligible  Director  is  a  “key  employee”  as  defined  in 
Section  409A  of  the  Code  for  such  purposes,  then  payment  or  settlement  shall 
occur 6 months following such separation of service;
as a result of the Eligible Director’s death or Disability; or
in connection with or as a result of a Change in Control in compliance with 409A 
of the Code.
The Company will issue one Share for each whole Deferred Stock Unit credited 
to the Eligible Director’s account (net of any applicable withholding tax as provided for in this 
Plan).  Such payment shall be made by the Company as soon as reasonably possible following 
the settlement date.  Fractional Shares shall not be issued, and where the Eligible Director would 
be entitled to receive a fractional Shares in respect of any fractional Deferred Stock Unit, the 
Company shall pay to such Eligible Director, in lieu of such fractional Shares, cash equal to the 
Fair  Market  Value  of  such  fractional  Shares  calculated  as  of  the  day  before  such  payment  is 
made, net of any applicable withholding tax.
8. 
Canadian Directors.  If a Deferred Stock Unit is granted to an Eligible Director 
who  is  a  Canadian  Director  would  otherwise  constitute  a  Salary  Deferred  Arrangement,  the 
Award Agreement pertaining to that Deferred Stock Unit shall contain such other or additional 
terms as will cause the Deferred Stock Unit to be a Prescribed Plan or Arrangement.
9. 
Issuance  of  Stock  Certificates.    A  stock  certificate  or  certificates  shall  be 
registered and issued in the name of the holder of Deferred Stock Units and delivered to such 
holder as soon as practicable after such Deferred Stock Units have become payable or satisfied in 
accordance with the terms of the Plan
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
- 4 -
10. 
Non-Exclusivity.  Nothing in this Subpart A shall prohibit the Administrator from 
making discretionary Awards to Eligible Directors pursuant to the other provisions of this Plan 
or outside this Plan, not otherwise inconsistent with these provisions.
Defined Terms.  Capitalized terms used in this Subpart A and not defined herein
11. 
have the meaning give in the Plan.
__________
3839555.1
--  2010 Stock Incentive Plan  -- 
--  Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.  --
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
We consent to the use of our report dated September 13, 2010 relating to the financial statements of Douglas Lake 
Minerals Inc. that are included in the Company’s annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010, 
which is incorporated by reference in each of (i) the Company’s Form S-8 Registration Statement filed with the 
United  States  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  on  October  9,  2007  and  (ii)  the  Company’s  Form  S-8 
Registration Statement filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission on December 30, 2008. 
 
/s/ “Manning Elliott LLP” 
 
CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
Exhibit 23.1
Vancouver, Canada 
September 13, 2010
3898868.1