
LINUX GOLD CORP.
(the “Company”)
NOTICE OF CHANGE OF AUDITOR
(AMENDED)
The British Columbia Securities Commission
ALL HOLDERS OF SHARES IN THE CAPITAL OF THE COMPANY
TO: 
 
AND TO: 
 
 
 
The Company wishes to report that the board of directors of the Company have made the 
decision to propose to the holders of qualified securities that a different company be 
nominated as auditor rather than the current auditor.  By resolution dated August 4, 2009, 
the board of directors of the Company recommend that Dale Matheson Carr-Hilton 
Labonte LLP, Chartered Accountants be appointed as auditor for the upcoming fiscal 
year by the Company’s shareholders at the annual general meeting. 
 
The Company reports that during the period of engagement of James Stafford LLP, 
Chartered Accountants (the “former auditor”) that there were no reservations in the report 
of the former auditor for the fiscal year ending February 28, 2009 reported on by the 
former auditor.  In the opinion of the Company, there have been no “Reportable Events” 
(as defined below) reported by James Stafford LLP. 
 
For the purpose of this notice National Policy Statement No. 31 of the Canadian 
Securities Administrators states that a Reportable Event may consist of “disagreements”, 
“unresolved issued” and “consultations” between the Company and the former auditor.  
Disagreements, unresolved issues and consultations are defined in the policy as follows: 
 
Disagreements 
 
Disagreements refer to any matter of audit scope, accounting principles or policies or 
financial statements disclosure that, if not resolved to the satisfaction of the former 
auditor, would have resulted in a reservation in the auditor’s report. 
 
Disagreements include both those resolved to the former auditor’s satisfaction and those 
not resolved to the former auditor’s satisfaction.  Disagreement should have occurred at 
the decision-making level, i.e. between personnel of the reporting issuer responsible for 
the finalization of its financial statements and the personnel of the auditor firm 
responsible for authorizing the issuance of audit reports with respect to the reporting 
issuer.
The term disagreement is to be interpreted broadly.  It is not necessary for there to have 
been an argument to have had a disagreement, merely a difference of opinion.  The term 
disagreement does not include initial differences of opinion, based on incomplete facts or 
preliminary information, that were later resolved to the former auditor’s satisfaction, 
provided that the reporting issuer and the former auditor do not continue to have a 
difference of opinion upon obtaining additional facts or information. 
 
Unresolved Issues 
 
Unresolved issues refer to matter which came to the former auditor’s attention and which, 
in the former auditor’s opinion, materially impact on the financial statements or audit 
reports (or which could have a material impact on them), where the former auditor had 
advised the reporting issuer about the matter and:
a)  the former auditor has been unable to fully explore the matter and reach a
conclusion as to its implications prior to a resignation or termination of the former 
auditor;
b)  the matter was not resolved to the former auditor’s satisfaction prior to a
resignation or termination of the former auditor; or
c)  the former auditor is no longer willing to be associated with the financial
statements prepared by management of the reporting issuer.
Consultations 
 
Consultations refer to situations where the reporting issued (or someone acting on its 
behalf) consulted the successor auditor regarding:
a)  the application of accounting principles to a specified transaction (either proposed
b)  the type of audit opinion that might be rendered on the reporting issuer’s financial
or complete):
statements; or
c)  a disagreement as defined above;
and a written report or seriously considered oral advice was provided by the successor 
auditor to the reporting issuer. 
 
Amendment dated at Richmond, British Columbia, this 6th day of October, 2009. 
 
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD 
 
“John Robertson” 
 
John Robertson, President.