
EX-4.4 3 memp-ex44_87.htm EX-4.4 memp-ex44_87.htm
Exhibit 4.4
THIS INSTRUMENT OF RESIGNATION, APPOINTMENT AND ACCEPTANCE (this
“Instrument”), dated as of June 24, 2016, is by and among Memorial Production Partners LP, a
Delaware limited partnership (the “Partnership”), Memorial Production Finance Corporation, a
Delaware corporation (“Finance Corp.” and, together with the Partnership, the
“Issuers”),  Wilmington Trust, National Association, a national banking association duly
organized and existing under the laws of the United States of America (the “Successor Trustee”),
and U.S. Bank National Association, a national banking association duly organized and existing
under the laws of the United States of America (the “Resigning Trustee”). Capitalized terms not
otherwise defined herein shall have the same meaning ascribed to such terms in the Indenture
(as defined below).
RECITALS
WHEREAS, pursuant to an Indenture dated as of April 17, 2013, (the “Original Indenture”), as
supplemented by the First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of October 7, 2013 (the “First
Supplemental Indenture”) and by the Second Supplemental Indenture, dated as of December 30,
2015 (the “Second Supplemental Indenture,” and collectively with the Original Indenture, as the
same may be supplemented and amended or otherwise modified from time to time, and the First
Supplemental Indenture, the “Indenture”), entered into by the Issuers, certain Guarantors from
time to time parties thereto and the Resigning Trustee, the Issuers issued $700,000,000.00
aggregate principal amount of their 7 5/8% Senior Notes due 2021 (the “Notes);
WHEREAS, the Issuers appointed the Resigning Trustee as the Trustee, Custodian, Registrar
and Paying Agent under the Indenture;
WHEREAS, there is presently issued and outstanding $647,787,000.00 in aggregate principal
amount of Notes;
WHEREAS, Section 7.08 of the Indenture provides that the Trustee may at any time resign by
giving written notice of such resignation to the Issuers;
WHEREAS, the Resigning Trustee desires to resign as Trustee, Custodian, Registrar and
Paying Agent under the Indenture, and the Issuers desire to appoint the Successor Trustee as
Trustee, Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent under the Indenture to succeed the Resigning
Trustee in each of such capacities under the Indenture; and
WHEREAS, the Successor Trustee is willing to accept the appointment as Trustee, Custodian,
Registrar and Paying Agent under the Indenture;
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the covenants herein and other good and valuable
consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which are hereby acknowledged, the parties hereto
agree as follows:
1.Acceptance of Resignation of Resigning Trustee; Appointment of Successor Trustee.  The
Resigning Trustee hereby resigns as Trustee, Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent under
the Indenture. The Issuers accept the resignation of the Resigning Trustee as Trustee,
Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent under the Indenture.  The Issuers hereby appoint the
Successor Trustee as Trustee, Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent under the
Indenture.  Pursuant to Sections 2.03 and 7.08 of the Indenture, the Issuers hereby
acknowledge that, as of the Effective Date (as defined in Section 12 below), the Successor
Trustee shall be the Trustee under the Indenture and shall hold all rights, powers, duties and
obligations which the Resigning Trustee now holds under and by virtue of the Indenture as
Trustee, Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent.  The Issuers shall execute and deliver such
further instruments and shall do such other things as the Successor Trustee may reasonably
require so as to more fully and certainly vest in and confirm to the Successor Trustee all the
rights, powers, duties and obligations hereby assigned, transferred, delivered and confirmed to
the Successor Trustee as Trustee, Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent. The Issuers waive
compliance with any applicable advance notice requirements for resignation and appointment
of a successor trustee contained in the Indenture.
2.Issuer Representations and Warranties.  The Issuers each represent and warrant, as of the
date hereof, to the Successor Trustee that:
a.It is duly organized and validly existing under the laws of the State of Delaware;
 b.It has full power, authority, and right to execute, deliver and perform this Instrument;
 c.Each of the Original Indenture, the First Supplemental Indenture and the Second
Supplemental Indenture was validly and lawfully executed and delivered by the Issuers and
the Guarantors and is in full force and effect.  The current outstanding aggregate principal
amount of the Notes is $647,787,000.00;
d.There is no action, suit or proceeding pending or, to the best of the Issuers’ knowledge,
threatened against the Issuers before any court or any governmental authority arising out of
any act or omission of the Issuers under the Indenture;
e.Assuming the accuracy of the representation made by the Successor Trustee in Section 4
hereof, all conditions precedent relating to the appointment of the Successor Trustee as
Trustee, Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent under the Indenture have been complied with
by the Issuers, and such appointment is permitted by the Indenture;
f.No event has occurred and is continuing which is, or after notice or lapse of time would
become, an Event of Default under the Indenture;
g.Except as set forth on Exhibit B hereto, the Indenture has not been supplemented and remains
in full force and effect; and
h.No covenant or condition contained in the Indenture has been waived by the Issuers, the
Resigning Trustee or, to the knowledge of the Issuers, by the holders of the percentage in
aggregate principal amount of Notes required by the Indenture to effect any such waiver.
3.Resigning Trustee Representations and Warranties.  The Resigning Trustee hereby represents
and warrants, as of the date hereof, to the Successor Trustee that:
a.No covenant or condition contained in the Indenture has been waived by the Resigning
Trustee or, to the knowledge of the Responsible Officer of the Resigning Trustee who is
signing this Instrument, by the Holders of the percentage in aggregate principal amount of
Notes required by the Indenture to effect any such waiver;
b.There is no action, suit or proceeding pending or, to the knowledge of the Responsible Officer
of the Resigning Trustee who is signing this Instrument, threatened against the Resigning
Trustee before any court or governmental authority arising out of any action or omission by the
Resigning Trustee as Trustee, Custodian, Registrar or Paying Agent under the Indenture;
c.Resigning Trustee shall endeavor to deliver to Successor Trustee, as of or immediately after
the Effective Date, to the extent available, all of the documents listed in Exhibit B hereto;  
 d.The execution and delivery of this Instrument has been duly authorized by the Resigning
Trustee, and this Instrument constitutes the Resigning Trustee’s legal, valid, binding and
enforceable obligation;
e.The Resigning Trustee certifies that $647,787,000.00 in principal amount of Notes is
outstanding. Interest due on the Notes has been paid to May 1, 2016; and
f.Except as set forth on Exhibit B hereto, the Indenture has not been supplemented and remains
in full force and effect.
4.Successor Trustee Representation and Warranty.  The Successor Trustee represents and
warrants, as of the date hereof, to the Resigning Trustee and the Issuers that it is eligible to
serve as Trustee under Section 7.10 of the Indenture.
5.Assignment by Resigning Trustee.  Effective on the Effective Date, the Resigning Trustee
hereby confirms, assigns, transfers, delivers and conveys to the Successor Trustee, as Trustee,
Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent under the Indenture, all rights, powers, duties and
obligations which the Resigning Trustee now holds under and by virtue of the Indenture as
Trustee, Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent, and effective as of such date does hereby pay
over to the Successor Trustee any and all property and moneys held by the Resigning Trustee
under and by virtue of the Indenture, which amounts are zero.
6.Acceptance by Successor Trustee. Effective on the Effective Date, the Successor Trustee
accepts its appointment as Trustee, Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent under the
Indenture and shall assume said rights, powers, duties and obligations upon the terms and
conditions set forth in the Indenture. Promptly after the execution and delivery of this Instrument,
the Successor Trustee shall cause a notice, the form of which is annexed hereto as Exhibit A,
to be sent to the Issuers and each Holder of the Notes.
7.Additional Documentation.  The Resigning Trustee, for the purposes of more fully and certainly
vesting in and confirming to the Successor Trustee the rights, powers, duties and obligations
hereby assigned, transferred, delivered and conveyed, agrees, upon reasonable request of the
Successor Trustee, to execute, acknowledge and deliver such further instruments of
conveyance and further assurance and to do such other things as may reasonably be required
by the Successor Trustee.  On the Effective Date, the parties hereto agree to deliver to each
other a certificate substantially in the form of Exhibit C attached hereto, with such changes as
may be necessary to make the statements therein accurate.
8.Choice of Laws.  This Instrument shall be governed by the laws of the State of New York.  
9.Counterparts.  This Instrument may be executed in any number of counterparts, each of which,
when so executed and delivered, shall be deemed an original, but all counterparts shall
constitute but one Instrument.  Delivery of a counterpart hereof by facsimile transmission or by
e-mail transmission of an Adobe portable document format file (also known as a “PDF” file)
shall be effective as delivery of a manually executed counterpart hereof.
10.Patriot Act.  The Issuers acknowledge that, in accordance with Section 326 of the USA Patriot
Act, the Successor Trustee, like all financial institutions, is required to obtain, verify, and
record information that identifies each person or legal entity that establishes a relationship or
opens an account with the Successor Trustee.  The Issuers agree that they will provide the
Successor Trustee with such information as it may reasonably request in order for it to satisfy
the requirements of the USA Patriot Act.
11.Notices.  All notices, whether faxed or mailed, will be deemed received in accordance with
Section 12.02 of the Indenture to the following:
TO THE SUCCESSOR TRUSTEE:
Wilmington Trust, National Association
Global Capital Markets
15950 North Dallas Parkway, Suite 550
Dallas, Texas 75248
Attention: Memorial Production Partners Administrator
Facsimile: (888) 316-6238
TO THE RESIGNING TRUSTEE:
U.S. Bank National Association
Global Corporate Trust Services
5555 San Filipe Street, 11th Floor
Houston, Texas 77056-2701
Attention: Steven Finklea, Vice President
Facsimile: (713) 235-9213
TO THE ISSUERS:
Memorial Production Partners LP
500 Dallas Street, Suite 1600
Houston, Texas 77002
Facsimile: (713) 490-8901
Attention: Chief Financial Officer
12.Effectiveness.  This Instrument and the resignation, appointment and acceptance effected
hereby shall be effective as of the close of business on July 11, 2016, which is the date that is
10 business days after the date hereof (the “Effective Date”).
13.Resigning Trustee Fees and Expenses.  This Instrument does not constitute a waiver or
assignment by the Resigning Trustee of any compensation, reimbursement, expenses or
indemnity to which it is or may be entitled pursuant to the Indenture. The Issuers acknowledge
their obligations to Resigning Trustee set forth in Section 7.07 of the Indenture survive the
Effective Date.
[Remainder of page left intentionally blank]
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Instrument as of the date set
forth above.
Memorial Production Partners LP, as Issuer
By:  Memorial Production Partners GP LLC, its general partner
/s/ Robert L. Stillwell, Jr.
By:
Name:  Robert L. Stillwell, Jr.
Its
Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
Memorial Production Finance Corporation, as Issuer
/s/ Robert L. Stillwell, Jr.
By:
Name:  Robert L. Stillwell, Jr.
Its
Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
U.S. Bank National Association, as Resigning Trustee
/s/ Steven A. Finklea
By:
Name:  Steven A. Finklea, CCTS
Its
Vice President
Wilmington Trust, National Association, as Successor Trustee
/s/ Shawn Goffinet
By:
Name:  Shawn Goffinet
Its
Assistant Vice President
EXHIBIT A
Notice to Holders of Memorial Production Partners LP and Memorial Production Finance
Corporation (the “Issuers”)
7 5/8% Senior Notes due 2021 (the “Notes”):
Cusip Numbers1: 586049 AB4
THIS NOTICE CONTAINS IMPORTANT INFORMATION THAT IS OF INTEREST TO THE
REGISTERED AND BENEFICIAL HOLDERS OF THE SUBJECT NOTES.  IF APPLICABLE,
ALL DEPOSITORIES, CUSTODIANS, AND OTHER INTERMEDIARIES RECEIVING THIS
NOTICE ARE REQUESTED TO EXPEDITE RE-TRANSMITTAL TO BENEFICIAL OWNERS
OF THE NOTES IN A TIMELY MANNER.
Reference is hereby made to that certain Indenture, dated as of April 17, 2013 (as supplemented,
modified or amended from time to time, the “Indenture”), by and among the Issuers, each of the
Guarantors named in the Indenture, and U.S. Bank National Association, as Trustee, pursuant to
which the above-referenced Notes were issued and are outstanding.
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN, pursuant to Section 7.08 of the Indenture that U.S. Bank National
Association has resigned as Trustee, Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent under the
Indenture.
NOTICE IS HEREBY FURTHER GIVEN, pursuant to Section 7.08 of the Indenture, that the
Issuers have appointed Wilmington Trust, National Association, whose corporate trust office is
located at 15950 North Dallas Parkway, Suite 550, Dallas, Texas 75248, as Successor Trustee,
Custodian, Registrar, and Paying Agent under the Indenture, and Wilmington Trust, National
Association has accepted such appointment.
NOTICE IS HEREBY FURTHER GIVEN that U.S. Bank National Association’s resignation as
Trustee, Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent, and Wilmington Trust, National Association’s
appointment as Trustee, Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent were effective as of the opening
of business on _______, 2016.
Dated:  ______, 2016
Wilmington Trust, National Association,
as Successor Trustee
1 CUSIP numbers appearing herein have been included solely for the convenience of the
Holders.  The Trustee assumes no responsibility for the selection or use of such numbers and
makes no representation as to the correctness of the CUSIP numbers listed above.
EXHIBIT B
Documents to be delivered by Resigning Trustee to Successor Trustee as to the Indenture:
1.Executed copy of the Indenture.
 2.Executed copy of First Supplemental Indenture.
 3.Executed copy of Second Supplemental Indenture.
 4.Certified list of noteholders as of the Effective Date, certificate detail and all “stop transfers” and
the reason for such “stop transfers” (or, alternatively, if there are a substantial number of
registered noteholders, the computer tape reflecting the identity of such noteholders).
5.Copies of any official notices sent by the Resigning Trustee to all the holders of the Notes
pursuant to the terms of the Indenture during the past twelve months and a copy of the
Resigning Trustee’s most recent annual report to Holders, if any.
6.Original Global Notes.
 7.Such other non-confidential, unprivileged documents or information as the Successor Trustee
may reasonably request on or after the Effective Date.
Exhibit C -- Form of Bring-Down Certificate
Reference is hereby made to that certain Instrument of Resignation, Appointment And
Acceptance (the “Instrument”), dated as of June 24, 2016, by and among Memorial Production
Partners LP, a Delaware limited partnership (the “Partnership”), Memorial Production Finance
Corporation, a Delaware corporation (“Finance Corp.” and, together with the Partnership, the
“Issuers”),  Wilmington Trust, National Association, a national banking association duly
organized and existing under the laws of the United States of America (the “Successor Trustee”),
and U.S. Bank National Association, a national banking association duly organized and existing
under the laws of the United States of America (the “Resigning Trustee”) relating to the Issuers’ 7
5/8% Senior Notes due 2021. Capitalized terms not otherwise defined herein shall have the
same meaning ascribed to such terms in the Instrument.
In connection with the Effective Date of the succession contemplated in the Instrument, each of
the parties hereby makes the following certification applicable to it:
1.  Each of the Issuers hereby certifies to Successor Trustee that the representations and
warranties set forth in Section 2 of the Instrument are true and correct as of the date hereof,
except that the outstanding principal amount of the Notes is $__________.
2.  The Resigning Trustee hereby certifies to Successor Trustee that the representations and
warranties set forth in Section 3 of the Instrument are true and correct as of the date hereof,
except that the outstanding principal amount of the Notes is $__________.
3.  The Successor Trustee hereby certifies to the Issuers and Resigning Trustee that the
representations and warranties set forth in Section 4 of the Instrument are true and correct as of
the date hereof.
Remainder of Page Intentionally Blank
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Certificate as of July 11, 2016.
Memorial Production Partners LP, as Issuer
By:  Memorial Production Partners GP LLC, its general partner
By
   
Name:   
   
Its
Memorial Production Finance Corporation, as Issuer
By
   
Name:   
Its
U.S. Bank National Association, as Resigning Trustee
By
   
Name:   
Its
Wilmington Trust, National Association, as Successor Trustee
By
   
Name:   
   
Its