
S C H E D U L E   9   –   T R A D I N G   P O L I C Y
1.
INTRODUCTION
These guidelines set out the policy on the sale and purchase of securities in  the 
Company by its Key Management Personnel.
Key Management Personnel are those persons having authority and responsibility 
for  planning,  directing  and  controlling  the  activities  of  the  entity,  directly  or 
indirectly, including any Director (whether executive or otherwise) of that entity.
The  Company  has  determined  that  its  Key  Management  Personnel  are  its 
Directors and those employees directly reporting to the Managing Director.
Key  Management  Personnel  are  encouraged  to  be  long-term  holders  of  the 
Company’s securities. However, it is important that care is taken in the timing of 
any purchase or sale of such securities.
The purpose of these guidelines is to assist Key Management Personnel to avoid 
conduct  known  as  ‘insider  trading’.  In  some  respects,  the  Company’s  policy 
extends beyond the strict requirements of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth).
1.
WHAT TYPES OF TRANSACTIONS ARE COVERED BY THIS POLICY?
This policy applies to both the sale and purchase of any securities of the Company 
and its subsidiaries on issue from time to time.
2.
WHAT IS INSIDER TRADING?
2.1
Prohibition
Insider trading is a criminal offence. It may also result in civil liability. In broad terms, 
a person will be guilty of insider trading if:
(a)
that person possesses information which is not generally available to the 
market and, if it were generally available to the market, would be likely 
to  have  a  material  effect  on  the  price  or  value  of  the  Company’s 
securities (ie information that is ‘price sensitive’); and
(b)
that person:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
buys or sells securities in the Company; or
procures someone else to buy or sell securities in the Company; 
or
passes  on  that  information  to  a  third  party  where  that  person 
knows, or ought reasonably to know, that the third party would 
be likely to buy or sell the securities or procure someone else to 
buy or sell the securities of the Company.
2.2
Examples
To illustrate the prohibition described above, the following are possible examples 
of price sensitive information which, if made available to the market, may be likely 
to materially affect the price of the Company’s securities:
(a)
the Company considering a major acquisition;
(b)
the threat of major litigation against the Company;
(c)
the Company’s revenue and profit or loss results materially exceeding (or 
falling short of) the market’s expectations;
(d)
a material change in debt, liquidity or cash flow;
(e)
a  significant  new  development  proposal  (e.g.  new  product  or 
technology);
(f)
the grant or loss or a major contract;
(g)
a management or business restructuring proposal;
(h)
a share issue proposal;
(i)
(j)
an agreement or option to acquire an interest in a mining tenement, or 
to enter into a joint venture or farm-in or farm-out arrangement in relation 
to a mining tenement; and
significant discoveries, exploration results, or changes in reserve/resource 
estimates from mining tenements in which the Company has an interest.
2.3
Dealing through third parties
The  insider  trading  prohibition  extends  to  dealings  by  individuals  through 
nominees, agents or other associates, such as family members, family trusts and 
family companies (referred to as “Associates” in these guidelines).
2.4
Information however obtained
It does not matter how or where the person obtains the information – it does not 
have to be obtained from the Company to constitute inside information.
2.5
Employee share schemes
The prohibition does not apply to acquisitions of shares or options by employees 
made  under  employee  share  or  option  schemes,  nor  does  it  apply  to  the 
acquisition  of  shares  as  a  result  of  the  exercise  of  options  under  an  employee 
option  scheme.  However,  the  prohibition  does  apply  to  the  sale  of  shares 
acquired  under  an  employee  share  scheme  and  also  to  the  sale  of  shares 
acquired following the exercise of an option granted under an employee option 
scheme.
3.
GUIDELINES FOR TRADING IN THE COMPANY’S SECURITIES
3.1
General rule
Key Management Personnel must not, except in exceptional circumstances deal 
in securities of the Company during the following periods:
(a)
(b)
(c)
two  weeks  prior  to,  and  48  hours  after  the  release  of  the  Company’s 
Annual Financial Report;
two  weeks  prior  to,  and  48  hours  after  the  release  of  the  Half  Year 
Financial Report of the Company; and
two  weeks  prior  to,  and  48  hours  after  the  release  of  the  Company’s 
quarterly reports (if applicable),
(together the Closed Periods).
The Company may at its discretion vary this rule in relation to a particular Closed 
Periods  by  general  announcement  to  all  Key  Management  Personnel  either 
before or during the Closed Periods. However, if a Key Management Personnel is 
in possession of price sensitive information which is not generally available to the 
market, then he or she must not deal in the Company’s securities at any time.
3.2
No short-term trading in the Company’s securities
Key  Management  Personnel  should  never  engage  in  short-term  trading  of  the 
Company’s securities except for the exercise of options where the shares will be 
sold shortly thereafter.
3.3
Securities in other companies
Buying and selling securities of other companies with which the Company may be 
dealing  is  prohibited  where  an  individual  possesses  information  which  is  not 
generally available to the market and is ‘price sensitive’. For example, where an 
individual  is aware that  the Company  is about  to  sign  a major  agreement  with 
another  company,  they  should  not  buy  securities  in  either  the Company  or  the 
other company.
3.4
Exceptions
(a)
Key Management Personnel may at any time:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
acquire  ordinary  shares  in  the  Company  by  conversion  of 
securities giving a right of conversion to ordinary shares;
acquire  Company  securities  under  a  bonus  issue  made  to  all 
holders of securities of the same class;
acquire Company  securities  under  a  dividend  reinvestment,  or 
top-up  plan  that  is  available  to  all  holders  or  securities  of  the 
same class;
acquire,  or  agree  to  acquire  or  exercise  options  under  an 
employee incentive scheme (as that term is defined in the ASX 
Listing Rules);
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
withdraw ordinary shares in the Company held on behalf of the 
Key Management Personnel in an employee incentive scheme 
(as  that  term  is  defined  in  the  ASX  Listing  Rules)  where  the 
withdrawal is permitted by the rules of that scheme;
acquire  ordinary  shares  in  the  Company  as  a  result  of  the 
exercise of options held under an employee option scheme;
transfer  securities  of  the  Company  already  held 
into  a 
superannuation  fund  or  other  saving  scheme  in  which  the 
restricted person is a beneficiary;
(viii)  make  an  investment  in,  or  trade  in  units  of,  a  fund  or  other 
scheme (other than a scheme only investing in the securities of 
the Company) where the assets of the fund or other scheme are 
invested at the discretion of a third party;
(ix)
where a restricted person is a trustee, trade in the securities of the 
Company  by  that  trust,  provided  the  restricted  person  is  not  a 
beneficiary  of  the  trust  and  any  decision  to  trade  during  a 
prohibited  period  is  taken  by  the  other  trustees  or  by  the 
investment managers independently of the restricted person;
(x)
undertake to accept, or accept, a takeover offer;
(xi)
(xii)
(xiii)
trade  under  an  offer  or  invitation  made  to  all  or  most  of  the 
security holders, such as a rights issue, a security purchase plan, 
a dividend or distribution reinvestment plan and an equal access 
buy-back,  where  the  plan  that  determines  the  timing  and 
structure  of  the  offer  has  been  approved  by  the  Board.  This 
includes  decisions  relating  to  whether  or  not  to  take  up  the 
entitlements and the sale of entitlements required to provide for 
the 
the  balance  of  entitlements  under  a 
renounceable pro rata issue;
take  up  of
dispose  of  securities  of  the  Company  resulting  from  a  secured 
lender  exercising  their  rights,  for  example,  under  a  margin 
lending arrangement;
exercise (but not sell securities following exercise) an option or a 
right  under  an  employee  incentive  scheme,  or  convert  a 
convertible security, where the final date for the exercise of the 
option  or  right,  or  the  conversion  of  the  security,  falls  during  a 
prohibited  period  or  the  Company  has  had  a  number  of 
consecutive prohibited periods and the restricted person could 
not  reasonably  have  been  expected  to  exercise  it  at  a  time 
when free to do so; or
(xiv)
trade  under  a  non-discretionary  trading  plan  for  which  prior 
written  clearance  has  been  provided  in  accordance  with 
procedures set out in this Policy.
(b)
In  respect  of  any  share  or  option  plans  adopted  by  the  Company,  it 
should be noted that it is not permissible to provide the exercise price of 
options  by  selling  the  shares  acquired  on  the  exercise  of  these  options 
unless  the  sale  of  those  shares  occurs  outside  the  periods  specified  in 
paragraph 3.1.
Were this is to occur at a time when the person possessed inside information, then 
the sale of Company securities would be a breach of insider trading laws, even 
though the person’s decision to sell was not influenced by the inside information 
that  the person  possessed  and  the person may  not  have made a  profit  on  the 
sale. Where Company securities are provided to a lender as security by way of 
mortgage  or  charge,  a  sale  that  occurs  under  that  mortgage  or  charge  as  a 
consequence of default would not breach insider trading laws.
3.5
Notification  of  periods  when  Key  Management  Personnel  are  not  permitted  to 
trade
The Company Secretary will endeavour to notify all Key Management Personnel 
of the times when they are not permitted to buy or sell the Company’s securities 
as set out in paragraph 3.1.
4.
APPROVAL AND NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
4.1
Approval requirements
(a)
(b)
Any  Key  Management  Personnel  (other  than  the  Chairman)  wishing  to 
buy,  sell  or  exercise  rights  in  relation  to  the  Company’s  securities  must 
obtain  the  prior  written  approval  of  the  Chairman  or  the  Board  before 
doing so.
If  the  Chairman  wishes  to  buy,  sell  or  exercise  rights  in  relation  to  the 
Company’s securities, the Chairman must obtain the prior approval of the 
Board before doing so.
4.2
Approvals to buy or sell securities
(a)
(b)
All requests to buy or sell securities as referred to in paragraph 4.1 must 
include the intended volume of securities to be purchased or sold and an 
estimated time frame for the sale or purchase.
Copies  of  written  approvals  must  be  forwarded  to  the  Company 
Secretary prior to the approved purchase or sale transaction.
4.3
Notification
Subsequent  to  approval  obtained in  accordance with  paragraphs 4.1  and 4.2, 
any Key Management Personnel who (or through his or her Associates) buys, sells, 
or  exercises  rights  in  relation  to  Company  securities  must  notify  the  Company 
Secretary in writing of the details of the transaction within two (2) business days of 
the  transaction  occurring.  This  notification  obligation  operates  at  all  times  and 
includes  applications  for  acquisitions  of  shares  or  options  by  employees  made 
under employee share or option schemes and also applies to the acquisition of 
shares as a result of the exercise of options under an employee option scheme.
4.4
Key Management Personnel sales of securities
Key  Management  Personnel  need  to  be  mindful  of  the  market  perception 
associated  with  any  sale  of  Company  securities  and  possibly  the  ability  of  the 
market  to  absorb  the  volume  of  shares  being  sold.  With  this  in  mind,  the 
management of the sale of any significant volume of Company securities  (ie a 
volume that would represent a volume in excess of 10% of the total securities held 
by the seller prior to the sale, or a volume to be sold that would be in excess of 
10% of the average daily traded volume of the shares of the Company on the ASX 
for the preceding 20 trading days) by a Key Management Personnel needs to be
discussed with the Board and the Company’s legal advisers prior to the execution 
of any sale. These discussions need to be documented in the form of a file note, 
to be retained by the Company Secretary.
4.5
Exemption from Closed Periods restrictions due to exceptional circumstance
Key  Management  Personnel  who  are  not  in  possession  of  inside  information  in 
relation to the Company, may be given prior written clearance by the Managing 
Director  (or  in  the  case  of  the  Managing  Director  by  all  other  members  of  the 
Board) to sell or otherwise dispose of Company securities in a Closed Period where 
the  person  is  in  severe  financial  hardship  or  where  there  are  exceptional 
circumstances as set out in this policy.
4.6
Severe financial hardship or exceptional circumstances
The determination of whether a Key Management Personnel is in severe financial 
hardship will be made by the Managing Director (or in the case of the Managing 
Director by all other members of the Board).
A  financial  hardship  or  exceptional  circumstances  determination  can  only  be 
made  by  examining  all  of  the  facts  and  if  necessary  obtaining  independent 
verification of the facts from banks, accountants or other like institutions.
4.7
Financial hardship
Key Management Personnel may be in severe financial hardship if they have a 
pressing financial commitment that cannot be satisfied other than by selling the 
securities of the Company.
In  the  interests  of  an  expedient  and  informed  determination  by  the  Managing 
Director  (or  all  other  members  of  the  Board  as  the  context  requires),  any 
application for an exemption allowing the sale of Company securities in a Closed 
Period based on financial hardship must be made in writing stating all of the facts 
and be accompanied by copies of relevant supporting documentation, including 
contact  details of  the person’s accountant,  bank  and other  such  independent 
institutions (where applicable).
Any exemption, if issued, will be in writing and shall contain a specified time period 
during which the sale of securities can be made.
4.8
Exceptional circumstances
Exceptional circumstances may apply to the disposal of Company securities by a 
Key  Management  Personnel  if  the  person  is  required  by  a  court  order,  a  court 
enforceable undertaking for example in a bona fide family settlement, to transfer 
or  sell  securities  of  the  Company,  or  there  is  some  other  overriding  legal  or 
regulatory requirement to do so.
Any  application  for  an exemption  allowing the sale of Company  securities  in  a 
Closed Period based on exceptional circumstances must be made in writing and 
be  accompanied  by  relevant  court  and/or  supporting  legal  documentation 
(where applicable).
Any exemption, if issued, will be in writing and shall contain a specified time period 
during which the sale of securities can be made.
5.
ASX NOTIFICATION FOR DIRECTORS
The ASX Listing Rules require the Company to notify the ASX within 5 business days 
after  any  dealing in  securities  of  the Company  (either  personally  or  through  an 
Associate) which results in a change in the relevant interests of a Director in the 
securities  of  the  Company.  The  Company  has  made  arrangements  with  each 
Director to ensure that the Director promptly discloses to the Company Secretary 
all the information required by the ASX.
6.
EFFECT OF COMPLIANCE WITH THIS POLICY
Compliance with these guidelines for trading in the Company’s securities does not 
absolve that individual from complying with the law, which must be the overriding 
consideration when trading in the Company’s securities.