
DEFA14A 1 d243148ddefa14a.htm DEFA14A DEFA14A
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549
SCHEDULE 14A
PROXY STATEMENT PURSUANT TO SECTION 14(a) OF THE
SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
Filed by the Registrant  x                             Filed by a Party other than the Registrant  ¨
Check the appropriate box:
Preliminary Proxy Statement
  Confidential, for Use of the Commission Only (as permitted by Rule 14a-6(e)(2))
  Definitive Proxy Statement
¨
¨
¨
x   Definitive Additional Materials
¨
Soliciting Material under Rule 14a-12
W&T Offshore, Inc.
(Name of Registrant as Specified in its Charter)
(Name of Person(s) Filing Proxy Statement, if other than the Registrant)
Payment of Filing Fee (Check the appropriate box):
x   No fee required.
¨
Fee computed on table below per Exchange Act Rules 14a-6(i)(1) and 0-11.
Title of each class of securities to which transaction applies:
(1)
Title of each class of securities to which transaction applies:
Aggregate number of securities to which transaction applies:
(2)
(3)
Per unit price or other underlying value of transaction computed pursuant to Exchange
Act Rule 0-11 (set forth the amount on which the filing fee is calculated and state how it
was determined):
Proposed maximum aggregate value of transaction:
(4)
Total fee paid:
(5)
¨
¨
Fee paid previously with preliminary materials.
Check box if any part of the fee is offset as provided by Exchange Act Rule 0-11(a)(2) and
identify the filing for which the offsetting fee was paid previously. Identify the previous filing
by registration statement number, or the form or schedule and the date of its filing.
(1)
Amount previously paid:
Form, Schedule or Registration Statement No.:
(2)
Filing Party:
(3)
(4) Date Filed:
Dear Shareholder:
August 16, 2016
On August 16, 2016, W&T Offshore, Inc., a Texas corporation (the “Company”), filed a Current
Report on Form 8-K with the Securities and Exchange Commission regarding the Company’s
entry into an Amendment (the “Amendment”) to the Support Agreement, dated as of July 11,
2016, by and among the Company and certain holders of the Company’s 8.500% Senior Notes
due 2019 (the “Existing Notes”) in connection with the Company’s previously announced
exchange offer for its Existing Notes, which (i) extended the Early Participation Date to 5:00 p.m.,
New York City time, on August 30, 2016 (as extended, the “Early Participation Date”),
(ii) eliminated the Minimum Tender Condition (as defined in the Support Agreement) and
(iii) increased the maximum consideration being offered to (i) 76,590,000 shares of common
stock, par value $0.00001 per share, of the Company (the “Shares”) (increased from 62,100,000
Shares), (ii) $202.5 million aggregate principal amount of its new Senior Second Lien PIK Toggle
Notes due 2020 (the “New Second Lien Notes”) and (iii) $180.0 million aggregate principal
amount of its new Senior Third Lien PIK Toggle Notes due 2021 (the “New Third Lien Notes”
and, together with the New Second Lien Notes, the “New Notes”; the New Notes and the Shares,
the “New Securities”) pursuant to the terms of the offering memorandum and consent solicitation
statement and the related letter of transmittal and consent, as amended by a supplement setting
forth the modifications described above (together, the “Offering Documents”). The New Third Lien
Notes will be issued in lieu of the unsecured Senior PIK Toggle Notes due 2021 described in the
Offering Documents, regardless of the percentage in principal amount of Existing Notes that are
tendered.
The right to withdraw tenders of Existing Notes and related consents terminated at 5:00 p.m.,
New York City time, on August 8, 2016 (the “Withdrawal Deadline”). Accordingly, Existing Notes
and related consents tendered before the Withdrawal Deadline remain tendered and may not be
withdrawn or revoked, except in certain limited circumstances where additional withdrawal rights
are required by law. Tenders submitted after the Withdrawal Deadline and on or before the
Expiration Date in the exchange offer and related consents will be irrevocable, except in the
same limited circumstances.
A copy of the Current Report on Form 8-K, dated as of August 16, 2016, including the related
press release and the Amendment, is included below.
Sincerely,
Tracy W. Krohn
Chairman of the Board and
Chairman of the Board and
Chief Executive Officer
Nine Greenway Plaza, Suite 300
Houston, Texas 77046
Phone (713) 626-8525
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 8-K
CURRENT REPORT PURSUANT
TO SECTION 13 OR 15(D) OF THE
SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
Date of Report (Date of earliest event reported): August 16, 2016
W&T Offshore, Inc.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
1-32414
(Commission File Number)
(State or Other Jurisdiction of Incorporation)
Texas
72-1121985
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
Nine Greenway Plaza, Suite 300
Houston, Texas 77046
(Address of Principal Executive Offices)
713.626.8525
(Registrant’s Telephone Number, Including Area Code)
N/A
(Former Name or Former Address, if Changed Since Last Report)
Check the appropriate box below if the Form 8-K filing is intended to simultaneously satisfy the
filing obligation of the registrant under any of the following provisions:
¨ Written communications pursuant to Rule 425 under the Securities Act (17 CFR 230.425)
Soliciting material pursuant to Rule 14a-12 under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.14a-12)
Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 14d-2(b) under the Exchange Act (17
CFR 240.14d-2(b))
Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 13e-4(c) under the Exchange Act (17
CFR 240.13e-4(c))
¨
¨
¨
Item 1.01Entry into a Material Definitive Agreement.
On August 16, 2016, W&T Offshore, Inc. (the “Company”) and certain of the holders (“Supporting
Noteholders”) of the Company’s 8.500% Senior Notes due 2019 (the “Existing Notes”) party to
the Support Agreement, dated as of July 11, 2016 (the “Support Agreement”), entered into an
Amendment to the Support Agreement (the “Amendment”) in connection with the Company’s
previously announced exchange offer for its Existing Notes, which (i) extended the Early
Participation Date to 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on August 30, 2016 (as extended, the “Early
Participation Date”), (ii) eliminated the Minimum Tender Condition (as defined in the Support
Agreement) and (iii) increased the maximum consideration being offered to (i) 76,590,000 shares
of common stock, par value $0.00001 per share, of the Company (the “Shares”) (increased from
62,100,000 Shares), (ii) $202.5 million aggregate principal amount of its new Senior Second Lien
PIK Toggle Notes due 2020 (the “New Second Lien Notes”) and (iii) $180.0 million aggregate
principal amount of its new Senior Third Lien PIK Toggle Notes due 2021 (the “New Third Lien
Notes” and, together with the New Second Lien Notes, the “New Notes”; the New Notes and the
Shares, the “New Securities”) pursuant to the terms of the offering memorandum and consent
solicitation statement and the related letter of transmittal and consent, as amended by a
supplement setting forth the modifications described above (together, the “Offering Documents”).
The New Third Lien Notes will be issued in lieu of the unsecured Senior PIK Toggle Notes due
2021 described in the Offering Documents, regardless of the percentage in principal amount of
Existing Notes that are tendered. In addition, the Amendment provides for certain limitations on
the Company’s ability to consummate future exchanges or repurchases of the Existing Notes on
terms more favorable than the terms provided in the exchange offer for the life of the Existing
Notes.
The right to withdraw tenders of Existing Notes and related consents terminated at 5:00 p.m.,
New York City time, on August 8, 2016 (the “Withdrawal Deadline”). Accordingly, Existing Notes
and related consents tendered before the Withdrawal Deadline remain tendered and may not be
withdrawn or revoked, except in certain limited circumstances where additional withdrawal rights
are required by law. Tenders submitted after the Withdrawal Deadline and on or before the
Expiration Date (as defined in the Offering Documents) in the exchange offer and related
consents will be irrevocable, except in the same limited circumstances.
The foregoing description of the Amendment does not purport to be complete and is qualified in
its entirety by reference to the form of Amendment, which is attached to this Current Report on
Form 8-K as Exhibit 10.1 and incorporated by reference herein.
Item 8.01 Other Events.
On August 16, 2016, the Company issued a press release to announce the entry into the
Amendment as set forth above.
The New Securities have not been and will not be registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as
amended (the “Securities Act”), or applicable state securities laws and may not be offered or sold
in the United States absent registration or an applicable exemption from the registration
requirements of the Securities Act and applicable state laws.
A copy of the press release is filed herewith as Exhibit 99.1 and incorporated herein by
reference.
Item 9.01Financial Statements and Exhibits.
(d) Exhibits. The following exhibits are included as part of this Current Report on Form 8-K:
Exhibit
Number  
10.1
99.1
2
Description
Form of Amendment by and among the Company and the Supporting Noteholders
party thereto.
Press release issued by the Company on August 16, 2016, announcing entry into
the Amendment.
3
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Registrant has duly
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned hereunto duly authorized.
Dated: August 16, 2016
W&T OFFSHORE, INC.
(Registrant)
By: /s/ John D. Gibbons
John D. Gibbons
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial
Officer
4
Exhibit
Number  
10.1
99.1
EXHIBIT INDEX
Description
Amendment by and among the Company and the Supporting Noteholders party
thereto.
Press release issued by the Company on August 16, 2016, announcing entry in to
the Amendment.
5
FORM OF
Exhibit 10.1
AMENDMENT TO SUPPORT AGREEMENT
This AMENDMENT TO SUPPORT AGREEMENT (this “Amendment”), dated as of August 16,
2016, is entered into by and among W&T Offshore, Inc., a Texas corporation (the “Company”)
and each of the holders of the Company’s 8.500% Senior Notes due 2019 listed on the signature
pages hereto (each a “Holder” and, collectively, the “Holders”).
WHEREAS, the Company and the Holders are party to that certain Support Agreement, dated as
of July 11, 2016 (as amended, supplemented or otherwise modified, the “Support Agreement”);
WHEREAS, the Company and the Holders have agreed to eliminate the Minimum Tender
Condition as a condition to their respective obligations to consummate the Transactions;
WHEREAS, the Company has agreed to increase the maximum number of Shares being offered
in connection with the Exchange Offer from 62,100,000 Shares to 76,590,000 Shares, which will
represent approximately 50% of the Company’s Total Equity (the “Consideration Increase”);
WHEREAS, the Company and the Holders each desire to enter into this Amendment in order to
eliminate the Minimum Tender Condition and agree to the Consideration Increase; and
WHEREAS, the Company will amend the Exchange Offer pursuant to an amendment to the
Offering Memorandum (the “Exchange Offer Amendment”), the form of which is attached hereto
as Exhibit A.
NOW, THEREFORE, intending to be legally bound and in consideration of the mutual
agreements set forth herein and for other good and valuable consideration, the receipt and
sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged, the parties hereto agree as follows:
1. Defined Terms. Each capitalized term that is defined in the Support Agreement, but that is not
defined in this Amendment, shall have the meaning ascribed such term in the Support
Agreement. Unless otherwise indicated, all section references in this Amendment refer to the
Support Agreement.
2. Amendments.
2.1 Amendment to Section 1(r). Section 1(r) shall be amended and restated in its entirety to read
in full as follows:
(r) “Exchange Consideration” means for each $1,000.00 face amount of Existing Notes, (i) if
tendered prior to the Early Tender Deadline, (A) 85.1 Shares, (B) $225 in principal amount of the
New Second Lien Notes and (C) $200 in principal amount of New Unsecured Notes, and (ii) if
tendered on or after the Early Tender Deadline, (A) 85.1 Shares, (B) $200 in principal amount of
the New Second Lien Notes and (C) $200 in principal amount of New Unsecured Notes.
2.2 Amendment to Section 1(ee). Section 1(ee) shall be amended and restated in its entirety to
read in full as follows:
[Reserved].
2.3 Amendment to Section 1(jj). Section 1(jj) shall be amended and restated in its entirety to read
in full as follows:
(jj) “New Third Lien Notes” has the meaning set forth in the introductory paragraphs herein;
provided, however, the provisions set forth under “Contingent Collateral” in Exhibit F shall be
made a part of the terms of the New Third Lien Notes.
Further, each reference to “New Unsecured Notes” and “New Unsecured Notes Indenture” in the
Support Agreement shall be replaced with references to “New Third Lien Notes” and “New Third
Lien Notes Indenture”, respectively.
2.4 Amendment to Section 3(b)(3). Section 3(b)(3) shall be amended and restated in its entirety to
read in full as follows:
[Reserved];
2.5 Amendment to Section 7(f). Section 7(f) shall be amended and restated in its entirety to read
in full as follows:
[Reserved].
2.6 Amendment to Section 7(g). Section 7(g)(2) shall be amended and restated in its entirety to
read in full as follows:
(2) an amendment to the First Lien Credit Agreement substantially in accordance with the terms
set forth in the Fourth Amendment to Fifth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, the form of
which was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Form 8-K on July 29, 2016,
with such changes as necessary to permit the consummation of the Exchange Offer taking into
account the amended Exchange Consideration as set forth in this Support Agreement, as
amended;
2.7 Amendment to Section 7(i). Section 7(i) shall be amended and restated in its entirety to read
in full as follows:
(i) it will furnish to the Holders at or prior to 12:00 pm (New York City time) on each of the
expiration date of the Exchange Offer and the date of Consummation of the Exchange Offer, a
certificate, signed by an executive officer of the Company and dated as of each respective date,
to the effect that the representations and warranties of the Company in this Agreement are true
and correct in all material respects on and as of each respective date (except for representations
and warranties made as of a specified date, which shall be true and correct only as of the
specified date), with the same effect as if made on such dates.
2.8 Amendment to Section 7(j). Section 7(j) shall be amended and restated in its entirety to read
in full as follows:
(j) for so long as the Holders own, in the aggregate, more than $50 million in total debt of the
Company in the form of (i) loans under the term loan credit agreement, dated May 11, 2015,
among the Company, as borrower, Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc., as administrative agent
and collateral trustee and the various other parties thereto, (ii) loans under the New Capital
Financing facility, (iii) New Second Lien Notes and (iv) New Third Lien Notes, the Company will
not enter into any agreement or consummate any exchange or enter into any Participation
Agreement or repurchase or consent to any repurchase of or exchange for the Existing Notes on
terms more favorable to any such holder of Existing
2
Notes (such consideration, the “Preferential Alternate Consideration”) than the terms provided
to the Holders under this Agreement and will not offer convertible securities or warrants as
consideration for any agreement or consent to or repurchase of or exchange for Existing Notes.
Without limitation, until June 15, 2018, consideration for any alternate agreement or repurchase
or exchange of Existing Notes will be deemed to be Preferential Alternate Consideration if such
consideration includes (i) any combination of debt obligations which in the aggregate exceed
$425 in principal amount per $1,000 of Existing Notes exchanged, (ii) any debt obligations with
an interest rate payable, whether payable in cash or in kind, in excess of the cash interest rate
payable on the New Third Lien Notes, (iii) any debt obligations with a shorter PIK interest period,
larger aggregate cash payment amount or more restrictive covenants than any of the New
Second Lien Notes or the New Third Lien Notes, (iv) any debt obligations with a maturity date
earlier than any of the New Second Lien Notes or the New Third Lien Notes, (v) any secured
debt obligations with senior lien priority than the New Third Lien Notes with respect to the
collateral securing such debt obligations, provided that up to $225 in principal amount of secured
debt obligations with lien priority equal to that of the New Second Lien Notes may be offered in
exchange per $1,000 principal amount of Existing Notes, (vi) any debt obligations senior in right
of payment to any of the New Second Lien Notes or the New Third Lien Notes or (vii) more than
85.1 Shares or any amount of securities convertible into an amount greater than 85.1 Shares per
$1,000 of Existing Notes. For the avoidance of doubt, this Section 7(j) shall prohibit cash
payments prior to June 15, 2018 in connection with repurchases or exchanges of Existing Notes
except as otherwise agreed to by the Required Holders and the Company. From and after June
15, 2018, the determination of Preferential Alternate Consideration shall be made by a fair market
value determination of such consideration and the fair market value determination of the
Exchange Consideration as of the date that is two business days prior to the announcement of
any such proposed exchange or agreement (the “FMV Determination Date”); provided that
consideration for any alternate agreement or repurchase or exchange of Existing Notes from and
after June 15, 2018 will be deemed to be Preferential Alternate Consideration if such
consideration includes (i) any debt obligations with an interest rate payable, whether payable in
cash or in kind, in excess of the cash interest rate payable on the New Third Lien Notes, (ii) any
debt obligations with a shorter PIK interest period, larger aggregate cash payment amount or
more restrictive covenants than any of the New Second Lien Notes or the New Third Lien Notes,
(iii) any debt obligations with a maturity date earlier than any of the New Second Lien Notes or
the New Third Lien Notes, (iv) any secured debt obligations with senior lien priority than the New
Second Lien Notes with respect to the collateral securing such debt obligations, (v) any debt
obligations senior in right of payment to any of the New Second Lien Notes or the New Third Lien
Notes. The fair market value of any debt obligations included in the Exchange Consideration or
any other consideration will be determined by the weighted average trading price of such debt
obligations for trades greater than $500,000 in the five trading days, measured from the close of
business on each such day as reported by TRACE (Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine),
prior to the FMV Determination Date. The fair market value of any equity included in the
Exchange Consideration or any other consideration will be determined by the product of the
average volume-weighted average price of such equity for the 20 trading days prior to the FMV
Determination Date and the number of units of equity offered in the Exchange Offer or such
repurchase or exchange, as applicable; provided that if such equity is not listed on any national
securities exchange, the fair market value of such equity shall be determined as of the FMV
Determination Date by a nationally recognized independent investment banking firm retained by
the Company in consultation with the Required Holders for this purpose, using a volume-
weighted average method. The provisions of this Section 7(j) shall survive the Consummation of
the Exchange Offer.
2.9 Addition of Section 7(l). Section 7 is hereby amended to include the following paragraph in its
entirety as a new paragraph 7(l):
(l) it will not extend the Withdrawal Deadline (as defined in the Offering Memorandum) to a date
after August 8, 2016 or otherwise grant any additional withdrawal rights to holders of Existing
Notes other than those set forth in the Offering Memorandum (without regard to any amendments,
modifications or waivers).
3
2.10 Addition of Section 8(d). Section 8 is hereby amended to include the following paragraph in
its entirety as a new paragraph 8(d):
(d) each Holder will be permitted to terminate its obligations under the Support Agreement, solely
as to itself, if (i) the Company grants withdrawal rights at any time after August 8, 2016 and (ii) the
percentage of Existing Notes validly tendered and accepted for exchange is lower than the
percentage of Existing Notes validly tendered and accepted for exchange at 5:00 p.m. (New York
City time) on August 8, 2016; provided that the Company will provide notice promptly to the
Holders if such percentage of Existing Notes validly tendered and accepted for exchange has
decreased below such level and that the Holders will be permitted to withdraw their tender of
Existing Notes for not less than two Business Days subsequent to receipt of any such notice.
2.11 Amendment to Section 9(b)(vi). Section 9(b)(vi) shall be amended and restated in its entirety
to read in full as follows:
(vi) modify the ranking of the New Second Lien Notes or the New Unsecured Notes in security or
in right of payment, provided, however, that the adding of collateral to secure all or a portion of
the New Unsecured Notes shall not require the consent of any Holder;
3. Condition to Effectiveness of Amendment. This Amendment shall be effective upon
execution and delivery by each party hereto, provided that the amendments set forth in Section 2
hereto shall each be effective only at such time as the Company amends the Exchange Offer
pursuant to the Exchange Offer Amendment in the form of Exhibit A attached hereto.
4. Support Agreement in Full Force and Effect. Except as expressly provided herein, all of the
terms, provisions and conditions of the Support Agreement shall remain in full force and effect.
5. Other Provisions. This Amendment and its contents are subject to the Specific Performance;
Injunctive Relief, Governing Law, Jurisdiction, Fees and Expenses, Fiduciary Duties,
Confidentiality and Interpretive Provisions; Construction provisions of the Support Agreement.
6. Counterparts. This Amendment may be executed in one or more counterparts, each of which
shall be deemed an original and all of which shall constitute one and the same agreement.
Delivery of an executed counterpart of a signature page by facsimile or .pdf shall be as effective
as delivery of a manually executed counterpart.
[Remainder of this page intentionally left blank]
4
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Amendment to be duly executed
as of the date first above written.
W&T OFFSHORE, INC.
By:
Name:
Title:
[Signature Page to Amendment]
[Noteholder], on behalf of itself and the funds/accounts set forth in a separate side letter referred
to in the Support Agreement:
[Noteholder]
By:
Name:
Title:
[Signature Page to Amendment]
EXHIBIT A
First Supplement to Offering Memorandum
[Exhibit A]
Exhibit 99.1
W&T Offshore Announces Extension of Early Participation Date,
Elimination of the Minimum Tender Condition and Increase in
Consideration for Exchange Offer and Consent Solicitation
HOUSTON, August 16, 2016 – W&T Offshore, Inc. (NYSE: WTI) (the “Company”) today
announced that, with respect to its previously announced exchange offer and consent solicitation
to eligible holders of its outstanding 8.500% Senior Notes due 2019 (the “Existing Notes”), it has
(i) extended the Early Participation Date to 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on August 30, 2016 (as
extended, the “Early Participation Date”), (ii) eliminated the Minimum Tender Condition (as
defined in the Offering Documents (as defined below)) and (iii) increased the maximum
consideration being offered to (i) 76,590,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.00001 per
share, of the Company (the “Shares”) (increased from 62,100,000 Shares), (ii) $202.5 million
aggregate principal amount of its new Senior Second Lien PIK Toggle Notes due 2020 (the “New
Second Lien Notes”) and (iii) $180.0 million aggregate principal amount of its new Senior Third
Lien PIK Toggle Notes due 2021 (the “New Third Lien Notes” and, together with the New Second
Lien Notes, the “New Notes”; the New Notes and the Shares, the “New Securities”) pursuant to
the terms of the offering memorandum and consent solicitation statement and the related letter of
transmittal and consent, as amended by a supplement setting forth the modifications described
above (together, the “Offering Documents”). The New Third Lien Notes will be issued in lieu of
the unsecured Senior PIK Toggle Notes due 2021 described in the Offering Documents,
regardless of the percentage of principal amount of Existing Notes that are tendered.
Concurrently with the exchange offer, the Company is soliciting consents from holders of the
Existing Notes to a proposed amendment to the indenture governing the Existing Notes in order
to permit the issuance of the New Second Lien Notes and the New Third Lien Notes. The
following table sets forth the increased consideration to be offered to eligible holders of the
Existing Notes in the exchange offer:
Total Exchange
Consideration for
Exchange
each $1,000
Consideration for
Principal Amount
each
Existing Notes
to be Exchanged
of
Existing Notes if
Tendered Prior to
Aggregate
or
Principal Amount
on the Early
(CUSIP No. / ISIN)
8.500% Senior Notes due 2019
Outstanding
$900,000,000
Participation Date  
(i) 85.1 Shares; (ii)
(92922P AC0 / US92922PAC05)
$225 principal
amount of New
Second Lien Notes;
$1,000 Principal
Amount of
Existing
Notes if Tendered
After the Early
Participation Date
(i) 85.1 Shares;
(ii) $200 principal
amount of New
and (iii) $200
Second Lien Notes;
principal amount of
New Third Lien
Notes
and
(iii) $200 principal
amount of New
Third Lien Notes
The total exchange consideration to be received by eligible holders of Existing Notes who validly
tender their Existing Notes prior to the Early Participation Date will include an early tender
premium equal to $25 principal amount of New Second Lien Notes per $1,000 principal amount
of Existing Notes accepted for exchange.
For Existing Notes validly tendered after the Early Participation Date and on or before the
Expiration Date (as defined below), the eligible holders of Existing Notes accepted for exchange
will receive the exchange consideration set forth above, which does not include the early tender
premium. Eligible holders of Existing Notes accepted for exchange will also receive a cash
payment equal to the accrued and unpaid interest in respect of such Existing Notes from June 15,
2016 (the most recent interest payment date) to, but not including, the date the exchange offer is
settled (the “Settlement Date”). Interest on the New Notes will accrue from the Settlement Date.
Certain holders of the Existing Notes (the “Participating Holders”) entered into a Support
Agreement, dated July 11, 2016 (the “Support Agreement”). Pursuant to the Support Agreement,
the Participating Holders agreed to tender their Existing Notes in the exchange offer, subject to
various conditions, including a limitation on the Company’s ability to reduce the Minimum Tender
Condition to a threshold lower than 85% of the aggregate principal amount of the outstanding
Existing Notes (the “Threshold Limitation”). Certain of the Participating Holders have entered into
an amendment to the Support Agreement (the “Amendment”) whereby they have agreed to
eliminate the Threshold Limitation. In addition, the Company has waived the Minimum Tender
Condition that was originally set forth in the Offering Documents. Therefore, the exchange offer is
no longer subject to the Minimum Tender Condition. The Amendment also provides for certain
limitations on the Company’s ability to consummate future exchanges or repurchases of the
Existing Notes on terms more favorable than the terms provided in the exchange offer for the life
of the Existing Notes.
As previously announced, the exchange offer and consent solicitation will expire at 5:00 p.m.,
New York City time, on September 1, 2016, unless extended or earlier terminated by the
Company (the “Expiration Date”). The right to withdraw tenders of Existing Notes and related
consents terminated at 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on August 8, 2016 (the “Withdrawal
Deadline”). Accordingly, Existing Notes and related consents tendered before the Withdrawal
Deadline remain tendered and may not be withdrawn or revoked, except in certain limited
circumstances where additional withdrawal rights are required by law. Tenders submitted after
the Withdrawal Deadline and on or before the Expiration Date in the exchange offer and related
consents will be irrevocable, except in the same limited circumstances. The act of tendering
Existing Notes pursuant to the exchange offer constitutes a consent to the proposed amendment
to the indenture governing the Existing Notes. The exchange offer is conditioned on the
satisfaction or waiver of certain additional conditions, as described in the Offering Documents.
The exchange offer and consent solicitation for the Existing Notes may be further amended,
extended or terminated.
The exchange offer and consent solicitation is only being made, and copies of the Offering
Documents will only be made available, to holders of the Existing Notes who complete and
submit an eligibility form confirming that they are (1) “qualified institutional buyers” within the
meaning of Rule 144A under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) or
(2) not “U.S. persons” and are outside of the United States within the meaning of Regulation S
under the Securities Act (such persons, “eligible holders”). Holders who desire to obtain and
complete an eligibility form should contact the information agent, D.F. King & Co., Inc., at
(877) 536-1561 (toll-free) or (212) 269-5550 (for banks and brokers), or via the following website:
www.dfking.com/wti.
Eligible holders are urged to carefully read the Offering Documents before making any decision
with respect to the exchange offer and consent solicitation. None of the Company, the sole dealer
manager, the information agent or the exchange agent makes any recommendation as to
whether eligible holders should tender or refrain from tendering their Existing Notes. Eligible
holders must make their own decision as to whether to tender Existing Notes and, if so, the
principal amount of Existing Notes to tender.
The New Securities offered by the Company have not been registered under the Securities Act,
or any state securities laws and, unless so registered, may not be offered or sold in the United
States except pursuant to an applicable exemption from the registration requirements of the
Securities Act and applicable state securities laws. The exchange offer and consent solicitation
is not being made to holders of Existing Notes in any jurisdiction in which the making or
acceptance thereof would not be in compliance with the securities, blue sky or other laws of such
jurisdiction. This press release is for informational purposes only and is not an offer to purchase,
a solicitation of an offer to purchase or a solicitation of consents with respect to, any securities.
Evercore Group L.L.C. is acting as the sole dealer manager in the Exchange Offer.
About W&T Offshore
W&T Offshore, Inc. is an independent oil and natural gas producer with operations offshore in the
Gulf of Mexico and has grown through acquisitions, exploration and development. The Company
currently has working interests in approximately 54 fields in federal and state waters (50
producing and four fields capable of producing) and has under lease approximately 750,000
gross acres, including approximately 450,000 gross acres on the Gulf of Mexico Shelf and
approximately 300,000 gross acres in the deepwater. A majority of the Company’s daily
production is derived from wells it operates. For more information on W&T Offshore, please visit
the Company’s website at www.wtoffshore.com.
Forward-Looking Statements
This press release contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the
Securities Act and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. These
forward-looking statements reflect the Company’s current views with respect to future
events, based on what it believes are reasonable assumptions. No assurance can be given,
however, that these events will occur. These statements are subject to risks and uncertainties
that could cause actual results to differ materially including, among other things, market
conditions, oil and gas price volatility, uncertainties inherent in oil and gas production operations
and estimating reserves, unexpected future capital expenditures, competition, the success of the
Company’s risk management activities, governmental regulations, uncertainties and other factors
discussed in W&T Offshore’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2015 and subsequent Form 10-Q reports found at www.sec.gov or at the Company’s website at
www.wtoffshore.com under the Investor Relations section. Investors are urged to consider
closely the disclosures and risk factors in these reports.
# # #