
EX-31.1 5 q22016nfxex31-1.htm EXHIBIT Exhibit
Exhibit 31.1
CERTIFICATION OF
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
OF NEWFIELD EXPLORATION COMPANY
PURSUANT TO 15 U.S.C. SECTION 7241, AS ADOPTED
PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF THE
SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Lee K. Boothby, certify that:
1.
2.
3.
4.
a.
b.
I have reviewed this quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30, 2016
of Newfield Exploration Company (the “Registrant”);
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or
omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the
circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the
period covered by this report;
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in
this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial condition, results of operations
and cash flows of the Registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
The Registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining
disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-
15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f)
and 15d-15(f)) for the Registrant and have:
designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and
procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information relating to
the Registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within
those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over
financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance
regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
evaluated the effectiveness of the Registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and
presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and
procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
disclosed in this report any change in the Registrant’s internal control over financial reporting
that occurred during the Registrant’s most recent fiscal quarter (the Registrant's fourth fiscal
quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
materially affect, the Registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
The Registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent
evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the Registrant’s auditors and the audit
committee of the Registrant’s Board of Directors (or persons performing the equivalent
functions):
all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal
control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the Registrant’s
ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
c.
d.
5.
a.
b.any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a
significant role in the Registrant’s internal control over financial reporting.
Date:  August 3, 2016By:/s/ LEE K. BOOTHBY
President and Chief Executive Officer
Lee K. Boothby
(Principal Executive Officer)