
EX-99.1 2 a16-17540_1ex99d1.htm EX-99.1
Pacific Coast Oil Trust
Pacific Coast Oil Trust Announces There Will Be No September Cash Distribution
Pacific Coast Oil Trust
The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., Trustee
For Immediate Release
Exhibit 99.1
News
Release
Austin, Texas August 25, 2016 — PACIFIC COAST OIL TRUST (NYSE—ROYT) (the “Trust”) a perpetual royalty trust
formed by Pacific Coast Energy Company LP (“PCEC”), announced today that there will be no cash distribution to the
holders of its units of beneficial interest of record on September 7, 2016. The Trust’s distribution calculation relates to
net profits and overriding royalties generated during July 2016 as provided in the conveyance of net profits and
overriding royalty interest.
The current month’s calculation for the Developed Properties resulted in $585,000 of excess revenues over direct
operating expenses and development costs.  The current month’s revenues were $3.0 million, lease operating
expenses including property taxes were $2.2 million, and capital expenditures were $85,000.  Average realized prices
for the Developed Properties were $36.79 per Boe in July, as compared to $41.33 per Boe in June. The cumulative
net profits deficit of $583,000 for the Developed Properties in the month of June was reduced to zero during the month
of July.  The Trust will not receive any net profits from the Developed Properties until the indebtedness borrowed from
PCEC has been paid in full.
The current month’s calculations included $37,000 for the 7.5% overriding royalty on the Remaining Properties from
Orcutt Diatomite and Orcutt Field. Average realized prices for the Remaining Properties were $36.59 per Boe in July,
as compared to $39.81 per Boe in June. The cumulative net profits deficit on the Remaining Properties, including the
7.5% overriding royalty payments, increased $24,000 and now totals $2.2 million.
The expected current month shortfall is $69,000, reflecting $88,000 for the monthly operating and services fee
payable to PCEC and $20,000 Trust general and administrative expenses, partially offset by
$2,000 of current net profits amount from the Developed Properties and $37,000 in proceeds from
the 7.5% overriding royalty on the Remaining Properties in July. The expected current month
shortfall will be borrowed from PCEC in September 2016 and is expected to increase the
cumulative borrowings from PCEC, including interest, to $1,037,000.
PCEC has agreed to loan funds to the Trust necessary to pay such expenses at an interest rate of
8.5% per annum. PCEC previously provided the Trust with a $1 million letter of credit to be used
by the Trust if its cash on hand (including available cash reserves) is not sufficient to pay ordinary
course administrative expenses as they become due.  Any funds provided under the letter of
credit or loaned by PCEC may only be used for the payment of current accounts or other
obligations to trade creditors in connection with obtaining goods or services or for the payment of
other accrued current liabilities arising in the ordinary course of the Trust’s business. No
distribution will be made to Trust unitholders until the indebtedness borrowed, including interest
thereon, has been paid in full.
Sales Volumes and Prices
The following table displays PCEC’s underlying sales volumes and average prices for the month of July 2016:
Developed Properties (a)
Remaining Properties (b)
Underlying Properties
Sales Volumes   Average Price  
 
 
36.79 
36.59
81,686  $
15,916  $
(Boe)
(per Boe)
(a)         Crude oil sales represented 93% of sales volumes
(b)         Crude oil sales represented 100% of sales volumes
Status of the Trust
As oil and natural gas prices continue to be depressed and as we are unable to predict future commodity prices with
any greater precision than the futures market, it appears likely that distributions to the Trust will continue to be
significantly impacted.  The Trust Agreement provides that the Trust will terminate in the event that annual proceeds
received by the Trust attributable to the Conveyed Interests (as defined in the Trust Agreement), in the aggregate, are
less than $2 million for each of any two consecutive years.
Overview of Trust Structure
Pacific Coast Oil Trust is a perpetual Delaware statutory trust formed by PCEC to own interests in certain oil and  
gas properties in the Santa Maria Basin and the Los Angeles Basin in California (the “Underlying Properties”). The
Underlying Properties and the Trust’s net profits and royalty interests are described in the Trust’s filings with the
Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”). As described in the Trust’s filings with the SEC, the amount of
any periodic distributions is expected to fluctuate, depending on the proceeds received by the Trust as a result of
actual production volumes, oil and gas prices, development expenses, and the amount and timing of the Trust’s
administrative expenses, among other factors. For additional information on the Trust, please visit
www.pacificcoastoiltrust.com.
Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Information
This press release contains statements that are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 21E of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. All statements contained in this press release, other than statements
of historical facts, are “forward-looking statements” for purposes of these provisions. These forward-looking
statements include the amount and date of any anticipated distribution to unitholders. The anticipated distribution is
based, in part, on the amount of cash received or expected to be received by the Trust from PCEC with respect to the
relevant period. Any differences in actual cash receipts by the Trust could affect this distributable amount. Other
important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially include expenses of the Trust and reserves for
anticipated future expenses. Statements made in this press release are qualified by the cautionary statements made
in this press release. Neither PCEC nor the Trustee intends, and neither assumes any obligation, to update any of the
statements included in this press release. An investment in units issued by Pacific Coast Oil Trust is subject to the
risks described in the Trust’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015 filed with the SEC
on March 4, 2016, and if applicable, the Trust’s Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q. The Trust’s Annual Report on
Form 10-K and the Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q reports are available over the Internet at the SEC’s website at
http://www.sec.gov.
Contact:
Pacific Coast Oil Trust
The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as Trustee
Sarah Newell
1(512) 236-6555
919 Congress Avenue Austin, TX 78701