
DEF 14C 1 iengdef14c_120914apg.htm IENG DEF 14C 12/09/14 IENG DEF14C 12/09/14
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
SCHEDULE 14C INFORMATION
Information Statement Pursuant to Section 14(c)
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Check the appropriate box:
[   ]  Preliminary Information Statement
[   ]  Confidential, for use of the Commission only (as permitted by Rule 14c-5(d)
(2))
[X]  Definitive Information Statement
INTEGRATED ENERGY SOLUTIONS, INC.
(Name of Registrant As Specified In Charter)
Payment of Filing Fee (Check the appropriate box):
[X] No fee required.
[   ] Fee computed on table below per Exchange Act Rules 14c-5(g) and 0-11.
[   ] Fee computed on table below per Exchange Act Rules 14c-5(g) and 0-11.
1) Title of each class of securities to which transaction applies:
     
2) Aggregate number of securities to which transaction applies:
     
3) Per unit price or other underlying value of transaction computed pursuant
to Exchange Act Rule 0-11 (Set forth the amount on which the filing fee is
calculated and state how it was determined):
4) Proposed maximum aggregate value of transaction:
     
5) Total fee paid:
[   ] Fee paid previously with preliminary materials.
  
[   ] Check box if any part of the fee is offset as provided by Exchange Act Rule 0-
11(a)(2) and identify the filing for which the offsetting fee was paid previously.
Identify the previous filing by registration statement number, or the Form or
Schedule and the date of its filing.
1) Amount Previously Paid:
     
2) Form, Schedule or Registration Statement No:
     
3) Filing Party:
     
4) Date Filed:
THIS INFORMATION STATEMENT IS BEING PROVIDED TO
YOU BY THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF INTEGRATED ENERGY SOLUTIONS, INC.
WE ARE NOT ASKING YOU FOR A PROXY AND YOU ARE
REQUESTED NOT TO SEND US A PROXY
Integrated Energy Solutions, Inc.
480 Forest Avenue Suite 1
Locust Valley, New York
(702) 583-7790
INFORMATION STATEMENT
(Definitive)
December 9, 2014
NOTICE OF STOCKHOLDER ACTION BY WRITTEN CONSENT
GENERAL INFORMATION
To the Holders of Common Stock of Integrated Energy Solutions, Inc.:
This Information Statement has been filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission and is
being furnished, pursuant to Section 14C of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
(the “Exchange Act”), to the holders  (the “Stockholders”) of common stock, $0.001 par value per
share  (the  “Common  Stock”),  of  Integrated  Energy  Solutions,  Inc.,  a  Nevada  corporation  (the
“Company”),  to  notify  the  Stockholders  that  on  October  10,  2014,  the  Company  received  a
unanimous written consent in lieu of a meeting of the holder of all 51 shares of Series A Preferred
Stock,  $0.001  par  value  per  share  (the  “Series  A  Preferred”),  created  by  unanimous  written
consent of the Board of Directors of the Company (the “Board”), as permitted by the Company’s
Certificate of Incorporation, as may be amended (“Amended Certificate”).  Each share of Series A
Preferred has voting rights equal to (x) 0.019607 multiplied by the total issued and outstanding
shares  of  Common  Stock  eligible  to  vote  at  the  time  of  the  respective  vote  (the  “Numerator”),
divided  by  (y)  0.49,  minus  (z)  the  Numerator.    As  there  are  currently  550,871,030  shares  of
Common  Stock  issued  and  outstanding,  the  51  shares  of  Series  A  Preferred  Stock  have  the
voting equivalent of 573,330,907 shares of Common Stock. The Series A Stockholder authorized
the following:
·
The  increase  in  the  number  of  authorized  shares  of  Common  Stock  from  two  billion
(2,000,000,000)  shares  of  Common  Stock  to  four  billion  (4,000,000,000)  shares  of  Common
Stock (the “Authorized Share Increase”).
On October 7, 2014, the Board of Directors of the Company (“Board”) approved the Authorized
Share Increase and recommended to the Majority Stockholders that they approve the Authorized
Share Increase.  On October 9, 2014, the Majority Stockholders approved the Authorized Share
Increase  by  written  consent  in  lieu  of  a  meeting  in  accordance  with  the  Nevada  Revised
Statutes.  Accordingly, your consent is not required and is not being solicited in connection with
the approval of the Authorized Share Increase.
We will mail the Notice of Stockholder Action by Written Consent to the Stockholders on or about
December 9, 2014.
WE ARE NOT ASKING YOU FOR A PROXY AND YOU ARE REQUESTED NOT TO SEND A
PROXY.
The  Board  believes  the  Authorized  Share  Increase  is  necessary  and  advisable  in  order  to
maintain  the  Company’s  financing  and  capital  raising  ability  and  to  generally  maintain  our
flexibility in today’s competitive and rapidly changing environment.
Accordingly, it is the Board’s opinion that the Authorized Share Increase would better position the
Company  to  attract  potential  business  candidates  and  provide  the  stockholders  a  greater
potential return.
1
The Company is not required to file Current and Periodic Reports with the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission and other reports required of filers pursuant to the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934, as amended, nor is the Company required to file proxy statements or information
statements. Furthermore, the Company is not subject to the going private rules and certain tender
offer regulations, and the beneficial holders of the Company’s securities do not need to report on
acquisitions or depositions of the Company’s securities or their plans regarding their influence
and  control  over  the  Company.  Therefore  the  Company’s  status  as  a  voluntary  filer  reduces
investors’  rights  to  access  significant  information  regarding  the  Company  and  its  controlling
shareholders. The Company’s voluntary filer status may lead to its removal from the over-the-
counter bulletin board, as Rule 6530 of the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority provides that
issuers  must  be  required  to  file  reports  pursuant  to  Section  13  or  15(d)  of  the  Securities  and
Exchange Act of 1934 in order to remain listed.
INTRODUCTION
The  Nevada  Revised  Statutes  provide  that  the  written  consent  of  the  holders  of  outstanding
shares of voting capital stock having not less than the minimum number of votes which would be
necessary  to  authorize  or  take  such  action  at  a  meeting  at  which  all  shares  entitled  to  vote
thereon  were  present  and  voted  can  approve  an  action  in  lieu  of  conducting  a  special
stockholders' meeting convened for the specific purpose of such action. The Nevada Revised
Statutes, however, require that in the event an action is approved by written consent, a company
must  provide  prompt  notice  of  the  taking  of  any  corporate  action  without  a  meeting  to  the
stockholders of record who have not consented in writing to such action and who, if the action
had been taken at a meeting, would have been entitled to notice of the meeting if the record date
for such meeting had been the date that written consents signed by a sufficient number of holders
to take the action were delivered to a company.
In accordance with the foregoing, we will mail this Information Statement on or about December
9, 2014.
This Information Statement contains a brief summary of the material aspects of the Authorized
Share Increase approved by the Board of Integrated Energy Solutions, Inc. (the “Company,” “we,”
“our,”  or  “us”)  and  the  holders  of  Series  A  Preferred  Stock  (the  “Series  A  Preferred”),  which
constitutes a majority of the voting capital stock of the Company.
Series A Preferred
By  unanimous  written  consent  of  the  Board  (as  permitted  under  Nevada  law),  the  number,
designation, rights, preferences and privileges of the Series A Preferred were established by the
Board (as is permitted under Nevada law and by the Amended Certificate of Incorporation of the
Company).  The designation, rights, preferences and privileges that the Board established for the
Series A Preferred is set forth in a Certificate of Designation that was filed with the Secretary of
State  of  the  State  of  Nevada  on  June  24,  2013.    Among  other  things,  the  Certificate  of
Designation provides that each one share of Series A Preferred has voting rights equal to (x)
0.019607 multiplied by the total issued and outstanding Common Stock eligible to vote at the
time of the respective vote (the “Numerator”), divided by  (y) 0.49, minus (z) the Numerator.
By  unanimous  written  consent  of  the  Board,  the  Board  issued  an  aggregate  of  fifty  one  (51)
shares of Series A Preferred to one individual (the “Series A Stockholder”).  As a result of the
voting rights granted to the Series A Preferred, the Series A Stockholder holds, in the aggregate,
approximately 51.0% of the total voting power of all issued and outstanding voting capital of the
Company.
As of October 9, 2014, there were issued and outstanding (i) 730,955,760 shares of Common
Stock, and (ii) 51 shares of Series A Preferred Stock.  Pursuant to the Nevada Revised Statutes,
at least a majority of the voting equity of the Company, or at least 365,477,880 votes, are required
to approve the Authorized Share Increase by written consent.  The Majority Stockholder, who
holds in the aggregate the equivalent of 760,757,975 votes or approximately 51.0% of the voting
equity of the Company, has voted in favor of the Authorized Share Increase thereby satisfying the
requirement under the Nevada Revised Statutes that at least a majority of the voting equity vote
in favor of a corporate action by written consent.
The  following  table  sets  forth  the  name  of  the  Series  A  Stockholder,  the  number  of  shares  of
Series A Preferred held by the Series A Stockholder, the total number of votes that the Series A
Stockholder voted in favor of the
2
Authorized Share Increase and the percentage of the issued and outstanding voting equity of the
Company that voted in favor thereof.
Name of Series
A Stockholder
Number of
Shares of
Series A
Preferred held
James Zimbler
51
Equivalent
Equivalent
Percentage of
Number of Votes
Number of Votes
the Voting Equity
of Common
Stock held by
such Series A
Stockholder
760,757,975
of Common
Stock that Voted
in favor of the
that Voted in
favor of the
Actions
Actions
760,757,975
51.0%
ACTIONS TO BE TAKEN
The Authorized Share Increase will become effective on the date that we file the Certificate of
Amendment  to  the  Certificate  of  Incorporation  of  the  Company  (the  “Amendment”)  with  the
Secretary of State of the State of Nevada.  We intend to file the Amendment with the Secretary of
State of the State of Nevada promptly after the twentieth (20th) day following the date on which
this Information Statement is mailed to the Stockholders.
We currently expect to file the Amendment on or about December 30, 2014.
INCREASE IN THE NUMBER OF AUTHORIZED SHARES
OF COMMON STOCK
GENERAL
The  number  of  authorized  shares  of  our  Common  Stock  will  be  increased  from  two  billion
(2,000,000,000) shares to four billion (4,000,000,000) shares.
PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF INCREASING THE NUMBER OF AUTHORIZED SHARES
The  Board  believes  the  Authorized  Share  Increase  is  necessary  and  advisable  in  order  to
maintain  our  financing  and  capital  raising  ability  and  to  generally  maintain  our  flexibility  in
today’s competitive and rapidly changing environment. The additional two billion (2,000,000,000)
shares  of  Common  Stock  so  authorized  will  be  available  for  issuance  by  the  Board  for  stock
splits or stock dividends, acquisitions, raising additional capital, stock options or other corporate
purposes.  The  additional  shares  of  Common  Stock  could  be  used  for  potential  strategic
transactions, including, among other things, acquisitions, strategic partnerships, joint ventures,
restructurings, business combinations and investments. Assurances cannot be provided that any
such  transactions  will  be  consummated  on  favorable  terms  or  at  all,  that  they  will  enhance
stockholder value or that they will not adversely affect the Company’s business or the trading
price of the Common Stock. The immediate purpose for increasing the authorized shares is to
provide  enough  shares  required  for  the  conversion  of  outstanding  convertible  securities.  The
additional  shares  of  Common  Stock  may  also  be  used  for  future  issuances  of  stock  options
pursuant to employee benefit plans and to provide for issuances to satisfy conversions of future
convertible debt or convertible preferred stock. The Company does not anticipate that it would
seek authorization from the stockholders for issuance of such additional shares unless required
by applicable law or regulations.
The  increase  in  the  authorized  number  of  shares  of  Common  Stock  and  any  subsequent
issuance of such shares could have the effect of delaying or preventing a change in control of the
Company  without  further  action  by  the  stockholders.  Shares  of  authorized  and  unissued
Common  Stock  could  (within  the  limits  imposed  by  applicable  law  and  stock  exchange
regulations) be issued in one or more transactions which would make a change in control of the
Company more difficult, and therefore less likely. Any such issuance of the additional shares of
Common Stock could have the effect of diluting the earnings per share and book value per share
of outstanding shares of Common
3
Stock, and such additional shares could be used to dilute the stock ownership or voting rights of
a person seeking to obtain control of the Company. The Board is not aware of any attempt to take
control of the Company and has not presented this proposal with the intention that the increase in
the number of authorized shares of Common stock be used as a type of antitakeover device. Any
additional  Common  Stock,  when  issued,  would  have  the  same  rights  and  preferences  as  the
shares of Common Stock presently outstanding.
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT
The  following  table  sets  forth  information  regarding  the  beneficial  ownership  of  our  common
stock as of October 10, 2014 and as adjusted to reflect the sale of our common stock offered by
this prospectus, by (a) each person who is known by us to beneficially own 5% or more of our
common stock, (b) each of our directors and executive officers, and (c) all of our directors and
executive officers as a group. As of October 10, 2014, there were a total of 730,955,760 shares of
Common Stock outstanding. Each share of Common Stock is entitled to one vote on matters on
which  holders  of  voting  stock  of  the  Company  are  eligible  to  vote.    The  column  entitled
“Percentage  of  Outstanding  Common  Stock”  shows  the  percentage  of  voting  common  stock
beneficially owned by each listed party.
The number of shares beneficially owned is determined under the rules promulgated by the SEC,
and  the  information  is  not  necessarily  indicative  of  beneficial  ownership  for  any  other
purpose.  Under those rules, beneficial ownership includes any shares as to which a person or
entity has sole or shared voting power or investment power plus any shares which such person
or entity has the right to acquire within sixty (60) days of October 10, 2014, through the exercise
or conversion of any stock option, convertible security, warrant or other right.  Unless otherwise
indicated, each person or entity named in the table has sole voting power and investment power
(or shares such power with that person’s spouse) with respect to all shares of capital stock listed
as owned by that person or entity.
Name of Beneficial Owner (1)
Number of Shares
of Common Stock
James Zimbler
Ernest B. Remo, Interim Chief
Executive Officer, Director (3)
 
All officers and directors as a group
(1 person)
Matthew Worrall, Former Chief
Executive Officer and Director (3)
0
0
0
18,332,315
Number of
Shares of
Series A
Preferred
Stock
Percent of Class (2)
51
0
0
0
100%
0%
0%
2.50%
(1)  Beneficial ownership generally includes voting or investment power with respect to
securities. Unless otherwise indicated, each of the beneficial owners listed above has
direct  ownership  of  and  sole  voting  power  and  investment  power  with  respect  to  the
securities.    Beneficial  ownership  is  determined  in  accordance  with  Rule  13d–3(d)(1)
under the Exchange Act and includes securities for which the beneficial owner has the
right to acquire beneficial ownership within 60 days.
(2)    Based  on  730,955,760  shares  of  common  stock  issued  and  outstanding  as  of
October 10, 2014.
(3)    On  January  27,  2014,  Mr.  Matthew  Worrall  resigned  as  Chief  Executive  Officer,
President, director and any and all other positions to which he has been previously or at
any time appointed, regardless of whether he served in such capacity of the Company.
 Mr. Ernest B. Remo assumed the role of the Company’s Interim Chief Executive Officer
and Director on January 27, 2014.
4
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
We  are  subject  to  the  disclosure  requirements  of  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  as
amended, and in accordance therewith, file reports, information statements and other information,
including annual and quarterly reports on Form 10-K and 10-Q, respectively, with the Securities
and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”). Reports and other information filed by the Company can
be inspected and copied at the public reference facilities maintained by the SEC at Room 1024,
450 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20549. Copies of such material can also be obtained
upon written request addressed to the SEC, Public Reference Section, 450 Fifth Street, N.W.,
Washington, D.C. 20549 at prescribed rates. In addition, the SEC maintains a web site on the
Internet (http://www.sec.gov) that contains reports, information statements and other information
regarding  issuers  that  file  electronically  with  the  SEC  through  the  Electronic  Data  Gathering,
Analysis and Retrieval System.
The  following  documents,  as  filed  with  the  SEC  by  the  Company,  are  incorporated  herein  by
reference:
(1) Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the three months ended June 30, 2013 filed on
August 19, 2013;
(2) Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the three months ended September 30, 2013
filed on November 19, 2013;
Current  Reports  on  Form  8-K  filed  on  September  9,  2013,  January  21,  2014,
January 28, 2014, April 10, 2014, and October 1, 2014, respectively;
(3)
(4) Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2013 filed
on April 25, 2013;
(5)
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the three months ended March 31, 2014 filed
on May 20, 2014; and
(6)
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the three months ended June 30, 2014 filed on
September 15, 2014.
You may request a copy of these filings, at no cost, by writing Integrated Energy Solutions, Inc. at
480 Forest Avenue Suite 1, Locust Valley, NY 11560 or telephoning the Company at (702) 583-
7790.  Any statement contained in a document that is incorporated by reference will be modified
or  superseded  for  all  purposes  to  the  extent  that  a  statement  contained  in  this  Information
Statement (or in any other document that is subsequently filed with the SEC and incorporated by
reference)  modifies  or  is  contrary  to  such  previous  statement.  Any  statement  so  modified  or
superseded  will  not  be  deemed  a  part  of  this  Information  Statement  except  as  so  modified  or
superseded.
DELIVERY OF DOCUMENTS TO SECURITY HOLDERS SHARING AN ADDRESS
If hard copies of the materials are requested, we will send only one Information Statement and
other corporate mailings to stockholders who share a single address unless we received contrary
instructions  from  any  stockholder  at  that  address.  This  practice,  known  as  “householding,”  is
designed to reduce our printing and postage costs. However, the Company will deliver promptly
upon written or oral request a separate copy of the Information Statement to a stockholder at a
shared  address  to  which  a  single  copy  of  the  Information  Statement  was  delivered.  You  may
make such a written or oral request by (a) sending a written notification stating (i) your name, (ii)
your shared address and (iii) the address to which the Company should direct the additional copy
of the Information Statement, to the Company at 480 Forest Avenue Suite 1, Locust Valley, NY
11560 or telephoning the Company at (702) 583-7790.
If multiple stockholders sharing an address have received one copy of this Information Statement
or  any  other  corporate  mailing  and  would  prefer  the  Company  to  mail  each  stockholder  a
separate copy of future mailings, you may mail notification to, or call the Company at, its principal
executive offices. Additionally, if current stockholders with a shared address received multiple
copies of this Information Statement or other corporate mailings and would prefer the Company to
mail  one  copy  of  future  mailings  to  stockholders  at  the  shared  address,  notification  of  such
request may also be made by mail or telephone to the Company’s principal executive offices.
5
This Information Statement is provided to the holders of Common Stock of the Company only for
information  purposes  in  connection  with  the  Name  Change  and  Authorized  Share  Increase,
pursuant to and in accordance with Rule 14c-2 of the Exchange Act. Please carefully read this
Information Statement.
By Order of the Board of Directors
/s/ Ernest Remo
Name: Ernest Remo
Title: Chief Executive Officer
Dated: December 9, 2014
6