
S-1/A 1 s1a081214_s1z.htm AMENDMENT NO. 1 TO THE S-1 REGISTRATION STATEMENT Converted by EDGARwiz
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 19, 2014
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Registration No. 333-197359
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
AMENDMENT NO. 1
TO
FORM S-1
REGISTRATION STATEMENT UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
RING ENERGY, INC.
(Exact name of registrant as specific in its charter)
Nevada
(State of jurisdiction of
Incorporation or
organization)
1311
(Primary Standard
Industrial Classification
Code Number)
90-0406406
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification NO.)
200 N. Loraine Street, Suite 1245
Midland, Texas 79701
(432) 682-7464
(Address, including zip code, and telephone
number, including area code, of registrant’s
principal executive offices)
William R. Broaddrick
Chief Financial Officer
6555 S. Lewis Ave, Suite 200
Tulsa, OK 74136
(918) 499-3880
(Address, including zip code, and telephone
number, including area code, of agent for
service)
Copies to:
Mark L. Jones
Allison D. Jones
Burleson LLP
700 Milam Street, Suite 1100, Houston, Texas 77002
(713) 358-1791 (Phone)
(713) 358-1717 (Fax)
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public: As soon as practicable after this Registration Statement is
declared effective.
If any of the securities being registered on this Form are to be offered on a delayed or continuous basis pursuant to Rule 415 under the
Securities Act of 1933 check the following box:  X .
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act, please check the
following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.
     .
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list the
Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.      .
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list the
Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.      .
Indicate  by  check  mark  whether  the  registrant  is  a  large  accelerated  filer,  an  accelerated  filer,  a  non-accelerated  filer,  or  a  smaller
reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer”, “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of
the Exchange Act.
Large
accelerated filer
Non-accelerated
filer
.
Accelerated filer
.
X .  (Do  not  check  if  a  smaller
reporting company)
Smaller 
company
reporting
.
THE INFORMATION IN THIS PROSPECTUS IS NOT COMPLETE AND MAY BE CHANGED. NEITHER THE COMPANY NOR ANY
SELLING  STOCKHOLDER  MAY  SELL  THESE  SECURITIES  UNTIL  THE  REGISTRATION  STATEMENT  FILED  WITH  THE
SECURITIES  AND  EXCHANGE  COMMISSION  IS  EFFECTIVE.  THIS  PROSPECTUS  IS  NOT  AN  OFFER  TO  SELL  THESE
SECURITIES  AND  IT  IS  NOT  SOLICITING  AN  OFFER  TO  BUY  THESE  SECURITIES  IN  ANY  JURISDICTION  WHERE  THE
OFFER OR SALE IS NOT PERMITTED.
Subject to Completion, dated August 19, 2014
PRELIMINARY PROSPECTUS
2,000,001 Shares
RING ENERGY, INC.
Common Stock
The Selling Stockholders identified in this prospectus, including their donees, pledgees, transferees or other successors-in-interests
(the  “Selling  Stockholders”),  may  offer  and  sell  from  time  to  time  up  to  2,000,001  outstanding  shares  (the  “Resale  Shares”)  of  the
common stock, $.001 par value, of Ring Energy, Inc., a Nevada corporation (“Common Stock”).
Certain of the Selling Stockholders may be deemed affiliates of the Company. The Selling Stockholders are offering the Resale Shares.
Because all of the shares being offered under this prospectus are Resale Shares being offered by Selling Stockholders, we cannot
currently determine the price or prices at which our Common Stock may be sold under this prospectus. Any Selling Stockholder may
sell all or a portion of these shares from time to time in market transactions through any market on which the Common Stock is then
traded, in negotiated transactions or otherwise, and at prices and on terms that will be determined by the then prevailing market price or
at negotiated prices directly or through a broker or brokers, who may act as agents or as principals or by a combination of such methods
of sale. The Selling Stockholders will receive all proceeds from such sales of the Resale Shares. For additional information on the
methods of sale of the Resale Shares, you should refer to the section entitled “Plan of Distribution.”
We will not receive any proceeds from the sale of any Resale Shares sold by the Selling Stockholders.
Our  Common  Stock  is  traded  on  the  NYSE  MKT  under  the  symbol  “REI”.  On August  18, 2014,  the  last  reported  sales  price  of  our
Common Stock was $18.00 per share.
The securities offered in this prospectus involve a high degree of risk. You should carefully consider the matters set forth in
“Risk Factors” on page 9 of this prospectus in determining whether to purchase our securities.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any regulatory body has approved or disapproved of these securities or
passed upon the accuracy or adequacy of this prospectus. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
You should rely only on the information contained in this prospectus. We have not authorized any dealer, salesperson or other person to
provide you with information concerning us, except for the information contained in this prospectus. Neither we nor any of the Selling
Stockholders may sell the securities until the registration statement, of which this prospectus forms a part, is filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission and is effective. This prospectus is not an offer to sell, nor is it a solicitation of an offer to buy, the Common
Stock in any jurisdiction in which the offer or sale is not permitted.
The date of this prospectus is ___________, 2014
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
 
THE OFFERING
RISK FACTORS
 
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS  
 
USE OF PROCEEDS
DILUTION
 
 
SELLING STOCKHOLDERS
 
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
 
DESCRIPTION OF CAPITAL STOCK
 
DIVIDEND POLICY
ABOUT THE COMPANY
 
 
PROPERTIES
 
MANAGEMENT
 
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
COMPENSATION COMMITTEE INTERLOCKS AND INSIDER PARTICIPATION
MARKET PRICE AND DIVIDENDS ON REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY AND
PAGE
4
8
9
19
20
21
22
24
26
29
30
38
46
50
58
59
RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
SELECTED HISTORICAL CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL AND OTHER DATA
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING
AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISKS
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND
MANAGEMENT
TRANSACTIONS WITH RELATED PERSONS, PROMOTERS AND CERTAIN
CONTROL PERSONS
DISCLOSURE OF COMMISSION POSITION ON INDEMNIFICATION FOR
SECURITIES ACT LIABILITIES
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
62
64
73
74
75
77
78
79
80
81
F-1
You  should  rely  only  on  the  information  contained  in  this  prospectus  and  in  any  relevant  prospectus  supplement  or  free  writing
prospectus, including any information incorporated herein or therein by reference. We have not authorized any other person to provide
you with different information. If anyone provides you with different or inconsistent information, you should not rely on it. You should not
assume that the information in this prospectus, any accompanying prospectus supplement, any free writing prospectus or any document
incorporated by reference is accurate as of any date other than the date on its front cover. Our business, financial condition, results of
operations and prospects may have changed since the date indicated on the front cover of such documents. Neither this prospectus nor
any prospectus supplement or free writing prospectus constitutes an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy any securities other
than the Resale Shares to which they relate, nor does this prospectus or a prospectus supplement or free writing prospectus constitute
an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy securities in any jurisdiction to any person to whom it is unlawful to make such offer or
solicitation in such jurisdiction.
3
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
This  summary  contains  basic  information  about  us  and  the  resale  of  the  securities  being  offered  by  the  Selling  Stockholders.  You
should read this entire prospectus carefully, including the section entitled “Risk Factors” and our financial statements and the notes to
the financial statements, before making an investment decision. This summary is qualified in its entirety by the more detailed information
and the financial statements and related notes.
Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this prospectus to “Ring,” “we,” “us,” the “Company,” “our” or “ours” refer to Ring
Energy, Inc. and its subsidiary.
Overview
Ring Energy, Inc.
Ring  is  a  Midland-based  exploration  and  production  company  that  is  engaged  in  oil  and  natural  gas  acquisition,  exploration,
development  and  production  activities.  Our  exploration  and  production  interests  are  currently  focused  in  Texas  and  Kansas.  The
Company takes a conventional approach to its drilling program and seeks to develop its traditional core areas, as well as look for new
growth opportunities.
The  Company’s  primary  drilling  operations  target  the  Central  Basin  Platform  in  Andrews  County  and  Gaines  County,  Texas.  As  of
December 31, 2013, Ring had 14,375 gross (8,949 net) acres in those counties. The Company also has 16,997 gross (14,232 net)
acres in Kansas targeting the Mississippi Lime play. The acreage is located in Gray, Finney and Haskell counties. On October 16, 2013,
Ring  entered  into  a  joint  development  agreement  with  Torchlight  Energy  Resources,  Inc.,  to  develop  its  Kansas  leasehold.  The
Company will continue to operate the acreage and Torchlight Energy Resources, Inc., will earn an equal share in the leasehold after
fulfilling the agreed upon drilling carry obligation of $6 million (the “Development Agreement”). Ring plans to drill ten vertical wells
pursuant to the Development Agreement.
As  of  December  31,  2013,  Ring’s  proved  reserves  were  7.3  million  BOE  (barrel  of  oil  equivalent).  Effectively  100%  of  its  reserves
(based on the estimates above) relate to properties located in Texas. The Company’s proved reserves are oil-weighted with 94% of
proved reserves consisting of oil and 6% consisting of natural gas. Of those reserves, 24% of the proved reserves are classified as
proved developed producing, or “PDP,” 4% are classified as proved developed non-producing, or “PDNP,” and approximately 72% are
classified as proved undeveloped, or “PUD.”
Production for the quarter ended June  30, 2014, was approximately 119,723 BOE, as compared to production of 15,443 BOE for the
quarter ended June 30, 2013, a 675% increase in BOE. The stated production amount reflects only the oil and gas that was produced
and shipped prior to the end of the quarter. Any oil and gas produced in the second quarter but still held on site after June 30, 2014, will
be credited in the third quarter.
Ring believes that there is significant value to be created by drilling the identified undeveloped opportunities on its Texas properties. As
of June 30, 2014, Ring owned interests in a total of 5,467 gross (3,537 net) developed acres and 15,280 gross (9,848 net) undeveloped
acres in Texas. The Company has 192 identified proven vertical drilling locations based on the reserve report as of December 31, 2013,
and  an  additional  1,171  identified  potential  vertical  drilling  locations  based  on  10-acre  downspacing.  Ring  believes  there  is  further
downspacing opportunity based on results of neighboring operators which would add additional drilling locations to existing acreage.
Ring intends to grow its reserves and production through development, drilling, exploitation and exploration activities on this multi-year
project  inventory  of  identified  potential  drilling  locations  and  through  acquisitions  that  meet  the  Company’s  strategic  and  financial
objectives,  targeting  oil-weighted  reserves.  Ring  has  identified  23  wells  that  are  suitable  candidates  for  re-stimulation,  providing
attractive returns with lower upfront costs. Ring will continue to develop its Kansas acreage through the Development Agreement with
Torchlight Energy Resources, Inc. The drilling carry will cover the drilling expenses for approximately the first ten wells.
4
Ring’s  Business Strategy
·
Growing production and reserves by developing our oil-rich resource base. Ring intends to actively drill and develop its acreage base in
an effort to maximize its value and resource potential. Ring’s portfolio of proved oil and natural gas reserves consists of 94% oil and 6%
natural gas. Of those reserves, 24% of the proved reserves are classified as proved developed producing, or “PDP,” 4% are classified
as proved developed non-producing, or “PDNP,” and approximately 72% are classified as proved undeveloped, or “PUD.” Through the
conversion  of  undeveloped  reserves  to  developed  reserves,  Ring  will  seek  to  increase  production,  reserves  and  cash  flow  while
gaining favorable returns on invested capital.
Through  December  31,  2013,  we  increased  our  proved  reserves  to  approximately  7.3  million  BOE  (barrel  of  oil  equivalent).  As  of
December 31, 2013, our estimated proved reserves had a pre-tax PV10 (present value of future net revenues before income taxes
discounted  at  10%)  of  approximately  $198.4  million  and  a  Standardized  Measure  of  Discounted  Future  Net  Cash  Flows  of
approximately $133.9 million. The difference between these two amounts is the effect of income taxes. The Company presents the pre-
tax PV-10 value, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, because it is a widely used industry standard which we believe is useful to
those  who  may  review  this  Annual  Report  when  comparing  our  asset  base  and  performance  to  other  comparable  oil  and  gas
exploration and production companies. We spent approximately $44.5 million on acquisitions and capital projects during 2012 and
2013, and we intend to continually actively drill and develop our acreage in an effort to maximize shareholder value.
·
Employ industry leading drilling and completion techniques. Ring’s executive team, which has over 100 years combined experience in
the  oil  and  gas  industry,  intends  to  utilize  new  and  innovative  technological  advancements  and  careful  geological  evaluation  in
reservoir  engineering  to  generate  value  for  its  stockholders  and  to  build  development  opportunities  for  years  to  come.  Improved
efficiency through employing technological advancements can provide a significant benefit in a continuous drilling program such as the
one Ring contemplates for its current inventory of drilling locations. Additionally, Ring believes that the experience of its executive team
will help reduce the time and cost associated with drilling and completing both conventional and horizontal wells, while potentially
increasing recovery.
·
Pursue strategic acquisitions with exceptional upside potential. Ring has a history of acquiring leasehold positions that it believes to
have substantial resource potential and to meet its targeted returns on invested capital. Ring has historically pursued acquisitions of
properties that it believes to have exploitation and development potential comparable to its existing inventory of drilling locations. The
Company has developed and refined an acquisition program designed to increase reserves and complement existing core properties.
Ring’s experienced team of management and engineering professionals identify and evaluate acquisition opportunities, negotiate and
close  purchases  and  manage  acquired  properties.  Management  intends  to  continue  to  pursue  strategic  acquisitions  that  meet  the
Company’s  operational  and  financial  targets.  The  executive  team,  with  its  extensive  experience  in  the  Permian  Basin,  has  many
relationships  with  operators  and  service  providers  in  the  region.  Ring  believes  that  leveraging  its  contacts  will  be  a  competitive
advantage in identifying acquisition targets. Management’s proven ability to evaluate resource potential will allow Ring to successfully
acquire acreage and bring out more value in the assets.
Ring’s Strengths
·
High  quality  asset  base  in  one  of  North  America’s  leading  resource  plays. Ring’s  acreage  in  the  Permian  Basin  is  all  located  in
Andrews and Gaines Counties, which is in the heart of the Central Basin Platform. The Central Basin Platform is a NW-trending uplifted
basement block that separates the Midland Basin (to the east) from the Delaware Basin (to the west). As of June 30, 2014, Ring has
drilled 100 wells on its acreage and re-stimulated 23existing wells. Production for the three months ended June 30, 2014, was 99% oil
and 1% natural gas. As of December 31, 2013, estimated net proved reserves were comprised of approximately 94% oil and 6% natural
gas, which allow the Company to benefit from the currently more favorable pricing of oil as compared to natural gas.
·
De-risked Permian acreage position with multi-year vertical drilling inventory. As of June 30, 2014, Ring has drilled 100 gross operated
wells across its leasehold position with a 100% success rate. The Company has also re-stimulated 23 existing wells with attractive well
economics. Ring has identified a multi-year inventory of potential drilling locations that will drive reserves and production growth and
provide attractive return opportunities. As of December 31, 2013, Ring has 192 identified proven vertical drilling locations in its proved
undeveloped reserves. It believes it has an additional 1,171 potential locations based on 10-acre downspacing. The Company views
this  drilling  inventory  as  de-risked  because  of  the  significant  production  history  in  the  area  and  well-established  industry  activity
surrounding the acreage.
5
·
Experienced and proven management team focused on the Permian Basin. The executive team has an average of approximately 22
years of industry experience per person, most of which has been focused in the Permian Basin. The Company believes its management
and technical team is one of the principal competitive strengths due to the team’s proven ability to identify and integrate acquisitions,
focus on cost efficiencies while managing a large-scale development program and disciplined allocation of capital to high-returning
projects. Chief Executive Officer Kelly Hoffman has had a successful career in the Permian Basin since 1975 when he started with
Amoco Production Company and found further success in West Texas when he co-founded AOCO. In addition, Chairman of the Board,
Lloyd T. Rochford, and Director, Stanley M. McCabe, formed Arena Resources, Inc. (“Arena”) in 2001, which operated in the same
proximate area as Ring’s Andrews and Gaines County acreage. Arena eventually sold to SandRidge Energy, Inc., in July 2010 for $1.6
billion.  Ring’s  management  team  aims  to  execute  a  similar  growth  strategy  and  development  plan  by  leveraging  its  industry
relationships and significant operational experience in these regions.
·
Concentrated  acreage  position  with  high  degree  of  operational  control. Ring operates approximately 99% of its Permian Basin and
Kansas acreage positions. The operating control allows Ring to implement and benefit from its strategy of enhancing returns through
operational and cost efficiencies. Additionally, as the operator of substantially all of acreage, Ring retains the ability to adjust its capital
expenditures based on well performance and commodity price forecasts.
Recent Developments
On  February  27,  2014,  Ring  completed  an  acquisition  of  certain  assets  pursuant  to  its  previously  announced  Purchase  and  Sale
Agreement,  for  a  purchase  price  of  approximately $6.51 million  in  cash.  The  assets  acquired  by  Ring  pursuant  to  the  Purchase
Agreement consist of approximately 2,481 gross (1,576 net) acres, located in Andrews and Gaines Counties, in the Permian Basin of
Texas. The acreage, comprised of 92 separate leases, includes both “developed” and “undeveloped” parcels and is in close proximity
to Ring’s existing Permian Basin assets. The “developed” area is comprised of approximately 907 net acres with current net production
of 42 BOEs (Barrel of Oil Equivalent) per day from the San Andres and Glorieta formations and is over 92% oil. The “undeveloped” area
is comprised of approximately 660 net acres.
On June 18, 2014, we closed our offering of 2,000,001 shares of our Common Stock, for gross proceeds of $30,000,015 (the “Private
Placement”). Offering costs, including sales commissions, for the Private Placement totaled $1,334,884. The shares were placed by
SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, Inc., acting as lead placement agent and Global Hunter Securities, LLC, acting as co-placement agent
in the transaction. These shares were issued without registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), by
reason of the exemption from registration afforded by the provisions of Section 4(a)(5) and/or Section 4(a)(2) thereof, and Rule 506
promulgated thereunder, as a transaction by an issuer not involving any public offering (constituting a “Private Placement”). Each of the
investors  in  this  offering  was  an  accredited  investor  as  defined  in  Regulation  D.  Each  investor  delivered  appropriate  investment
representations with respect to their investment, including their status as “accredited investors”. The Resale Shares are being registered
with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) to fulfill Ring’s commitment to register such shares in connection with the
Private Placement.
On July 1, 2014, the Company entered into a Credit Agreement with SunTrust Bank, as lender, issuing bank and administrative agent
for several banks and other financial institutions and lenders (the “Credit Facility”). The Credit Facility provides for a senior secured
revolving credit facility with a maximum borrowing amount of $150 million and an initial borrowing base of $40 million, which is subject
to periodic redeterminations, mandatory reductions and further adjustments from time to time. The Credit Facility matures on July 1,
2019, and is secured by substantially all of the Company’s assets.  As of August 13, 2014, no amount was outstanding on the Credit
Facility. Upon entering into this Credit Facility, the Company terminated its prior credit facility with The F&M Bank and Trust Company
and has paid off all amounts outstanding under such credit facility.
Historical Background
Ring was originally organized under the name of Blanca Corp. in the State of Nevada on July 30, 2004. The name of the corporation
was changed of record to Transglobal Mining Corp. on April 8, 2007. The initial purpose of the corporation was to engage in mining
development operations within the United States and Canada.
On March 21, 2008, the corporation was acquired by a new majority group of stockholders. At the time of the closing of the majority
share acquisition, the corporation divested itself of all mining-related assets and liabilities. On or about March 20, 2008, the corporation
changed its name of record in Nevada to Ring Energy, Inc., and the purpose of the corporation changed to focus on the acquisition and
development of oil and gas properties and the marketing of oil and gas products derived from those properties. In connection with the
closing,  the  corporation  approved,  by  majority  stockholder  consent  resolution,  a  reverse  split  of  eighteen-to-one  (18:1)  of  its  issued
shares, decreasing the issued and outstanding shares.
6
On June 28, 2012, Ring completed the acquisition of Stanford Energy, Inc. (“Stanford”) through the closing of a stock-for-stock exchange
agreement dated May 3, 2012. As a result, Stanford’s stockholders obtained control of Ring under current accounting guidance. Since
the Stanford stockholders obtained a controlling interest in Ring’s Common Stock and stock options, Stanford was determined to be the
accounting acquirer and its historical financial statements have been adjusted to reflect its reorganization in a manner equivalent to a
2,500-for-1 stock split.
On May 23, 2011, prior to Ring’s acquisition of Stanford, Stanford acquired developed and undeveloped properties referred to as the
“Fisher I Property.” The Fisher I Property represents Stanford’s predecessor under Rule 405 of Regulation C of the Securities Act of
1933,  as  amended,  as  the  Fisher  I  Property  was  Stanford’s  first  significant  interest  in  producing  oil  and  natural  gas  properties  and
Stanford’s  own  operations  before  the  acquisition  were  insignificant  relative  to  the  operations  acquired.  In  that  regard,  upon
consummation of the acquisition, the historical financial statements of the Fisher I Property became the historical financial statements of
Ring.
Corporate Information
Our principal executive offices are located at 200 N. Loraine Street, Suite 1245, Midland, Texas 79701, and our telephone number is
(432) 682-7464. Our Internet website can be found at www.ringenergy.com. Our annual reports on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form
10-Q,  current  reports  on  Form  8-K  and  amendments  to  those  reports  filed  or  furnished  pursuant  to  Section  13(a)  or  15(d)  of  the
Exchange Act of 1934 will be available through our Internet website as soon as reasonably practical after we electronically file such
material with, or furnish it to, the SEC. The information on, or that can be accessed through, our website is not incorporated by reference
into this prospectus and should not be considered part of this prospectus.
7
THE OFFERING
The following is a summary of the shares being offered by the Selling Stockholders.
Common Stock Offered by
Selling Stockholders
Common Stock
Outstanding as of August
13, 2014
Use of Proceeds
2,000,001 shares
25,711,218 shares
The Selling Stockholders shall receive the proceeds from the sale of
the Resale Shares. Ring will receive no proceeds from the sale of the
Resale Shares by the Selling Stockholders.
NYSE MKT Trading SymbolREI
Offering Price
Dividend Policy
Risk Factors
The  Selling  Stockholders  may  sell  all  or  a  portion  of  their  shares
through public or private transactions at prevailing market prices or at
privately negotiated prices at their discretion.
Ring does not anticipate paying dividends on the Common Stock in
the foreseeable future.
Investing  in  the  Common  Stock  involves  a  high  degree  of  risk.  You
should carefully read and consider the information set forth under the
heading “Risk Factors” beginning page 9  of this prospectus.
8
RISK FACTORS
You should carefully consider each of the risks described below, together with all of the other information contained in this prospectus,
before  investing  in  our  Common  Stock.  If  any  of  the  following  risks  develop  into  actual  events,  our  business,  financial  condition  or
results of operations could be materially adversely affected, the trading prices of the Common Stock could decline and you may lose all
or part of your investment.
Risks Relating to the Oil and Natural Gas Industry and Our Business
A substantial or extended decline in oil and natural gas prices may adversely affect our business, financial condition or results
of operations and our ability to meet our capital expenditure obligations and financial commitments.
The price we receive for our oil and natural gas production heavily influences our revenue, profitability, access to capital and future rate
of growth. Oil and natural gas are commodities and, therefore, their prices are subject to wide fluctuations in response to relatively minor
changes in supply and demand. Historically, the markets for oil and natural gas have been volatile. These markets will likely continue to
be volatile in the future. The prices we receive for our production, and the levels of our production, depend on numerous factors beyond
our control. These factors include, but are not limited to, the following:
·
changes in global supply and demand for oil and natural gas;
·
the actions of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, or OPEC;
·
the price and quantity of imports of foreign oil and natural gas;
·
political conditions, including embargoes, in or affecting other oil-producing activity;
·
the level of global oil and natural gas exploration and production activity;
·
the level of global oil and natural gas inventories;
·
weather conditions;
·
technological advances affecting energy consumption; and
·
the price and availability of alternative fuels.
Lower oil and natural gas prices may not only decrease our revenues on a per unit basis but also may reduce the amount of oil and
natural gas that we can produce economically. Lower prices will also negatively impact the value of our proved reserves. A substantial
or extended decline in oil or natural gas prices may materially and adversely affect our future business, financial condition, results of
operations, liquidity or ability to finance planned capital expenditures.
A substantial percentage of our proven properties are undeveloped; therefore the risk associated with our success is greater
than would be the case if the majority of our properties were categorized as proved developed producing.
Because a substantial percentage of our proven properties are proved undeveloped (approximately 78%) or proved developed behind
pipe (approximately 12%), we will require significant additional capital to develop such properties before they may become productive.
Further, because of the inherent uncertainties associated with drilling for oil and gas, some of these properties may never be developed
to the extent that they result in positive cash flow. Even if we are successful in our development efforts, it could take several years for a
significant portion of our undeveloped properties to be converted to positive cash flow.
While our current business plan is to fund the development costs with cash flow from our other producing properties, if such cash flow is
not  sufficient  we  may  be  forced  to  seek  alternative  sources  for  cash,  through  the  issuance  of  additional  equity  or  debt  securities,
increased borrowings or other means.
9
Drilling for and producing oil and natural gas are high risk activities with many uncertainties that could adversely affect our
business, financial condition or results of operations.
Our  future  success  will  depend  on  the  success  of  our  exploitation,  exploration,  development  and  production  activities.  Our  oil  and
natural gas exploration and production activities are subject to numerous risks beyond our control; including the risk that drilling will not
result in commercially viable oil or natural gas production. Our decisions to purchase, explore, develop or otherwise exploit prospects or
properties will depend in part on the evaluation of data obtained through geophysical and geological analyses, production data and
engineering studies, the results of which are often inconclusive or subject to varying interpretations. Please read “—Reserve estimates
depend on many assumptions that may turn out to be inaccurate. Any material inaccuracies in these reserve estimates or underlying
assumptions will materially affect the quantities and present value of our reserves” (below) for a discussion of the uncertainty involved in
these  processes.  Our  cost  of  drilling,  completing  and  operating  wells  is  often  uncertain  before  drilling  commences.  Overruns  in
budgeted expenditures are common risks that can make a particular project uneconomical. Further, many factors may curtail, delay or
cancel drilling, including the following:
·
delays imposed by or resulting from compliance with regulatory requirements;
·
pressure or irregularities in geological formations;
·
shortages of or delays in obtaining equipment and qualified personnel;
·
equipment failures or accidents;
·
adverse weather conditions;
·
reductions in oil and natural gas prices;
·
title problems; and
·
limitations in the market for oil and natural gas.
If  our  assessments  of  recently  purchased  properties  are  materially  inaccurate,  it  could  have  significant  impact  on  future
operations and earnings.
We  have  aggressively  expanded  our  base  of  producing  properties.  The  successful  acquisition  of  producing  properties  requires
assessments of many factors, which are inherently inexact and may be inaccurate, including the following:
·
the amount of recoverable reserves;
·
future oil and natural gas prices;
·
estimates of operating costs;
·
estimates of future development costs;
·
estimates of the costs and timing of plugging and abandonment; and
·
potential environmental and other liabilities.
Our assessment will not reveal all existing or potential problems, nor will it permit us to become familiar enough with the properties to
assess fully their capabilities and deficiencies. As noted previously, we plan to undertake further development of our properties through
the use of cash flow from existing production. Therefore, a material deviation in our assessments of these factors could result in less
cash flow being available for such purposes than we presently anticipate, which could either delay future development operations (and
delay the anticipated conversion of reserves into cash), or cause us to seek alternative sources to finance development activities.
Decreases in oil and natural gas prices may require us to take write-downs of the carrying values of our oil and natural gas
properties,  potentially  requiring  earlier  than  anticipated  debt  repayment  and  negatively  impacting  the  trading  value  of  our
securities.
Accounting rules require that we review periodically the carrying value of our oil and natural gas properties for possible impairment.
Based on specific market factors and circumstances at the time of prospective impairment reviews, and the continuing evaluation of
development plans, production data, economics and other factors, we may be required to write down the carrying value of our oil and
natural gas properties. Because our properties serve as collateral for advances under our existing credit facility, a write-down in the
carrying values of our properties could require us to repay debt earlier than we would otherwise be required. A write-down could also
constitute a non-cash charge to earnings. It is likely the cumulative effect of a write-down could also negatively impact the trading price
of our securities.
10
Reserve  estimates  depend  on  many  assumptions  that  may  turn  out  to  be  inaccurate.  Any  material  inaccuracies  in  these
reserve estimates or underlying assumptions will materially affect the quantities and present value of our reserves.
The  process  of  estimating  oil  and  natural  gas  reserves  is  complex.  It  requires  interpretations  of  available  technical  data  and  many
assumptions, including assumptions relating to economic factors. Any significant inaccuracies in these interpretations or assumptions
could materially affect the estimated quantities and present value of our reported reserves.
In order to prepare our estimates, we must project production rates and timing of development expenditures. We must also analyze
available geological, geophysical, production and engineering data. The extent, quality and reliability of this data can vary. The process
also  requires  economic  assumptions  about  matters  such  as  oil  and  natural  gas  prices,  drilling  and  operating  expenses,  capital
expenditures, taxes and availability of funds. Therefore, estimates of oil and natural gas reserves are inherently imprecise.
Actual future production, oil and natural gas prices, revenues, taxes, development expenditures, operating expenses and quantities of
recoverable oil and natural gas reserves most likely will vary from our estimates. Any significant variance could materially affect the
estimated  quantities  and  present  value  of  our  reported  reserves.  In  addition,  we  may  adjust  estimates  of  proved  reserves  to  reflect
production history, results of exploration and development, prevailing oil and natural gas prices and other factors, many of which are
beyond our control.
You should not assume that the present value of future net revenues from our reported proved reserves is the current market value of
our estimated oil and natural gas reserves. In accordance with SEC requirements, we generally base the estimated discounted future
net cash flows from our proved reserves on prices and costs on the date of the estimate. Actual future prices and costs may  differ
materially from those used in the present value estimate. If future values decline or costs increase it could negatively impact our ability
to finance operations, and individual properties could cease being commercially viable, affecting our decision to continue operations on
producing properties or to attempt to develop properties. All of these factors would have a negative impact on earnings and net income,
and most likely the trading price of our securities. These factors could also result in the acceleration of debt repayment and a reduction
in our borrowing base under our credit facility.
Prospects that we decide to drill may not yield oil or natural gas in commercially viable quantities.
Our prospects are in various stages of evaluation, ranging from prospects that are currently being drilled, to prospects that will require
substantial additional seismic data processing and interpretation. There is no way to predict in advance of drilling and testing whether
any particular prospect will yield oil or natural gas in sufficient quantities to recover drilling or completion costs or to be economically
viable. This risk may be enhanced in our situation, due to the fact that a significant percentage of our proved reserves is currently proved
undeveloped reserves. The use of seismic data and other technologies and the study of producing fields in the same area will not
enable us to know conclusively prior to drilling whether oil or natural gas will be present or, if present, whether oil or natural gas will be
present in commercial quantities. We cannot assure you that the analogies we draw from available data from other wells, more fully
explored prospects or producing fields will be applicable to our drilling prospects.
We cannot control the development of the properties we do not operate, which may adversely affect our production, revenues
and results of operations.
We do not operate all of the properties in which we have an interest. As a result, we have limited ability to exercise influence over, and
control the risks associated with, the operation of these properties. The success and timing of our drilling and development activities on
those properties depend upon a number of factors outside of our control, including:
·
the timing and amount of capital expenditures;
·
the operators’ expertise and financial resources;
·
the approval of other participants in drilling wells; and
·
the selection of suitable technology.
As a result of any of the above or an operator’s failure to act in ways that are in our best interest, our allocated production revenues and
results of operations could be adversely affected.
11
We could suffer the loss of all or part of the expenses that we prepay to the operators of our properties.
We may be required prepay to the operators of our properties our contractual share of acreage, geophysical and geological costs and
other up-front expenses, and drilling and completion costs, on a well-by-well basis. Once a prepayment is made, the operator is under
no requirement to keep such funds segregated from funds received by other working interest owners. As a result of any prepayment, we
would become a general unsecured creditor of the operator and, therefore, could suffer the loss of all or part of the amount prepaid in the
event that an operator has financial difficulties, liens are placed against the operator’s assets or the operator files for bankruptcy.
We are not insured against all risks and may incur substantial losses and be subject to substantial liability claims as a result of
our oil and natural gas operations.
We  are  not  insured  against  all  risks.  Losses  and  liabilities  arising  from  uninsured  and  underinsured  events  could  materially  and
adversely affect our business, financial condition or results of operations. Our oil and natural gas exploration and production activities
are subject to all of the operating risks associated with drilling for and producing oil and natural gas, including the possibility of:
·
environmental  hazards,  such  as  uncontrollable  flows  of  oil,  natural  gas,  brine,  well  fluids,  toxic  gas  or  other  pollution  into  the
environment, including groundwater and shoreline contamination;
·
abnormally pressured formations;
·
mechanical difficulties, such as stuck oil field drilling and service tools and casing collapse;
·
fires and explosions;
·
personal injuries and death; and
·
natural disasters.
Any of these risks could adversely affect our ability to conduct operations or result in substantial losses to our company. We may elect
not to obtain insurance if we believe that the cost of available insurance is excessive relative to the risks presented. In addition, pollution
and  environmental  risks  generally  are  not  fully  insurable.  If  a  significant  accident  or  other  event  occurs  and  is  not  fully  covered  by
insurance, then it could adversely affect us.
We are subject to complex laws that can affect the cost, manner or feasibility of doing business.
Exploration,  development,  production  and  sale  of  oil  and  natural  gas  are  subject  to  extensive  federal,  state,  local  and  international
regulation.  We  may  be  required  to  make  large  expenditures  to  comply  with  governmental  regulations.  Matters  subject  to  regulation
include:
·
discharge permits for drilling operations;
·
drilling bonds
·
reports concerning operations;
·
the spacing of wells;
·
unitization and pooling of properties; and
·
taxation.
Under these laws, we could be liable for personal injuries, property damage and other damages. Failure to comply with these laws also
may result in the suspension or termination of our operations and subject us to administrative, civil and criminal penalties. Moreover,
these  laws  could  change  in  ways  that  substantially  increase  our  costs.  Any  such  liabilities,  penalties,  suspensions,  terminations  or
regulatory changes could materially adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
12
Our operations may incur substantial liabilities to comply with the environmental laws and regulations.
Our  oil  and  natural  gas  operations  are  subject  to  stringent  federal,  state  and  local  laws  and  regulations  relating  to  the  release  or
disposal of materials into the environment or otherwise relating to environmental protection. These laws and regulations may require the
acquisition of a permit before drilling commences, restrict the types, quantities and concentration of substances that can be released
into the environment in connection with drilling and production activities, limit or prohibit drilling activities on certain lands lying within
wilderness, wetlands and other protected areas, and impose substantial liabilities for pollution resulting from our operations. Failure to
comply  with  these  laws  and  regulations  may  result  in  the  assessment  of  administrative,  civil  and  criminal  penalties,  incurrence  of
investigatory  or  remedial  obligations  or  the  imposition  of  injunctive  relief.  Changes  in  environmental  laws  and  regulations  occur
frequently, and any changes that result in more stringent or costly waste handling, storage, transport, disposal or cleanup requirements
could require us to make significant expenditures to maintain compliance, and may otherwise have a material adverse effect on our
results of operations, competitive position or financial condition as well as the industry in general. Under these environmental laws and
regulations, we could be held strictly liable for the removal or remediation of previously released materials or property contamination
regardless  of  whether  we  were  responsible  for  the  release  or  if  our  operations  were  standard  in  the  industry  at  the  time  they  were
performed.
Operating hazards, natural disasters or other interruptions of our operations could result in potential liabilities, which may not
be fully covered by our insurance.
The oil and natural gas business generally, and our operations specifically, are subject to certain operating hazards such as:
·
accidents resulting in serious bodily injury and the loss of life or property;
·
liabilities from accidents or damage by our equipment;
·
well blowouts;
·
cratering (catastrophic failure);
·
explosions;
·
uncontrollable flows of oil, natural gas or well fluids;
·
abnormally pressurized formations;
·
fires;
·
reservoir damage;
·
oil spills;
·
pollution and other damage to the environment; and
·
releases of toxic gas.
In addition, our operations are susceptible to damage from natural disasters such as flooding or tornados, which involve increased risks
of personal injury, property damage and marketing interruptions. The occurrence of one of these operating hazards may result in injury,
loss of life, suspension of operations, environmental damage and remediation and/or governmental investigations and penalties. The
payment of any of these liabilities could reduce, or even eliminate, the funds available for exploration and development, or could result
in a loss of our properties. In addition, pollution and environmental risks generally are not fully insurable. If a significant accident or other
event occurs and is not fully covered by insurance, it could materially adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and
cash flows.
Our insurance might be inadequate to cover our liabilities. Insurance costs are expected to continue to increase over the next few years,
and we may decrease coverage and retain more risk to mitigate future cost increases. If we incur substantial liability, and the damages
are not covered by insurance or are in excess of policy limits, then our business, results of operations and financial condition may be
materially adversely affected.
If our indebtedness increases, it could reduce our financial flexibility.
On July 1, 2014, the Company entered into the Credit Facility with SunTrust Bank. The Credit Facility provides for a senior secured
revolving credit facility with a maximum borrowing amount of $150 million and an initial borrowing base of $40 million, which is subject
to periodic redeterminations, mandatory reductions and further adjustments from time to time. As of August  13, 2014, no amount was
outstanding on the Credit Facility. The Credit Facility matures on July 1, 2019.
13
If  in  the  future  we  utilize  our  credit  facility,  the  level  of  our  indebtedness  could  affect  our  operations  in  several  ways,  including  the
following:
·
a significant portion of our cash flow could be used to service the indebtedness;
·
a high level of debt would increase our vulnerability to general adverse economic and industry conditions;
·
the covenants contained in our credit facility limit our ability to borrow additional funds, dispose of assets, pay dividends and make
certain investments; and
·
a  high  level  of  debt  could  impair  our  ability  to  obtain  additional  financing  in  the  future  for  working  capital,  capital  expenditures,
acquisitions, general corporate or other purposes.
In addition, the bank borrowing bases under our credit facility is subject to semi-annual redeterminations. We could be forced to repay a
portion of our bank borrowings due to redeterminations of our borrowing base. If we are forced to do so, we may not have sufficient
funds to make such repayments. If we do not have sufficient funds and are otherwise unable to negotiate renewals of our borrowings or
arrange new financing, we may have to sell significant assets. Any such sale could have a material adverse effect on our business and
financial results.
Our credit facility contains various covenants that limit our management’s discretion in the operation of our business and can
lead to an event of default that may adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
The operating and financial restrictions and covenants in our credit facility, to the extent drawn upon, may adversely affect our ability to
finance future operations or capital needs or to engage in other business activities. Our credit facility contains various covenants that
restrict our ability to, among other things, incur liens, incur additional indebtedness, enter into mergers, sell assets, make investments
and pay dividends. Various risks, uncertainties and events beyond our control could affect our ability to comply with the covenants
required by the credit facility.
We  are  presently  a  small  company  with  limited  resources  and  personnel  making  it  difficult  to  establish  a  comprehensive
system of internal controls without more personnel or external assistance.
Effective internal control, particularly those related to revenue recognition, are necessary for use to produce reliable financial reports
and are important to help prevent financial fraud. If we cannot provide reliable financial reports or prevent financial fraud, our brand and
operating results could be harmed. We may in the future discover areas of our internal controls that need improvements. We cannot be
certain that the measures that we have in place will ensure that we implement and maintain controls over our financial processes and
reporting in the future. Any failure to implement required new or improved controls, or difficulties encountered in their implementation,
could  harm  our  operating  results  or  cause  us  to  fail  to  meet  our  reporting  obligations.  Inferior  internal  controls  could  also  lead  to
misinformation being disseminated to the public, which could have a negative effect on our company and the trading price of our stock.
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting. Internal control over
financial  reporting  is  a  process  designed  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the
preparation  of  financial  statements  in  accordance  with  U.S  generally  accepted  accounting  principles.  A  material  weakness  is  a
deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal controls over financial reporting, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a
material misstatement of annual or interim financial statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis.
If we are unable to successfully implement and maintain effective internal controls over financial reporting, we risk being unable to
produce accurate and timely financial statements, and our stock price may be adversely affected as a result.
Unless we replace our oil and natural gas reserves, our reserves and production will decline, which would adversely affect our
cash flows and income.
Unless we conduct successful development, exploitation and exploration activities or acquire properties containing proved reserves,
our proved reserves will decline as those reserves are produced. Producing oil and natural gas reservoirs generally are characterized
by  declining  production  rates  that  vary  depending  upon  reservoir  characteristics  and  other  factors.  Our  future  oil  and  natural  gas
reserves and production, and, therefore our cash flow and income, are highly dependent on our success in efficiently developing and
exploiting  our  current  reserves  and  economically  finding  or  acquiring  additional  recoverable  reserves.  If  we  are  unable  to  develop,
exploit,  find  or  acquire  additional  reserves  to  replace  our  current  and  future  production,  our  cash  flow  and  income  will  decline  as
production declines, until our existing properties would be incapable of sustaining commercial production.
14
If our access to markets is restricted, it could negatively impact our production, our income and ultimately our ability to retain
our leases.
Market conditions or the unavailability of satisfactory oil and natural gas transportation arrangements may hinder our access to oil and
natural gas markets or delay our production. The availability of a ready market for our oil and natural gas production depends on a
number of factors, including the demand for and supply of oil and natural gas and the proximity of reserves to pipelines and terminal
facilities. Our ability to market our production depends in substantial part on the availability and capacity of gathering systems, pipelines
and processing facilities owned and operated by third parties. Our failure to obtain such services on acceptable terms could materially
harm our business.
Currently,  the  majority  of  our  production  is  sold  to  marketers  and  other  purchasers  that  have  access  to  nearby  pipeline  facilities.
However, as we begin to further develop our properties, we may find production in areas with limited or no access to pipelines, thereby
necessitating delivery by other means, such as trucking, or requiring compression facilities. Such restrictions on our ability to sell our oil
or  natural  gas  have  several  adverse  effects,  including  higher  transportation  costs,  fewer  potential  purchasers  (thereby  potentially
resulting  in  a  lower  selling  price)  or,  in  the  event  we  were  unable  to  market  and  sustain  production  from  a  particular  lease  for  an
extended time, possibly causing us to lose a lease due to lack of production.
The unavailability or high cost of drilling rigs, equipment, supplies, personnel and oilfield services could adversely affect our
ability to execute exploration plans on a timely basis and within budget.
We are highly dependent upon third-party services. The cost of oilfield services typically fluctuates based on demand for those services.
There is no assurance that we will be able to contract for such services on a timely basis or that the cost of such services will remain at
a satisfactory or affordable level. Shortages or the high cost of drilling rigs, equipment, supplies or personnel could delay or adversely
affect  our  exploration  operations,  which  could  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  our  business,  financial  condition  or  results  of
operations.
Hedging transactions may limit our potential gains.
In order to reduce commodity price uncertainty and increase cash flow predictability relating to the marketing of our crude oil and natural
gas, we may enter into crude oil and natural gas price hedging arrangements with respect to a portion of our expected production. While
intended to reduce the effects of volatile crude oil and natural gas prices, such transactions may limit our potential gains if crude oil and
natural gas prices rise over the price established by the arrangements.
We may have difficulty managing growth in our business, which could adversely affect our financial condition and results of
operations.
Growth in accordance with our business plan, if achieved, could place a significant strain on our financial, technical, operational and
management resources. As we expand our activities, increase the number of projects we are evaluating or in which we participate,
there will be additional demands on our financial, technical, operational and management resources. The failure to continue to upgrade
our technical, administrative, operating and financial control systems or the occurrences of unexpected expansion difficulties, including
the failure to recruit and retain experienced managers, geologists, engineers and other professionals in the oil and natural gas industry,
could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations and our ability to timely execute our
business plan.
We could lose leases on certain of our properties unless production is established and maintained on units containing the
acreage or the leases are extended.
Oil and natural gas leases generally must be drilled before the end of the lease term or the leaseholder will lose the lease and any
capital invested therein. In addition, leases may also be lost due to legal issues relating to the ownership of leases. Any delays in
drilling or legal issues causing us to lose leases on properties could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and
reserve growth. If our leases expire, we will lose our right to develop such properties.
Our drilling plans are subject to change based upon various factors, including factors that are beyond our control. Such factors include
drilling results, oil and natural gas prices, the availability and cost of capital, drilling and production costs, availability of drilling services
and equipment, gathering system and pipeline transportation constraints, and regulatory approvals.
15
Our operations could be impacted by burdens and encumbrances on title to our properties.
Our leasehold acreage may be subject to existing oil and natural gas leases, liens for current taxes and other burdens, including other
mineral encumbrances and restrictions customary in the oil and natural gas industry. Such liens and burdens could materially interfere
with the use or otherwise affect the value of such properties. Additionally, any cloud on the title of the working interests, leases and other
rights owned by us could have a material adverse effect on our operations.
Our operations are subject to hazards inherent in the oil and natural gas industry.
Risks inherent to our industry include the potential for significant losses associated with damage to the environment. Equipment design
or  operational  failures,  or  vehicle  operator  error  can  result  in  explosions  and  discharges  of  toxic  gases,  chemicals  and  hazardous
substances, and, in rare cases, uncontrollable flows of natural gas or well fluids into environmental media, as well as personal injury,
loss of life, long-term suspension or cessation of operations and interruption of our business and/or the business or livelihood of third
parties, damage to geologic formations, environmental media and natural resources, equipment and/or facilities and property. We may
implement hydraulic fracturing in our operations, a process involving the injection of fluids — usually consisting mostly of water but
typically  including  small  amounts  of  several  chemical  additives  —  as  well  as  sand  in  order  to  create  fractures  extending  from  the
wellbore through the rock formation to enable oil or natural gas to move more easily through the rock pores to a production well. In
addition, we use and generate hazardous substances and wastes in our operations and may become subject to claims relating to the
release  of  such  substances  into  the  environment.  In  addition,  some  of  our  current  properties  are,  or  have  been,  used  for  industrial
purposes, which could contain currently unknown contamination that could expose us to governmental requirements or claims relating
to environmental remediation, personal injury and/or property damage. These conditions could expose us to liability for personal injury,
wrongful  death,  property  damage,  loss  of  oil  and  natural  gas  production,  pollution  and  other  environmental  damages  and  could
materially impair our profitability, competitive position or viability. Depending on the frequency and severity of such liabilities or losses, it
is possible that our operating costs, insurability and relationships with employees and regulators could be materially impaired.
Federal and state legislative and regulatory initiatives as well as governmental reviews relating to hydraulic fracturing could
result in increased costs and additional operating restrictions or delays as well as adversely affect our level of production.
Hydraulic fracturing is a common and important practice that is used to stimulate production of hydrocarbons from tight formations. The
process  involves  the  injection  of  water,  sand  and  chemicals  under  pressure  into  formations  to  fracture  the  surrounding  rock  and
stimulate  production.  The  process  is  typically  regulated  by  state  oil  and  gas  commissions.  However,  the  Environmental  Protection
Agency  (“EPA”)  has  asserted  federal  regulatory  authority  over  certain  hydraulic  fracturing  practices.  Also,  legislation  has  been
introduced,  but  not  enacted,  in  Congress  to  provide  for  federal  regulation  of  hydraulic  fracturing  and  to  require  disclosure  of  the
chemicals used in the fracturing process. Certain states, including Texas, and municipalities have adopted, or are considering adopting,
regulations that have imposed, or that could impose, more stringent permitting, disclosure, disposal and well construction requirements
on hydraulic fracturing operations. For example, in December 2011, the Railroad Commission of Texas finalized regulations requiring
public  disclosure  of  all  the  chemicals  in  fluids  used  in  the  hydraulic  fracturing  process.  Local  ordinances  or  other  regulations  may
regulate  or  prohibit  the  performance  of  well  drilling  in  general  and  hydraulic  fracturing  in  particular.  If  new  laws  or  regulations  that
significantly restrict or regulate hydraulic fracturing are adopted, such legal requirements could cause project delays and make it more
difficult or costly for us to perform fracturing to stimulate production from a formation. These delays or additional costs could adversely
affect the determination of whether a well is commercially viable. Restrictions on hydraulic fracturing could also reduce the amount of oil
and natural gas that we are ultimately able to produce in commercial quantities.
In addition, a number of federal agencies are analyzing, or have been requested to review, a variety of environmental issues associated
with hydraulic fracturing. The White House Council on Environmental Quality is coordinating an administration-wide review of hydraulic
fracturing  practices,  and  a  committee  of  the  United  States  House  of  Representatives  has  conducted  an  investigation  of  hydraulic
fracturing practices. The EPA has commenced a study of the potential environmental effects of hydraulic fracturing on drinking water
and groundwater, with final results expected to be available by 2014. Moreover, the EPA announced on October 20, 2011 that it was
also launching a study regarding wastewater resulting from hydraulic fracturing activities and currently plans to propose standards by
2014 that such wastewater must meet before being transported to a treatment plant. On August 16, 2012, the EPA published final rules
under  the  CAA  that,  among  other  things,  imposed  new  source  performance  standards  (“NSPS”)  for  completions  of  hydraulically
fractured natural gas wells, requiring the use of reduced emission completion techniques.
16
In  addition,  the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy  is  conducting  an  investigation  into  hydraulic  fracturing  practices  the  agency  could
recommend to better protect the environment from drilling using hydraulic fracturing completion methods. Also, the U.S. Department of
the  Interior  is  considering  disclosure  requirements  or  other  mandates  for  hydraulic  fracturing  on  federal  lands.  Additionally,  certain
members  of  Congress  have  called  upon  the  U.S.  Government  Accountability  Office  to  investigate  how  hydraulic  fracturing  might
adversely affect water resources; the SEC to investigate the natural gas industry and any possible misleading of investors or the public
regarding the economic feasibility of pursuing natural gas deposits in shales by means of hydraulic fracturing; and the U.S. Energy
Information  Administration  to  provide  a  better  understanding  of  that  agency’s  estimates  regarding  natural  gas  reserves,  including
reserves  from  shale  formations,  as  well  as  uncertainties  associated  with  those  estimates.  These  ongoing  or  proposed  studies,
depending on their degree of pursuit and any meaningful results obtained, could spur initiatives to further regulate hydraulic fracturing
under the Safe Drinking Water Act (“SDWA”) or other regulatory mechanisms. Any additional regulations of hydraulic fracturing could
result in increased operation costs, which could have a material adverse effect on our cash flows and financial condition.
Our business may suffer if we lose key personnel.
We depend to a large extent on the services of our officers, including Kelly Hoffman, our Chief Executive Officer; David Fowler; our
President; Daniel Wilson, our Vice President of Operations; and William Broaddrick, our Chief Financial Officer. These individuals have
extensive  experience  and  expertise  in  evaluating  and  analyzing  producing  oil  and  natural  gas  properties  and  drilling  prospects,
maximizing production from oil and natural gas properties and developing and executing financing strategies. The loss of any of these
individuals could have a material adverse effect on our operations. We do not maintain key-man life insurance with respect to any
management personnel. Our success will be dependent on our ability to continue to retain and utilize skilled technical personnel.
Risks Relating to Our Common Stock and this Offering
We have no plans to pay dividends on our Common Stock. Stockholders may not receive funds without selling their shares.
We do not anticipate paying any cash dividends on our Common Stock in the foreseeable future. We currently intend to retain future
earnings, if any, to finance the expansion of our business. Our future dividend policy is within the discretion of our board of directors and
will depend upon various factors, including our business, financial condition, results of operations, capital requirements and investment
opportunities.
Our board of directors can, without stockholder approval, cause preferred stock to be issued on terms that adversely affect
Common Stockholders.
Under our Articles of Incorporation, our board of directors is authorized to issue up to 50,000,000 shares of preferred stock, of which
none  are  issued  and  outstanding  as  of  the  date  of  this  prospectus.  Also,  our  board  of  directors,  without  stockholder  approval,  may
determine the price, rights, preferences, privileges and restrictions, including voting rights, of those shares. If the board causes shares of
preferred stock to be issued, the rights of the holders of our Common Stock could be adversely affected. The board’s ability to determine
the terms of preferred stock and to cause its issuance, while providing desirable flexibility in connection with possible acquisitions and
other corporate purposes, could have the effect of making it more difficult for a third party to acquire a majority of our outstanding voting
stock. Preferred shares issued by the board of directors could include voting rights, or even super voting rights, which could shift the
ability to control the company to the holders of the preferred stock. Preferred shares could also have conversion rights into shares of
Common Stock at a discount to the market price of the Common Stock which could negatively affect the market for our Common Stock.
In  addition,  preferred  shares  would  have  preference  in  the  event  of  liquidation  of  the  corporation,  which  means  that  the  holders  of
preferred  shares  would  be  entitled  to  receive  the  net  assets  of  the  corporation  distributed  in  liquidation  before  the  Common  Stock
holders receive any distribution of the liquidated assets. We have no current plans to issue any shares of preferred stock.
Provisions under Nevada law could delay or prevent a change in control of Ring, which could adversely affect the price of our
Common Stock.
In addition to the ability of the board of directors to issue preferred stock, the existence of some provisions under Nevada law could
delay or prevent a change in control of Ring, which could adversely affect the price of our Common Stock. Nevada law imposes some
restrictions on mergers and other business combinations between us and any holder of 10% or more of our outstanding Common Stock.
17
The price of our Common Stock may fluctuate significantly, which could negatively affect us and holders of our Common
Stock.
The trading price of our Common Stock may fluctuate significantly in response to a number of factors, many of which are beyond our
control. For instance, if our financial results are below the expectations of securities analysts and investors, the market price of our
Common Stock could decrease, perhaps significantly. Other factors that may affect the market price of our Common Stock include:
·
actual or anticipated fluctuations in our quarterly results of operations;
·
liquidity;
·
sales of Common Stock by our stockholders;
·
changes in oil and natural gas prices;
·
changes in our cash flow from operations or earnings estimates;
·
publication of research reports about us or the oil and natural gas exploration and production industry generally;
·
competition for, among other things, capital, acquisition of reserves, undeveloped land and skilled personnel;
·
increases in market interest rates which may increase our cost of capital;
·
changes in applicable laws or regulations, court rulings and enforcement and legal actions;
·
changes in market valuations of similar companies;
·
adverse market reaction to any indebtedness we may incur in the future;
·
additions or departures of key management personnel;
·
actions by our stockholders;
·
commencement of or involvement in litigation;
·
news reports relating to trends, concerns, technological or competitive developments, regulatory changes and other related issues in
our industry;
·
speculation in the press or investment community regarding our business;
·
political conditions in oil and natural gas producing regions;
·
general market and economic conditions; and
·
domestic and international economic, legal and regulatory factors unrelated to our performance.
In addition, the U.S. securities markets have experienced significant price and volume fluctuations. These fluctuations often have been
unrelated to the operating performance of companies in these markets. Market fluctuations and broad market, economic and industry
factors may negatively affect the price of our Common Stock, regardless of our operating performance. Any volatility or a significant
decrease in the market price of our Common Stock could also negatively affect our ability to make acquisitions using Common Stock.
Further, if we were to be the object of securities class action litigation as a result of volatility in our Common Stock price or for other
reasons, it could result in substantial costs and diversion of our management’s attention and resources, which could negatively affect
our financial results.
Additional stock offerings may dilute current stockholders.
Given our plans and our expectation that we may need additional capital and personnel, we may need to issue additional shares of
Common Stock or securities convertible into or exercisable for shares of Common Stock, including preferred stock, options or warrants.
The issuance of additional Common Stock may dilute the ownership of our current stockholders.
18
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
All statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this prospectus regarding our strategy, future operations, financial
position,  estimated  revenues  and  losses,  projected  costs,  prospects,  plans  and  objectives  of  management  are  forward-looking
statements. When used in this prospectus, the words “could,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “expect,” “project” and similar
expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements, although not all forward-looking statements contain such identifying
words.  All  forward-looking  statements  speak  only  as  of  the  date  of  this  prospectus.  You  should  not  place  undue  reliance  on  these
forward-looking statements. Although we believe that our plans, intentions and expectations reflected in or suggested by the forward-
looking statements we make in this prospectus are reasonable, we can give no assurance that these plans, intentions or expectations
will be achieved. We disclose important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from our expectations under “Risk
Factors,” “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and elsewhere in this prospectus.
These cautionary statements qualify all forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf.
Forward-looking statements also involve risks and uncertainties. Many of these risks and uncertainties are beyond our ability to control
or predict and could cause results to differ materially from the results discussed in such forward-looking statements. Such risks and
uncertainties include, but are not limited to, the following:
·
our ability to generate sufficient cash flow from operations, borrowings or other sources to enable us to fully develop and produce our oil
and natural gas properties;
·
declines or volatility in the prices we receive for our oil and natural gas;
·
general economic conditions, whether internationally, nationally or in the regional and local market areas in which we do business;
·
risks associated with drilling, including completion risks, cost overruns and the drilling of non-economic wells or dry holes;
·
uncertainties associated with estimates of proved oil and natural gas reserves;
·
the presence or recoverability of estimated oil and natural gas reserves and the actual future production rates and associated costs;
·
risks and liabilities associated with acquired companies and properties;
·
risks related to integration of acquired companies and properties;
·
potential defects in title to our properties;
·
cost and availability of drilling rigs, equipment, supplies, personnel and oilfield services;
·
geological concentration of our reserves;
·
environmental or other governmental regulations, including legislation of hydraulic fracture stimulation;
·
our ability to secure firm transportation for oil and natural gas we produce and to sell the oil and natural gas at market prices;
·
exploration and development risks;
·
management’s ability to execute our plans to meet our goals;
·
our ability to retain key members of our management team;
·
weather conditions;
·
actions or inactions of third-party operators of our properties;
·
costs and liabilities associated with environmental, health and safety laws;
·
our ability to find and retain highly skilled personnel;
·
operating hazards attendant to the oil and natural gas business;
·
competition in the oil and natural gas industry; and
·
the other factors discussed under “Risk Factors.”
Forward-looking  statements  speak  only  as  of  the  date  of  this  prospectus.  All  such  forward-looking  statements  and  any  subsequent
written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or any person acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety
by the cautionary statements contained or referred to in this section and any other cautionary statements that may accompany such
forward-looking  statements.  Except  as  otherwise  required  by  applicable  law,  we  disclaim  any  duty  to  update  any  forward-looking
statements.
19
USE OF PROCEEDS
The proceeds from the sale of the Resale Shares that may be offered pursuant to this prospectus will be received directly by the Selling
Stockholders. Ring will not receive any proceeds from the sale of the Resale Shares.
20
DILUTION
The shares of Common Stock to be sold by the Selling Stockholders pursuant to this prospectus are currently issued and outstanding.
Accordingly, there will be no dilution to our existing stockholders as a result of this offering.
21
SELLING STOCKHOLDERS
The Selling Stockholders are offering for possible resale 2,000,001 shares of our Common Stock in this prospectus, which comprises
the Resale Shares. Certain of the Selling Stockholders may be deemed affiliates of the Company. The Selling Stockholders entered
into the Subscription Agreements, which were entered into at the time of the Private Placement. See “Description of Capital Stock –
Subscription Agreements” for a description of the terms of the Subscription Agreements.
The resale Shares are being registered to permit public sales of such Resale Shares. The Selling Stockholders may offer the Resale
Shares for resale from time to time pursuant to this prospectus. The Selling Stockholders may also sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of
all or a portion of their Resale Shares in transactions exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act or pursuant to
another effective registration statement covering those shares. We may from time to time include additional Selling Stockholders in
amendments to this prospectus.
The following table sets forth information, as of July 9, 2014, with respect to the Resale Shares owned by each Selling Stockholder and
the number of Resale Shares that may be offered pursuant to this prospectus. No Selling Stockholder is a registered broker-dealer or an
affiliate of a registered broker-dealer. Unless otherwise indicated below, to our knowledge, each Selling Stockholder named in the table
has sole voting and investment power with respect to the shares of Common Stock beneficially owned by it. See “Security Ownership of
Certain Beneficial Owners and Management” for additional information regarding the beneficial ownership of the Selling Stockholders
in securities in the Company. As used in this prospectus, the term “Selling Stockholders” has the meaning set forth in the “Plan of
Distribution” section of this prospectus. The information is based on information provided by or on behalf of the Selling Stockholders.
We  do  not  know  when  or  in  what  amounts  any  Selling  Stockholder  may  offer  the  Resale  Shares  for  sale.  Because  (i)  the  Selling
Stockholders may offer all or some of the Resale Shares pursuant to this offering, (ii) there are currently no agreements, arrangements
or understandings with respect to the sale of any of the Resale Shares, (iii) the Selling Stockholders may acquire additional shares from
us or in the open market in the future, no definitive estimate as to the number of shares that will be held by each Selling Stockholder
after the offering can be provided. The column captioned “Shares Beneficially Owner After the Offering” in the following table has been
prepared on the assumption that all Resale Shares offered under this prospectus will be sold to parties unaffiliated with the Selling
Stockholders, even though the Resale Shares will continue to be owned by the Selling Stockholders after the offering until they are
actually sold.
Selling Stockholder
O’Connor Global Multi-
Strategy Alpha Master
Limited(5)
Midsummer Small Cap Master,
Ltd.(6)
MSD Credit Opportunity
Master Fund, L.P.(7)
Empery Asset Master, LTD(8)
Empery Tax Efficient, LP(9)
GLG European Long-Short
Master Fund Ltd.(10)
GLG Investments VI plc: sub-
fund GLG European Equity
Alternative(11)
GLG Investments Umbrella
QIF plc: sub-fund ELS Master
QIF(12)
GLG European Long-Short
Fund (13)
GLG Global Long-Short Fund
(14)
GLG Investments VI plc: sub-
fund GLG Global Equity
Alternative (15)
* Represents beneficial ownership of less than 1%
Shares Beneficially
Owned Prior to the
Offering for Resale (1)
Number
Percent of
Class (4)
Shares Beneficially
Owned After the
Offering (3)
Percent
of Class
Shares  
Offered
for
Resale (2)  Number
(4)
*
*
100,000
100,000
-
-
5% 
* 
*
1,333,334 
117,085 
16,248
- 
4,160 
-
*
*
*
*
*
*
46,709
87,281
95,823
61,721
5,439
36,361
-
-
-
-
-
-
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
100,000
100,000
1,333,334 
121,245 
16,248
46,709
87,281
95,823
61,721
5,439
36,361
22
(1)
Shares  beneficially  owned  by  the  Selling  Stockholder  prior  to  this  offer  to  resale,  including  whose  beneficially  owned  by  Selling
Stockholder prior to the Private Placement.
(2)
Resale Shares offered in this prospectus.
(3)
Shares beneficially owned by the Selling Stockholder assuming the Resale Shares are sold by the Selling Stockholders.
(4)
Applicable  percentage  ownership  is  based  on 25,711,218 shares  of  Common  Stock  outstanding  as  of August  13, 2014,  and  on
Common Stock owned by the Selling Stockholder including Common Stock owned by the Selling Stockholder that is exercisable for or
convertible into shares of common stock within 60 days of August 13, 2014. Beneficial ownership is determined in accordance with the
rules of the SEC and generally includes voting or investment power with respect to securities. Shares of common stock underlying
securities that are currently exercisable or convertible or exercisable or convertible within 60 days of August 13, 2014 are deemed to be
beneficially owned by the person holding such securities for the purpose of computing the percentage of ownership of such person, but
are not treated as outstanding for the purpose of computing the percentage of ownership of any other person.
(5)
The selling security holder, O'Connor Global Multi-Strategy Alpha Master Limited, is a fund which cedes investment control to UBS
O’Connor LLC, its investment manager. UBS O’Connor LLC makes all of the investment and voting decisions. Jeff Putman is a portfolio
manager for UBS O’Connor LLC. Mr. Putman disclaims beneficial ownership of the shares held by O’Connor Global Multi-Strategy
Alpha Master Limited. UBS O’Connor LLC is a wholly-owned subsidiary of UBS AG, a company whose securities are listed on the New
York Stock Exchange.
(6)
Joshua Thomas and Alan Benaim share voting and dispositive powers over these securities.
(7)
MSDC Management, L.P. is the investment manager of, and may be deemed to have or share voting and dispositive power over, and/or
beneficially own securities owned by MSD Credit Opportunity Master Fund, L.P. MSDC Management (GP), LLC is the general partner
of  and  may  be  deemed  to  have  or  share  voting  and  dispositive  power  over,  and/or  beneficially  own  securities  owned  by  MSDC
Management, L.P. Each of Glenn R. Fuhrman, John C. Phelan and Marc R. Lisker is manager of MSDC Management (GP), LLC and
may be deemed to have or share voting and/or dispositive power over, and beneficially own, the common stock beneficially owned by
MSD Management (GP), LLC. Each of Mr. Fuhrman, Mr. Phelan and Mr. Lisker disclaim beneficial ownership of such common stock,
except to the extent of the pecuniary interest of such person in such shares.
(8)
Empery  Asset  Management  LP,  the  authorized  agent  of  Empery  Asset  Master  Ltd  (“EAM”),  has  discretionary  authority  to  vote  and
dispose of the shares held by EAM and may be deemed to be the beneficial owner of these shares. Martin Hoe and Ryan Lane, in their
capacity as investment managers of Empery Asset Management LP, may also be deemed to have investment discretion and voting
power over the shares held by EAM. EAM, Mr. Hoe and Mr. Lane each disclaim any beneficial ownership of these shares.
(9)
Empery  Asset  Management  LP,  the  authorized  agent  of  Empery  Tax  Efficient,  LP  (“ETE”),  has  discretionary  authority  to  vote  and
dispose of the shares held by ETE and may be deemed to be the beneficial owner of these shares. Martin Hoe and Ryan Lane, in their
capacity as investment managers of Empery Asset Management LP, may also be deemed to have investment discretion and voting
power over the shares held by ETE. ETE, Mr. Hoe and Mr. Lane each disclaim any beneficial ownership of these shares.
(10)
Chris Padden has voting and dispositive powers over these securities.
(11)
Chris Padden has voting and dispositive powers over these securities.
(12)
Chris Padden has voting and dispositive powers over these securities.
(13)
Chris Padden has voting and dispositive powers over these securities.
(14)
Chris Padden has voting and dispositive powers over these securities.
(15)
Chris Padden has voting and dispositive powers over these securities.
23
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
We  are  registering  the  Resale  Shares  held  by  Selling  Stockholders.  As  used  in  this  prospectus,  the  term  “Selling  Stockholders”
includes the named Selling Stockholders and any donees, pledgees, transferees or other successors-in-interest selling shares received
from a named Selling Stockholder as a gift, distribution, foreclosure on a pledge, or other non-sale related transfer after the date of this
prospectus. The Selling Stockholders will act independently of us in making decisions regarding the timing, manner and size of each
sale. Sales may be made on any national securities exchange or quotation service on which the securities may be listed or quoted at
the time of sale. Each Selling Stockholder reserves the right, together with its agents from time to time, to accept or reject, in whole or in
part,  any  proposed  purchase  of  the  shares  of  Common  Stock  for  any  reason,  including  if  they  deem  the  purchase  price  to  be
unsatisfactory at any particular time.
In addition, the Selling Stockholders may sell the Resale Shares from time to time by one or more of the following methods permitted
pursuant to applicable law, without limitation:
·
block trades (which may involve crosses) in which a broker or dealer will be engaged to attempt to sell the shares of Common Stock as
agent but may position and resell a portion of the block as principal to facilitate the transaction;
·
direct sales to purchasers;
·
purchases by a broker or dealer as principal and resale by the broker or dealer for its own account;
·
ordinary brokerage transactions and transactions in which the broker solicits purchases;
·
privately negotiated transactions;
·
bidding or auction process;
·
closing out of short sales;
·
transactions in which the broker solicits purchasers;
·
satisfying delivery obligations relating to the writing of options on the shares of Common Stock, whether or not the options are listed on
an options exchange;
·
one or more underwritten offerings on a firm commitment or best efforts basis;
·
any combination of any of these methods; or
·
any other method permitted pursuant to applicable law.
The Selling Stockholders may distribute the securities from time to time in one or more transactions at a fixed price or prices (which may
be  changed  from  time  to  time),  at  market  prices  prevailing  at  the  times  of  sale,  at  prices  related  to  these  prevailing  market  prices
prevailing at the times of sale, at prices related to these prevailing market prices or at negotiated prices. The Selling Stockholders may
effect these transactions by selling the Resale Shares to market-makers acting as principals or through brokers-dealers or agents, and
these persons may receive compensation in the form of discounts, concessions or commissions from the Selling Stockholders and/or
the  purchasers  of  the  securities  for  whom  such  persons  may  act  as  agents  or  to  whom  they  sell  as  principals,  or  both  (which
compensation as to a particular broker-dealer might be in excess of customary commissions). Market makers and block purchasers
purchasing the Common Stock will do so for their own account and at their own risk. It is possible that a Selling Stockholder will attempt
to sell shares of Common Stock in block transactions to market makers or other purchasers at a price per share which may be below the
then market price.
The  shares  may  be  sold  according  to  any  one  or  more  of  the  methods  described  above.  In  addition,  subject  to  compliance  with
applicable law and Company policy, the Selling Stockholder may enter into option, derivative or hedging transactions with respect to
the shares, and any related offers or sales of shares may be made under this prospectus. In some circumstances, for example, the
Selling Stockholder may write call options, put options or other derivative instruments (including exchange-traded options or privately
negotiated options) with respect to the shares, or which it settles through delivery of the shares. These option, derivative and hedging
transactions may require the delivery to a broker, dealer or other financial institution of shares offered under this prospectus, and that
broker, dealer or other financial institution may resell those shares under this prospectus. A Selling Stockholder or his successors in
interest may enter into hedging transactions with broker-dealers who may engage in short sales of Common Stock in the course of
hedging the positions they assume with a Selling Stockholder. The Selling Stockholder may offer and sell the shares under any other
method permitted by applicable law.
If a material arrangement with any broker-dealer or other agent is entered into for the sale of any shares of Common Stock through a
block  trade,  special  offering,  exchange  distribution,  secondary  distribution,  or  a  purchase  by  a  broker  or  dealer,  a  prospectus
supplement will be filed, if necessary, disclosing the material terms and conditions of these arrangements.
24
The Selling Stockholders may from time to time deliver all or a portion of the shares offered hereby to cover a short sale or upon the
exercise, settlement or closing of a call equivalent position or a put equivalent position.
The SEC may deem a Selling Stockholder and any broker-dealers or agents who participate in the distribution of Common Stock to be
“underwriters” within the meaning of Section 2(11) of the Securities Act. As a result, the SEC may deem any discounts and commissions
received  by  such  broker-dealers  or  agents  and  any  profit  on  the  resale  of  the  Common  Stock  by  the  Selling  Stockholder  to  be
underwriting discounts or commissions under the Securities Act. Because a Selling Stockholder may be deemed to be an “underwriter”
within the meaning of Section 2(11) of the Securities Act, a Selling Stockholder will be subject to the prospectus delivery requirements
of the Securities Act and also may be subject to liabilities under the securities laws, including Sections 11, 12 and 17 of the Securities
Act and Rule 10b-5 under the Exchange Act. No Selling Stockholder is a registered broker-dealer or an affiliate of a registered broker-
dealer, and to our knowledge, there are currently no plans, arrangements or understandings between any Selling Stockholder and any
broker-dealer, underwriter or agent regarding the sale of the Common Stock.
In order to comply with the applicable securities laws of particular states, if applicable, the Resale Shares will be sold in the jurisdictions
only through registered or licensed brokers or dealers.
In addition, if applicable, in particular states the Resale Shares may not be sold unless they have been registered or qualified for sale in
the applicable state or an exemption from the registration or qualification requirement is available and is complied with.
Each Selling Stockholder and any person participating in the distribution of Common Stock registered under the registration statement
that includes this prospectus will be subject to applicable provisions of the Exchange Act, and applicable SEC rules and regulations,
including, among others, Regulation M, which may limit the timing of purchases and sales of any of our Common Stock by any such
person. Furthermore, Regulation M may restrict the ability of any person engaged in the distribution of our Common Stock to engage in
market-making  activities  with  respect  to  our  Common  Stock.  We  have  informed  the  Selling  Stockholders  that  the  anti-manipulative
provisions of Regulation M promulgated under the Exchange Act may apply to their sales in the market. These restrictions may affect
the marketability of our Common Stock and the ability of any person or entity to engage in market-making activities with respect to our
Common Stock.
To the extent required, this prospectus will be amended or supplemented from time to time to describe a specific plan of distribution or to
disclose additional information with respect to any sale or other distribution of the shares.
The  Selling  Stockholder  may  also  sell  its  shares  in  accordance  with  Rule  144  under  the  Securities  Act,  to  the  extent  available,  or
pursuant to other available exemptions from the registration requirements of the Securities Act, rather than pursuant to this prospectus.
We will pay for all costs of the Selling Stockholders of this registration, including, without limitation, SEC filing fees and expenses of
compliance with state securities or “blue sky” laws; except that the selling holders will pay all brokerage commissions, underwriting
discounts and selling expenses, if any.
We have agreed to indemnify the Selling Stockholders against particular liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act, incurred
in connection with the offering of the Resale Shares. We and the Selling Stockholders may agree to indemnify any underwriter, broker,
dealer  or  agent  that  participates  in  transactions  involving  sales  of  the  Resale  Shares  against  certain  liabilities,  including  liabilities
arising under the Securities Act.
Once sold under the registration statement, of which this prospectus forms a part, the Resale Shares will be freely tradable in the hands
of persons other than our affiliates.
25
DESCRIPTION OF CAPITAL STOCK
We are authorized to issue up to 150,000,000 shares of Common Stock, par value $0.001 per share. As of August 13, 2014, there were
25,711,218 shares of our Common Stock issued and outstanding and no shares of preferred stock outstanding. All outstanding shares
of Common Stock are fully paid and nonassessable.
Overview
Voting Rights
Holders of our Common Stock are entitled to one vote for each share on all matters submitted to a stockholder vote, except as matters
that relate only to a series of our preferred stock. Holders of Common Stock do not have cumulative voting rights.
Each outstanding share of voting capital stock of the Company shall be entitled to one vote on each matter submitted to a vote at a
meeting of stockholders, except as otherwise provided in the Articles of Incorporation of the Company. Except as otherwise provided by
the general corporation laws of the State of Nevada, the Articles of Incorporation of the Company or the Bylaws of the Company, if a
quorum is present: (a) directors shall be elected by a plurality of the votes of the shares of capital stock of the Company present in
person or represented by proxy at the meeting and entitled to vote on the election of directors; and (b) action on any matter other than
the election of directors shall be approved if the votes cast by the holders of shares represented at the meeting and entitled to vote on
the subject matter favoring the action exceed the votes cast opposing such action.
Our board of directors is elected annually at the meeting of our stockholders. Each director holds office until the next annual meeting of
our stockholders at which his term expires and until his successor is elected and qualified, or until his earlier death, resignation or
removal.
Any action that the stockholders could take at a meeting may be taken without a meeting if one or more written consents, setting forth
the action taken, shall be signed and dated, before or after such action, by the holders of outstanding stock of each voting group entitled
to  vote  thereon  having  not  less  than  the  minimum  number  of  votes  with  respect  to  each  voting  group  that  would  be  necessary  to
authorize or take such action at a meeting at which all voting groups and shares entitled to vote thereon were present and voted. The
consent shall be delivered to us for inclusion in the minutes or filing with the corporate records. We will give notice of any action so
taken within ten (10) days of the date of such action to those stockholders entitled to vote thereon who did not give their written consent
and to those stockholders not entitled to vote thereon.
According to the Company’s Articles of Incorporation, the authority to adopt, amend or repeal bylaws is reserved exclusively to the
Board of Directors.
Liquidation
In the event of a liquidation, dissolution or winding up, each outstanding share of Common Stock entitles its holder to participate pro rata
in all assets that remain after payment of liabilities and after providing for any class of stock, if any, having preference over the Common
Stock.
Dividend Rights
The board of directors may from time to time declare, and we may pay, dividends on our outstanding shares in the manner and upon the
terms and conditions provided by the general corporation laws of the State of Nevada.
We have not declared or paid any cash dividends on our Common Stock during the last three years. We currently intend to retain future
earnings,  if  any,  to  finance  the  expansion  of  our  business.  As  a  result,  we  do  not  anticipate  paying  any  cash  dividends  in  the
foreseeable future.
Redemption
Our Common Stock is not redeemable.
Conversion Rights
Our Common Stock is not convertible.
26
Preemptive Rights
Holders of our Common Stock do not have preemptive rights.
Other Provisions
The Common Stock offered by this prospectus has been duly and validly authorized by the Company, duly and validly issued, and is
fully paid and non-assessable.
Transfer Agent
The transfer agent and registrar for our Common Stock is Standard Registrar and Transfer Company.
Listing
Our Common Stock is listed on the NYSE MKT under the symbol “REI”. Prior to September 1, 2013, our Common Stock was quoted on
the OTCQB and the OTC Bulletin Board under the trading symbol “RNGE”.
This section is a summary and may not describe every aspect of our Common Stock that may be important to you. We urge you to read
applicable Nevada law, our articles of incorporation and bylaws, as amended, because they, and not this description, define your rights
as  a  holder  our  Common  Stock.  See  “Where  You  Can  Find  More  Information”  for  information  on  how  to  obtain  copies  of  these
documents.
Anti-Takeover Provisions of Our Charter Documents and Bylaws
Sections  78.378  to  78.3793  of  the  Nevada  Revised  Statutes  (“NRS”)  contain  provisions  that  may  prevent  any  person  acquiring  a
controlling interest in a Nevada company from exercising voting rights. Under NRS Sections 78.378 to 78.3793, an acquiring person
who acquires a controlling interest in a company’s common shares may not exercise voting rights on any of these shares unless these
voting rights are granted by a majority vote of our disinterested stockholders at a special stockholders' meeting held upon the request
and  at  the  expense  of  the  acquiring  person.  We  have  expressly  opted-out  of,  or  elect  not  to  be  governed  by,  the  “Acquisition  of
Controlling Interest” provisions contained in NRS Sections 78.378 through 78.3793, inclusive, or any successor statutes.
Board Vacancies are Generally Filled by Remaining Directors and Not Stockholders
Our bylaws provide that any vacancies on the board of directors may be filled by the vote of the majority of the remaining directors,
although less than a quorum. Notwithstanding the immediately preceding sentence, the board of directors may by resolution determine
that any such vacancies or newly created directorships shall be filled by our stockholders representing at least one-third (1/3) of the
issued and outstanding shares of our capital stock that would be entitled to vote at a meeting of stockholders.
Stockholder Meetings
The  bylaws  provide  that  a  special  meeting  of  stockholders,  other  than  those  required  by  Nevada  law,  may  be  called  only  by  the
chairperson of the board of directors or our chief executive officer.
Undesignated Preferred Stock
The ability to authorize undesignated preferred stock makes it possible for our board of directors to issue one or more series of preferred
stock with voting or other rights or preferences that could make it more difficult or prevent a change of control of our company or the
removal of our management.
Requirements for Advance Notification of Stockholder Nominations and Proposals
Our bylaws establish advance notice procedures with respect to stockholder proposals and the nomination of candidates for election as
directors.
27
Subscription Agreements
In  connection  with  the  Private  Placement,  the  Company  entered  into  subscription  agreements  (the  “Subscription  Agreements”)  with
each  of  the  Selling  Stockholders  (collectively,  the  “Holders”).  Pursuant  to  the  Subscription  Agreements,  the  Holders  are  entitled  to
certain registration rights, subject to certain limitations, with respect to Resale Shares (the “Registrable Securities”). Pursuant to the
Subscription Agreements, on or before the 30th calendar day following the Closing, the Company will file with the SEC a registration
statement covering all of the Registrable Securities. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any
such registration statement, including all reasonable expenses incurred in performing its obligations under the Subscription Agreement.
28
DIVIDEND POLICY
We have never declared or paid any cash dividends on our Common Stock, and we do not anticipate paying cash dividends in the
foreseeable future. We currently intend to retain our earnings for use in our business. Future dividends on our Common Stock, if any,
will be at the discretion of our board of directors and will depend on, among other things, our operations, capital requirements and
surplus, general financial condition, contractual restrictions and such other factors as our board of directors may deem relevant.
29
ABOUT THE COMPANY
Overview
Ring  is  a  Midland,  Texas  based  energy  company  that  is  engaged  in  oil  and  natural  gas  acquisition,  exploration,  development  and
production  activities.  Our  exploration  and  production  interests  are  currently  focused  in  Texas  and  Kansas.  We  primarily  drill
conventional wells on our properties and look for new properties capable of being developed in a conventional manner.
History
The corporation was originally organized under the name of Blanca Corp. in the State of Nevada on July 30, 2004. The name of the
corporation was changed of record to Transglobal Mining Corp. on April 8, 2007. The initial purpose of the corporation was to engage in
mining development operations within the United States and Canada.
On March 21, 2008, the corporation was acquired by a new majority group of stockholders. At the time of the closing of the majority
share acquisition, the corporation divested itself of all mining-related assets and liabilities. On or about March 20, 2008, the corporation
changed its name of record in Nevada to Ring Energy, Inc., and the purpose of the corporation changed to focus on the acquisition and
development of oil and gas properties and the marketing of oil and gas products derived from those properties. In connection with the
closing,  the  corporation  approved,  by  majority  stockholder  consent  resolution,  a  reverse  split  of  eighteen-to-one  (18:1)  of  its  issued
shares, decreasing the issued and outstanding shares.
On June 28, 2012, Ring completed the acquisition of Stanford through the closing of a stock-for-stock exchange agreement dated May
3,  2012.  As  a  result,  Stanford’s  stockholders  obtained  control  of  Ring  under  current  accounting  guidance.  Since  the  Stanford
stockholders obtained a controlling interest in Ring’s Common Stock and stock options, Stanford was determined to be the accounting
acquirer and its historical financial statements have been adjusted to reflect its reorganization in a manner equivalent to a 2,500-for-1
stock split.
On May 23, 2011, prior to Ring’s acquisition of Stanford, Stanford acquired developed and undeveloped properties referred to as the
“Fisher I Property.” The Fisher I Property represents Stanford’s predecessor under Rule 405 of Regulation C of the Securities Act of
1933,  as  amended,  as  the  Fisher  I  Property  was  Stanford’s  first  significant  interest  in  producing  oil  and  natural  gas  properties  and
Stanford’s  own  operations  before  the  acquisition  were  insignificant  relative  to  the  operations  acquired.  In  that  regard,  upon
consummation of the acquisition, the historical financial statements of the Fisher I Property became the historical financial statements of
Ring.
On  October  16,  2013,  we  entered  into  the  Development  Agreement  with  Torchlight  Energy  Resources,  Inc., to develop our Kansas
leasehold. Ring will enter into a Joint Operating Agreement (“JOA”) with Torchlight Energy, whereby the Company will (i) be designated
as  “Operator”  under  the  JOA  and  (ii)  remain  Operator  as  long  as  it  owns  or  controls  any  interest  in  the  acreage  subject  to  such
agreement.
On December 11, 2013, the Company completed the sale of 5,750,000 shares of its Common Stock in an underwritten public offering,
resulting in gross proceeds of $57.5 million and estimated net proceeds of approximately $54.3 million, after deducting underwriting
commissions  and  estimated  offering  expenses  payable  by  the  Company.  The  Company  intends  to  use  the  net  proceeds  from  the
underwritten public offering to fund drilling and development of its properties, to pay for additional leases of oil and gas properties, to
pay down borrowings under its credit facility, and to pay for acquisitions of oil and gas properties in and around existing properties. The
offering was made pursuant to a prospectus filed a part of an effective registration statement on Form S-1, as amended, filed with the
SEC.
On  February  6,  2014,  the  Company’s  resale  registration  statement  on  Form  S-1  in  connection  with  the  offering  by  certain  selling
stockholders  named  therein  of  up  to  3,528,580  outstanding  shares  of  common  stock  became  effective.  Pursuant  to  the  registration
statement, the selling stockholders named therein may sell all or a portion of these shares from time to time in market transactions
through any market on which the common stock is then traded, in negotiated transactions or otherwise, and at prices and on terms that
will be determined by the then prevailing market price or at negotiated prices directly or through a broker or brokers, who may act as
agents or as principals or by a combination of such methods of sale. Such selling stockholders will receive all proceeds from such sales
of  the  Resale  Shares,  and  the  Company  will  not  receive  any  proceeds  from  the  sale  of  any  Resale  Shares  sold  by  the  selling
stockholders.
30
On  February  27,  2014,  Ring  completed  an  acquisition  of  certain  assets  pursuant  to  its  previously  announced  Purchase  and  Sale
Agreement,  for  a  purchase  price  of  approximately $6.51 million  in  cash.  The  assets  acquired  by  Ring  pursuant  to  the  Purchase
Agreement consist of approximately 2,481 gross (1,576 net) acres, located in Andrews and Gaines Counties, in the Permian Basin of
Texas. The acreage, comprised of 92 separate leases, includes both “developed” and “undeveloped” parcels and is in close proximity
to Ring’s existing Permian Basin assets. The “developed” area is comprised of approximately 907 net acres with current net production
of 42 BOEs (Barrel of Oil Equivalent) per day from the San Andres and Glorieta formations and is over 92% oil. The “undeveloped” area
is comprised of approximately 660 net acres.
On June 18, 2014, we closed our offering of 2,000,001 shares of our Common Stock, for gross proceeds of $30,000,015 in the Private
Placement.
Business Description and Plan of Operation
Ring is currently engaged in oil and natural gas acquisition, exploration, development and production, with activities currently in Texas
and Kansas. We focus on developing our existing properties, while continuing to pursue acquisitions of oil and gas properties with
upside potential.
Business Strategy
Our goal is to increase stockholder value by investing in oil and gas projects with attractive rates of return on capital employed. We plan
to achieve this goal by exploiting and developing our existing oil and natural gas properties and pursuing acquisitions of additional
properties. Specifically, our business strategy is to increase our stockholders value through the following:
·
Growing production and reserves by developing our oil-rich resource base. Ring intends to actively drill and develop its acreage base in
an effort to maximize its value and resource potential. Ring’s portfolio of proved oil and natural gas reserves consists of 94% oil and 6%
natural gas. Of those reserves, 24% of the proved reserves are classified as proved developed producing, or “PDP,” 4% are classified
as proved developed non-producing, or “PDNP,” and approximately 72% are classified as proved undeveloped, or “PUD.” Through the
conversion  of  undeveloped  reserves  to  developed  reserves,  Ring  will  seek  to  increase  production,  reserves  and  cash  flow  while
gaining favorable returns on invested capital.
Through  December  31,  2013,  we  increased  our  proved  reserves  to  approximately  7.3  million  BOE  (barrel  of  oil  equivalent).  As  of
December 31, 2013, our estimated proved reserves had a pre-tax PV10 (present value of future net revenues before income taxes
discounted  at  10%)  of  approximately  $198.4  million  and  a  Standardized  Measure  of  Discounted  Future  Net  Cash  Flows  of
approximately $133.9 million. The difference between these two amounts is the effect of income taxes. The Company presents the pre-
tax PV-10 value, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, because it is a widely used industry standard which we believe is useful to
those  who  may  review  this  Annual  Report  when  comparing  our  asset  base  and  performance  to  other  comparable  oil  and  gas
exploration and production companies. We spent approximately $44.5 million on acquisitions and capital projects during 2012 and
2013, and we intend to continually actively drill and develop our acreage in an effort to maximize shareholder value.
·
Employ industry leading drilling and completion techniques. Ring’s executive team, which has over 100 years combined experience in
the  oil  and  gas  industry,  intends  to  utilize  new  and  innovative  technological  advancements  and  careful  geological  evaluation  in
reservoir  engineering  to  generate  value  for  its  stockholders  and  to  build  development  opportunities  for  years  to  come.  Improved
efficiency through employing technological advancements can provide a significant benefit in a continuous drilling program such as the
one Ring contemplates for its current inventory of drilling locations. Additionally, Ring believes that the experience of its executive team
will help reduce the time and cost associated with drilling and completing both conventional and horizontal wells, while potentially
increasing recovery.
·
Pursue strategic acquisitions with exceptional upside potential. Ring has a history of acquiring leasehold positions that it believes to
have substantial resource potential and to meet its targeted returns on invested capital. Ring has historically pursued acquisitions of
properties that it believes to have exploitation and development potential comparable to its existing inventory of drilling locations. The
Company has developed and refined an acquisition program designed to increase reserves and complement existing core properties.
Ring’s experienced team of management and engineering professionals identify and evaluate acquisition opportunities, negotiate and
close  purchases  and  manage  acquired  properties.  Management  intends  to  continue  to  pursue  strategic  acquisitions  that  meet  the
Company’s  operational  and  financial  targets.  The  executive  team,  with  its  extensive  experience  in  the  Permian  Basin,  has  many
relationships  with  operators  and  service  providers  in  the  region.  Ring  believes  that  leveraging  its  contacts  will  be  a  competitive
advantage in identifying acquisition targets. Management’s proven ability to evaluate resource potential will allow Ring to successfully
acquire acreage and bring out more value in the assets.
31
Competitive Business Conditions
We operate in a highly competitive environment for acquiring properties, marketing oil and natural gas and securing trained personnel.
Some of our competitors possess and employ financial resources substantially greater than ours and some of our competitors employ
more technical personnel. These factors can be particularly important in the areas in which we operate. Those companies may be able
to pay more for productive oil and natural gas properties and exploratory prospects and to evaluate, bid for and purchase a greater
number of properties and prospects than what our financial or technical resources permit. Our ability to acquire additional properties and
to  find  and  develop  reserves  in  the  future  will  depend  on  our  ability  to  identify,  evaluate  and  select  suitable  properties  and  to
consummate transactions in a highly competitive environment. Also, there is substantial competition for capital available for investment
in the oil and natural gas industry.
The actual price range of crude oil is largely established by major crude oil purchasers and commodities trading. Pricing for natural gas
is based on regional supply and demand conditions. To this extent, we believe we receive oil and gas prices comparable to other
producers. There is little risk in our ability to sell all our current production at current prices with a reasonable profit margin. The risk of
domestic overproduction at current prices is not deemed significant. We view our primary pricing risk to be related to a potential decline
in prices to a level which could render our current production uneconomical.
We  are  presently  committed  to  use  the  services  of  the  existing  gathering  systems  of  the  companies  that  purchase  our  natural  gas
production.  This  commitment  is  tied  to  existing  natural  gas  purchase  contracts  associated  with  our  production  This  commitment
potentially gives such gathering companies certain short-term relative monopolistic powers to set gathering and transportation costs,
because obtaining the services of an alternative gathering company would require substantial additional costs (since an alternative
gathering  company  would  be  required  to  lay  new  pipeline  and/or  obtain  new  rights  of  way  to  any  lease  from  which  we  are  selling
production). We are not subject to third party gathering systems for our oil production. Some of our oil production is sold through a third
party pipeline which has no regional competition. All other oil production is transported by the oil purchaser by trucks with competitive
trucking costs in the area.
Customers and Marketing
We principally sell our oil and natural gas production to end users, marketers and other purchasers that have access to nearby pipeline
facilities. In areas where there is no practical access to pipelines, oil is trucked to storage facilities. For the past three (3) fiscal years, all
revenues from our clients were attributed to the United States. Our marketing of oil and natural gas can be affected by factors beyond
our control, the effects of which cannot be accurately predicted.
For the fiscal year 2013, sales to one customer, HollyFrontier Refining and Marketing (“HollyFrontier”) represented 97% of oil and gas
revenues. At December 31, 2013, HollyFrontier represented 99% of our accounts receivable. For the six months ended June 30, 2014,
sales to HollyFrontier represented 86% of oil and gas revenues and 78% of our accounts receivable. However, we believe that the loss
of this customer would not materially impact our business, because we could readily find other purchasers for our oil and gas produced.
Existing or Probable Governmental Regulations
Regulation of Transportation of Oil
Sales of crude oil, condensate and natural gas liquids are not currently regulated and are made at negotiated prices. Nevertheless,
Congress could reenact price controls in the future.
Our  sales  of  crude  oil  are  affected  by  the  availability,  terms  and  cost  of  transportation.  The  transportation  of  oil  in  common  carrier
pipelines is also subject to rate regulation. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, or the FERC, regulates interstate oil pipeline
transportation  rates  under  the  Interstate  Commerce  Act.  Intrastate  oil  pipeline  transportation  rates  are  subject  to  regulation  by  state
regulatory commissions. The basis for intrastate oil pipeline regulation, and the degree of regulatory oversight and scrutiny given to
intrastate oil pipeline rates, varies from state to state.
Insofar as effective interstate and intrastate rates are equally applicable to all comparable shippers, we believe that the regulation of oil
transportation rates will not affect our operations in any way that is of material difference from those of our competitors. Further, interstate
and  intrastate  common  carrier  oil  pipelines  must  provide  service  on  a  non-discriminatory  basis.  Under  this  open  access  standard,
common carriers must offer service to all shippers requesting service on the same terms and under the same rates. When oil pipelines
operate  at  full  capacity,  access  is  governed  by  pro-rationing  provisions  set  forth  in  the  pipelines’  published  tariffs.  Accordingly,  we
believe that access to oil pipeline transportation services generally will be available to us to the same extent as to our competitors.
32
Regulation of Transportation and Sale of Natural Gas
Historically, the transportation and sale for resale of natural gas in interstate commerce have been regulated pursuant to the Natural
Gas Act of 1938, the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978 and regulations issued under those Acts by the FERC. In the past, the federal
government has regulated the prices at which natural gas could be sold. While sales by producers of natural gas can currently be made
at uncontrolled market prices, Congress could reenact price controls in the future.
Since 1985, the FERC has endeavored to make natural gas transportation more accessible to natural gas buyers and sellers on an
open and non-discriminatory basis. The FERC has stated that open access policies are necessary to improve the competitive structure
of  the  interstate  natural  gas  pipeline  industry  and  to  create  a  regulatory  framework  that  will  put  natural  gas  sellers  into  more  direct
contractual relations with natural gas buyers by, among other things, unbundling the sale of natural gas from the sale of transportation
and storage services. Although the FERC’s orders do not directly regulate natural gas producers, they are intended to foster increased
competition within all phases of the natural gas industry.
We  cannot  accurately  predict  whether  the  FERC’s  actions  will  achieve  the  goal  of  increasing  competition  in  markets  in  which  our
natural gas is sold. Therefore, we cannot provide any assurance that the less stringent regulatory approach established by the FERC
will continue. However, we do not believe that any action taken will affect us in a way that materially differs from the way it affects other
natural gas producers.
Intrastate natural gas transportation is subject to regulation by state regulatory agencies. The basis for intrastate regulation of natural
gas transportation and the degree of regulatory oversight and scrutiny given to intrastate natural gas pipeline rates and services varies
from state to state. Insofar as such regulation within a particular state will generally affect all intrastate natural gas shippers within the
state on a comparable basis, we believe that the regulation of similarly situated intrastate natural gas transportation in any states in
which we operate and ship natural gas on an intrastate basis will not affect our operations in any way that is of material difference from
those of our competitors.
Regulation of Production
The production of oil and natural gas is subject to regulation under a wide range of local, state and federal statutes, rules, orders and
regulations.  Federal,  state  and  local  statutes  and  regulations  require  permits  for  drilling  operations,  drilling  bonds  and  reports
concerning  operations.  All  of  the  states  in  which  we  own  and  operate  properties  have  regulations  governing  conservation  matters,
including provisions for the unitization or pooling of oil and natural gas properties, the establishment of maximum allowable rates of
production from oil and natural gas wells, the regulation of well spacing, and plugging and abandonment of wells. The effect of these
regulations is to limit the amount of oil and natural gas that we can produce from our wells and to limit the number of wells or the
locations  at  which  we  can  drill,  although  we  can  apply  for  exceptions  to  such  regulations  or  to  have  reductions  in  well  spacing.
Moreover, each state generally imposes a production or severance tax with respect to the production and sale of oil, natural gas and
natural gas liquids within its jurisdiction.
The failure to comply with these rules and regulations can result in substantial penalties. Our competitors in the oil and natural gas
industry are subject to the same regulatory requirements and restrictions that affect our operations.
Environmental Compliance and Risks
Our oil and natural gas exploration, development and production operations are subject to stringent federal, state and local laws and
regulations governing the discharge of materials into the environment or otherwise relating to environmental protection. Historically,
most of the environmental regulation of oil and gas production has been left to state regulatory boards or agencies in those jurisdictions
where there is significant gas and oil production, with limited direct regulation by such federal agencies as the Environmental Protection
Agency. However, while we believe this generally to be the case for our production activities in Texas and Kansas, there are various
regulations  issued  by  the  EPA  and  other  governmental  agencies  that  would  govern  significant  spills,  blow-outs,  or  uncontrolled
emissions.
In Texas and Kansas, specific oil and gas regulations apply to the drilling, completion and operations of wells, and the disposal of
waste oil and salt water. There are also procedures incident to the plugging and abandonment of dry holes or other non-operational
wells, all as governed by the applicable governing state agency.
33
At the federal level, among the more significant laws and regulations that may affect our business and the oil and gas industry are: The
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, also known as “CERCLA” or “Superfund; the Oil
Pollution  Act  of  1990;  the  Resource  Conservation  and  Recovery  Act,  also  known  as  “RCRA,”;  the  Clean  Air  Act;  Federal  Water
Pollution Control Act of 1972, or the Clean Water Act; and the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974.
Compliance  with  these  regulations  may  constitute  a  significant  cost  and  effort  for  us.  No  specific  accounting  for  environmental
compliance has been maintained or projected by us at this time. We are not presently aware of any environmental demands, claims, or
adverse actions, litigation or administrative proceedings in which either we or our acquired properties are involved in or subject to, or
arising out of any predecessor operations.
In the event of a breach of environmental regulations, these environmental regulatory agencies have a broad range of alternative or
cumulative remedies which include: ordering a clean-up of any spills or waste material and restoration of the soil or water to conditions
existing prior to the environmental violation; fines; or enjoining further drilling, completion or production activities. In certain egregious
situations the agencies may also pursue criminal remedies against us or our principal officers.
The following is a summary of the more significant existing environmental, health and safety laws and regulations to which our business
is subject and for which compliance may have a material adverse impact on our capital expenditures, financial condition or results of
operations.
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act. Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation
and Liability Act (“CERCLA”), also known as the “Superfund” law, and comparable state statutes impose joint and several liability for
costs of investigation and remediation and for natural resource damages without regard to fault or legality of the original conduct, on
certain classes of persons with respect to the release into the environment of substances designated under CERCLA as hazardous
substances. These classes of persons, or so-called potentially responsible parties (“PRPs”) include the current and past owners or
operators of a site where the release occurred and anyone who transported or disposed or arranged for the transport or disposal of a
hazardous  substance  found  at  the  site.  CERCLA  also  authorizes  the  EPA  and,  in  some  instances,  third  parties  to  take  actions  in
response to threats to public health or the environment and to seek to recover from the PRPs the costs of such action. Many states have
adopted comparable or more stringent state statutes.
Although CERCLA generally exempts “petroleum” from the definition of hazardous substance, in the course of our operations, we will
generate, transport and dispose or arrange for the disposal of wastes that may fall within CERCLA’s definition of hazardous substances.
Comparable state statutes may not contain a similar exemption for petroleum. We may also be the owner or operator of sites on which
hazardous substances have been released.
Solid and Hazardous Waste Handling. The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (“RCRA”) and comparable state statutes regulate
the generation, transportation, treatment, storage, disposal and cleanup of solid and hazardous waste. Although oil and natural gas
waste generally is exempt from regulations as hazardous waste under RCRA, we will generate waste as a routine part of our operations
that may be subject to RCRA and not all state and local laws contain a comparable exemption. Further, there is no guarantee that the
EPA or individual states will not adopt more stringent requirements for the handling of non-hazardous waste or categorize some non-
hazardous waste as hazardous in the future. Any such change could result in an increase in our costs to manage and dispose of waste,
which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
It is also possible that our oil and natural gas operations may require us to manage naturally occurring radioactive materials, or NORM.
NORM is present in varying concentrations in sub-surface formations, including hydrocarbon reservoirs, and may become concentrated
in scale, film and sludge in equipment that comes in contract with crude oil and natural gas production and processing streams. Some
states have enacted regulations governing the handling, treatment, storage and disposal of NORM.
34
Clean Water Act. The Clean Water Act and analogous state laws impose restrictions and strict controls with respect to the discharge of
pollutants, including spills and leaks of produced water and other oil and natural gas wastes, and fill materials into state waters and
waters of the United States. The discharge of pollutants into regulated waters is prohibited, except in accordance with the terms of
certain permits issued by the EPA or an analogous state agency. Spill prevention, control and countermeasure (“SPCC”) requirements
under federal law require appropriate containment berms and similar structures to help prevent the contamination of navigable waters in
the event of a petroleum hydrocarbon tank spill, rupture or leak. In addition, the Clean Water Act and analogous state laws require
individual permits or coverage under general permits for discharges of storm water runoff from certain types of facilities. The Clean
Water Act also prohibits the discharge of dredge and fill material in regulated waters, including wetlands, unless authorized by a permit
issued  by  the  United  States  Army  Corps  of  Engineers.  Federal  and  state  regulatory  agencies  can  impose  administrative,  civil  and
criminal penalties, as well as require remedial or mitigation measures, for non–compliance with discharge permits or other requirements
of the Clean Water Act and analogous state laws and regulations. In the event of an unauthorized discharge of wastes, we may be
liable for penalties and costs of remediation.
The Oil Pollution Act of 1990 (“OPA 90”) and its regulations impose requirements on “responsible parties” related to the prevention of oil
spills and liability for damages resulting from oil spills into or upon navigable waters, adjoining shorelines or in the exclusive economic
zone of the United States. A “responsible party” under the OPA 90 may include the owner or operator of an onshore facility. The OPA 90
subjects responsible parties to strict, joint and several financial liability for removal costs and other damages, including natural resource
damages, caused by an oil spill that is covered by the statute. It also imposes other requirements on responsible parties, such as the
preparation  of  an  oil  spill  contingency  plan.  Failure  to  comply  with  the  OPA  90  may  subject  a  responsible  party  to  civil  or  criminal
enforcement action. We may conduct operations on acreage located near, or that affects, navigable waters subject to the OPA 90. We
believe that compliance with applicable requirements under the OPA 90 will not have a material and adverse effect on us.
Safe Drinking Water Act. The SDWA regulates, among other things, underground injection operations. Hydraulic fracturing continues to
be  under  intense  regulatory  scrutiny  both  at  the  federal  level  and  at  the  state  level.  In  past  legislative  sessions,  the  United  States
Congress considered two companion bills that if passed would have imposed on our hydraulic fracturing operations significantly more
stringent  requirements.  In  addition  to  subjecting  the  injection  of  hydraulic  fracturing  to  the  SDWA  regulatory  and  permitting
requirements, the proposed legislation would require the disclosure of the chemicals within the hydraulic fluids, which could make it
easier for our competition to copy our operations and for third parties opposing hydraulic fracturing to initiate legal proceedings based
on allegations that specific chemicals used in the process could adversely affect ground water. If this or similar legislation is enacted,
we could incur substantial compliance costs and the requirements could negatively impact our ability to conduct fracturing activities on
our assets.
Many states have considered or adopted legislation or regulations requiring the disclosure of the chemicals used in hydraulic fracturing.
Texas  has  adopted  such  a  program,  which  is  administered  by  the  Railroad  Commission  of  Texas.  The  Wyoming  Oil  and  Gas
Conservation Commission also passed a rule requiring disclosure of hydraulic fracturing fluid. In addition, a number of states in which
we plan to conduct, are currently conducting, or may in the future conduct, hydraulic fracturing operations regulatory reviews hydraulic
fracturing and new regulations from such reviews could restrict or limit our access to shale formations or could delay our operations or
make them more costly.
The  BLM  has  proposed  a  comprehensive  rule  regulating  hydraulic  fracturing  on  federal  and  certain  tribal  lands.  The  rules  impose
disclosure requirements on the use of hydraulic fracturing chemicals. These proposed rules also require BLM approval prior to hydraulic
fracturing. BLM also would require operators to meet other substantive requirements relating to well integrity and recordkeeping.
The EPA recently issued draft guidance under the SDWA, providing direction about how it will address the use of diesel in hydraulic
fracturing activities. The draft guidance provides a definition of diesel fuels and discusses how the EPA’s Underground Injection Control
rules will be applied to hydraulic fracturing. Further, in March 2010, the EPA announced that it would conduct a wide-ranging study on
the effects of hydraulic fracturing on drinking water resources. Final results of the study are expected in 2014.
35
Air Emissions. Our operations are subject to federal, state and local regulations for the control of emissions from sources of air pollution
under the CAA and analogous state and local programs. Federal and state laws require new and modified sources of air pollutants to
obtain permits prior to commencing construction and also impose various monitoring and reporting requirements. Major sources of air
pollutants are subject to more stringent, federally imposed requirements including additional permits. Federal and state laws designed
to control hazardous or toxic air pollutants may require installation of additional controls. Administrative enforcement actions for failure
to comply strictly with air pollution regulations or permits are generally resolved by payment of monetary fines and correction of any
identified deficiencies. Alternatively, regulatory agencies could bring lawsuits for civil penalties or require us to forego construction,
modification or operation of certain air emission sources.
On April 17, 2012, the EPA signed final rules under the CAA regarding emissions from oil and natural gas operations. The EPA rule
subjects oil and natural gas operations to regulation under the NSPS and NESHAPS programs under the CAA, and imposes new and
amended  requirements  under  both  programs.  The  new  rules,  among  other  things,  amend  standards  applicable  to  natural  gas
processing  plants  and  would  expand  the  NSPS  to  include  all  oil  and  natural  gas  operations,  imposing  requirements  on  those
operations. The EPA also imposed NSPS standards for completions of hydraulically fractured natural gas wells, requiring the use of
reduced emission completion techniques. The adopted rules allow in most circumstances, until January 1, 2015, facilities to combust
natural  gas  that  would  escape  during  completion  activities  as  an  alternative  to  the  reduced  emission  completion  techniques.  The
NESHAPS proposal includes maximum achievable control technology standards for certain glycol dehydrators and storage vessels,
and revises applicability provisions, alternative test protocols and the availability of the startup, shutdown and maintenance exemption.
These  new  requirements  may  result  in  increased  operating  and  compliance  costs,  increased  regulatory  burdens  and  delays  in  our
operations. Compliance with such rules could result in significant costs, including increased capital expenditures and operating costs,
and could adversely impact our business.
Climate Change Legislation. In response to certain scientific studies suggesting that emissions of carbon dioxide, methane and other
GHGs  are  contributing  to  the  warming  of  the  Earth’s  atmosphere  and  other  climatic  changes,  the  United  States  Congress  has
considered  legislation  to  reduce  such  emissions.  To  date,  the  United States  Congress  has  failed  to  enact  a  comprehensive  GHG
program. Some states, either individually or on a regional level, have considered or enacted legal measures to reduce GHG emissions.
Although most of the state-level initiatives have to date focused on large sources of GHG emissions, it is possible that smaller sources
of emissions could become subject to GHG emission limitations. The cost of complying with these programs could be significant.
The EPA published finding that emissions of GHGs presented an endangerment to public health and the environment. These findings
by the EPA allowed the agency to proceed through a rule-making process with the adoption and implementation of regulations that
would restrict emissions of GHGs under existing provisions of the CAA. Consequently, the EPA adopted two sets of regulations that
would require a reduction in emissions of GHGs from motor vehicles and could trigger permit review for GHG emissions from certain
stationary sources. On June 3, 2010, the EPA published its final rule to address permitting of GHG emissions from stationary sources
under the prevention of significant deterioration (“PSD”) and Title V permitting programs. The final rule tailors the PSD and Title V
permitting programs to apply to qualifying stationary sources of GHG emissions in a multi-step process, beginning January 2, 2011, with
the largest sources first subject to permitting. In addition, the EPA has adopted a rule requiring the reporting of GHG emissions from
specified large GHG emission sources in the United States. On November 8, 2010, the EPA finalized its regulations to expand its final
rule on GHG emissions reporting to include onshore and offshore oil and natural gas production facilities and onshore oil and natural
gas processing, transmission, storage and distribution facilities. Reporting of GHG emissions from such facilities has been required
since  2012  for  emissions  occurring  in  2011.  While  we  believe  that  we  will  be  able  to  substantially  comply  with  such  reporting
requirements  without  any  material  adverse  effect  to  our  financial  condition,  since  such  reporting  requirements  with  respect  to  GHG
emissions  are  new  in  the  oil  and  natural  gas  industry,  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  our  reports  will  initially  be  in  substantial
compliance or that such requirements will not develop into more stringent and costly obligations that may have a significant impact on
our operating costs. The adoption and implementation of any regulations imposing reporting obligations on, or limiting emissions of
GHGs from, our equipment and operations could require us to incur costs to reduce emissions of GHGs associated with our operations
or could adversely affect demand for the oil and natural gas we produce. Any one of these climate change regulatory and legislative
initiatives could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Finally, it should be noted that some scientists have concluded that increasing concentrations of GHGs in the Earth’s atmosphere may
produce climate changes that have significant physical effects, such as increased frequency and severity of storms, droughts and floods
and other climatic events; if any such effects were to occur, they could have a material adverse effect on our business and results of
operations.
36
OSHA and Other Laws and Regulations on Employee Health and Safety. To the extent not preempted by other applicable laws, we are
subject  to  the  requirements  of  the  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Act  (“OSHA”)  and  comparable  state  statutes,  where  applicable.
These laws and the implementing regulations strictly govern the protection of the health and safety of employees. The OSHA hazard
communication standard, the EPA community right-to-know regulations under the Title III of CERCLA and similar state statutes, where
applicable,  require  us  to  organize  and  maintain  information  about  hazardous  materials  used  or,  as  applicable,  produced  in  our
operations and that this information be provided to employees, state and local government authorities and, where applicable, citizens.
OSHA may enforce workplace safety regulations through issuance of citations for violations of its standards, which include, but are not
limited  to,  those  regarding  hazard  communication,  personal  protective  equipment,  general  environmental  controls,  and  materials
handling  and  storage.  We  believe  that  we  are  in  substantial  compliance  with  these  requirements  where  applicable  and  with  other
applicable OSHA and comparable requirements.
National Environmental Policy Act. Oil and natural gas exploration and production activities on federal lands may be subject to the
National Environmental Policy Act (“NEPA”) which requires federal agencies, including the U.S. Department of the Interior, to evaluate
major agency actions having the potential to significantly impact the environment. In the course of such evaluations, an agency will
prepare an Environmental Assessment that assesses the potential direct, indirect and cumulative impacts of a proposed project and, if
necessary, will prepare a more detailed Environmental Impact Statement that may be made available for public review and comment.
All of our current exploration and production activities, as well as proposed exploration and development plans, on federal lands require
governmental  permits  that  are  subject  to  the  requirements  of  NEPA.  This  process  has  the  potential  to  delay  or  impose  additional
conditions upon the development of oil and natural gas projects.
Endangered Species Act. The Endangered Species Act, as amended (the “ESA”), and analogous state statutes restrict activities that
may affect endangered and threatened species or their habitats. While some of our facilities may be located in areas that are designated
as  habitat  for  endangered  or  threatened  species,  we  believe  that  we  are  in  substantial  compliance  with  the  ESA.  However,  the
designation of previously unidentified endangered or threatened species could cause us to incur additional costs or become subject to
operating restrictions or bans in the affected areas.
Legal Proceedings
In the ordinary course of business, we may be, from time to time, a claimant or a defendant in various legal proceedings. We do not
presently have any material litigation pending or threatened.
Current Employees
As of August 13, 2014, we have 17 employees, all of whom were full-time employees. Our employees are not represented by any labor
union. We consider our relations with our employees to be satisfactory and have never experienced a work stoppage or strike.
We  retain  certain  engineers,  geologists,  landmen,  pumpers  and  other  personnel  on  a  contract  or  fee  basis  as  necessary  for  our
operations.
37
PROPERTIES
General Background
Ring is currently engaged in oil and natural gas acquisition, exploration, development and production, with activities currently in Texas
and Kansas. Our focus will be on developing our existing properties, while continuing to pursue acquisitions of oil and gas properties
with upside potential.
Management’s Business Strategy Related to Properties
Our goal is to increase stockholder value by investing in oil and gas projects with attractive rates of return on capital employed. We plan
to achieve this goal by exploiting and developing our existing oil and natural gas properties and pursuing acquisitions of additional
properties. Specifically, we have focused, and plan to continue to focus, on the following:
Developing and Exploiting Existing Properties
We  believe  that  there  is  significant  value  to  be  created  by  drilling  the  identified  undeveloped  opportunities  on  our  properties.  The
Company’s  primary  drilling  operations  target  the  Central  Basin  Platform  in  Andrews  County  and  Gaines  County,  Texas.  As  of
December 31, 2013, Ring had 14,375 gross (8,949 net) acres in those counties. The Company also has 16,997 gross (14,232 net)
acres in Kansas targeting the Mississippi Lime play. The acreage is located in Gray, Finney and Haskell counties. On October 16, 2013,
Ring entered into the Development Agreement with Torchlight Energy Resources, Inc., to develop its Kansas leasehold. The Company
will continue to operate the acreage and Torchlight Energy Resources, Inc., will earn an equal share in the leasehold after fulfilling the
agreed upon drilling carry obligation of $6 million. Ring plans to drill ten vertical wells pursuant to the Development Agreement.
While our focus will be toward growth through additional acquisitions and leasing, we do plan on drilling wells on our existing acreage
to develop the potential contained therein.
Pursuing Profitable Acquisitions
We have historically pursued acquisitions of properties that we believe to have exploitation and development potential comparable to
our existing inventory of drilling locations. We have developed and refined an acquisition program designed to increase reserves and
complement our existing core properties. We have an experienced team of management and engineering professionals who identify
and evaluate acquisition opportunities, negotiate and close purchases and manage acquired properties.
Summary of Oil and Natural Gas Properties and Projects
Significant Texas Operations
Andrews and Gaines County leases – Andrews County and Gaines County, Texas. In 2011, we acquired a 100% working interest and
a 75% net revenue interest in the initial leases. Subsequent to the initial acquisition and through June 2014, we acquired working and
net revenue interests in additional producing leases and acquired additional undeveloped acreage in and around our Andrews County
leases. The working interests range from 33-100% and the net revenue interests range from 21-75%. As of December 31, 2013, we
owned 20,747 acres, with 5,467 acres developed and held by production and the remaining 15,280 acres being undeveloped. We
believe the Andrews County leases contain considerable remaining potential drilling. Our reserve estimate includes 192 PUD wells.
Our reserve estimates include potential development expenditures.
Significant Kansas Operations
Kansas  Properties  –  Gray,  Finney  and  Haskell  Counties,  Kansas.  We  acquired  a  100%  working  interest  and  an  80%  net  revenue
interest in 9,541.5 net mineral acres and a 95% working interest and a 76% net revenue interest in 1,600 net mineral acres, along with
all production. We acquired a 100% working interest and an 80% net revenue interest in 4,698 net mineral acres in addition to our
existing acreage acquired in 2012. There are 14 total wells on the acreage, including one previous producing well and four new wells
drilled under the Development Agreement. The new wells are in various stages of evaluation.
38
Title to Properties
We generally conduct a preliminary title examination prior to the acquisition of properties or leasehold interests. Prior to commencement
of operations on such acreage, a thorough title examination will usually be conducted and any significant defects will be remedied
before proceeding with operations. We believe the title to our leasehold properties is good, defensible and customary with practices in
the oil and natural gas industry, subject to such exceptions that we believe do not materially detract from the use of such properties.
With respect to our properties of which we are not the record owner, we rely instead on contracts with the owner or operator of the
property or assignment of leases, pursuant to which, among other things, we generally have the right to have our interest placed on
record.
Our  properties  are  generally  subject  to  royalty,  overriding  royalty  and  other  interests  customary  in  the  industry,  liens  incident  to
agreements,  current  taxes  and  other  burdens,  minor  encumbrances,  easements  and  restrictions.  We  do  not  believe  any  of  these
burdens will materially interfere with our use of these properties.
Summary of Oil and Natural Gas Reserves
As of December 31, 2013, our estimated proved reserves had a pre-tax PV10 value of approximately $198.4 million and a Standardized
Measure of Discounted Future Cash Flows of approximately $133.9 million, essentially 100% of which relate to our properties in Texas.
We spent approximately $44.5 million on acquisitions and capital projects during 2012 and 2013. We expect to further develop these
properties through additional drilling. We will closely manage our capital expenditures to our cash flow. As commodity prices change,
we will consider the resulting impact on our cash flow and adjust our capital expenditures up or down accordingly. We have maintained
a  strong  current  cash  position  with  no  long-term  debt;  we  will  continue  to  seek  acquisition  opportunities  that  complement  our  core
assets.
The following table summarizes our total net proved reserves, pre-tax PV10 value and Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net
Cash Flows as of December 31, 2013.
Geographic
Area
Texas
Kansas
Total
Oil (Bbl)
 
6,838,055 
17,600 
6,855,655
Natural Gas
(Mcf)
 
2,456,043 
31,000 
2,487,043
Reserve Quantity Information
Total (Boe)
Pre-Tax PV10
Value
Standardized
Measure of
Discounted
Future Net
Cash Flows
7,247,397  $ 197,669,038  $
33,309,068
638,859
7,270,164  $ 198,367,438  $ 133,947,927
698,400
22,767
Our estimates of proved reserves and related valuations as of December 31, 2013, were based on independent third party reports and
audited by Cawley, Gillespie & Associates, Inc., independent petroleum engineers. The Company’s reserve estimates and process for
developing such estimates are reviewed and approved by our Vice President of Operations, Daniel Wilson, a petroleum engineer, and
the Chief Executive Officer, Kelly Hoffman. Mr. Daniel Wilson has 29 years of experience in operating, evaluating and exploiting oil and
gas properties. Mr. Kelly Hoffman has 38 years of well-rounded experience in the oil and gas industry.
The estimates of proved reserves are inherently imprecise and are continually subject to revision based on production history, results of
additional exploration and development, price changes and other factors.
39
Our oil and natural gas reserves are attributable solely to properties within the United States. A summary of the changes in quantities of
proved (developed and undeveloped) oil and natural gas reserves is shown below.
Balance, December 31,
2011
Purchase of minerals in
place
Improved recovery
Production
  Revisions of estimates
 
Balance, December 31,
2012
Purchase of minerals in
place
Improved recovery
Extensions and
 
discoveries
  Production
Sales of minerals in
place
Revisions of estimates
 
Balance, December 31,
2013
Oil
(Bbls)
Natural Gas
(Mcf)
2,493,560
1,749,100
780,669
149,149 
(20,531) 
243,896
430,800
30,250
(6,480)
(469,890)
3,646,743
1,733,780
934,716
282,958
2,393,976
(109,673)
(16,100)
(276,965)
208,013
62,970
532,760
(36,047)
-
(14,433)
6,855,655
2,487,043
Our proved oil and natural gas reserves are shown below:
Total
Oil (Bbls)
 
  Developed
 
  Undeveloped  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Natural Gas
(Mcf)
 
  Developed
 
  Undeveloped  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total (Boe)
 
  Developed
 
  Undeveloped
Total
Total
For the Years Ended
December 31,
2012
812,000 
2,834,743 
 
3,646,743
94,090 
1,639,690 
 
1,733,780 
 
 
827,682 
3,108,025 
 
3,935,707
2013
1,941,367
4,914,288
6,855,655
630,751
1,856,292
2,487,043
2,046,493
5,223,670
7,270,163
Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net Cash Flows
Our  standardized  measure  of  discounted  future  net  cash  flows  relating  to  proved  oil  and  natural  gas  reserves  and  changes  in  the
standardized measure as described below were prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
Future income tax expenses are calculated by applying appropriate year-end tax rates to future pre-tax net cash flows relating to proved
oil and natural gas reserves, less the tax basis of properties involved. Future income tax expenses give effect to permanent differences,
tax credits and loss carryforwards relating to the proved oil and natural gas reserves. Future net cash flows are discounted at a rate of
10% annually to derive the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows. This calculation procedure does not necessarily
result in an estimate of the fair market value or the present value of our oil and natural gas properties.
40
The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to the proved oil and natural gas reserves are shown below.
December 31,
Future cash flows
Future production costs
Future development costs
Future income taxes
Future net cash flows
10% annual discount for estimated timing of
cash flows
 
Standardized Measure of Discounted
Cash Flows
$
$
2012
2013
648,958,812  $ 331,489,046
(73,667,753)
(66,835,270)
(62,412,466)
128,573,357
(165,478,373) 
(98,287,766) 
(125,104,471) 
260,088,202
(126,140,575)
(57,215,111)
133,947,627  $
71,358,446
The changes in the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to the proved oil and natural gas reserves are
shown below.
Beginning of the year
Purchase of minerals in place
  Extensions, discoveries and improved recovery, less
related costs
Development costs incurred during the year
Sales of oil and gas produced, net of production costs
Sales of minerals in place
Accretion of discount
Net changes in price and production costs
Net change in estimated future development costs
Revision of previous quantity estimates
Revision of estimated timing of cash flows
Net change in income taxes
 
End of the Year
$
$
2013
71,358,446  $
24,631,148
2012
60,755,575
19,027,746
72,635,671 
 
29,103,392 
 
(994,793) 
 
(1,039,031) 
 
8,568,497 
 
5,568,442 
 
(6,499,395) 
 
(10,313,017) 
 
(29,859,746) 
 
(29,211,687) 
 
 
 
133,947,927  $
6,279,507
6,532,898
(972,881)
-
6,524,980
(8,004,160)
(2,968,626)
6,364,907
(19,303,858)
(2,877,642)
71,358,446
Proved Reserves
Our  7,270,164  BOE  of  proved  reserves,  which  consist  of  approximately  94%  oil  and  6%  natural  gas,  are  summarized  below  as  of
December 31, 2013, on a net pre-tax PV10 value and Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net Cash Flows basis. Our reserve
estimates have not been filed with any Federal authority or agency (other than the SEC).
As of December 31, 2013, our Texas proved reserves had a net pre-tax PV10 value of $197.7 million and Standardized Measure of
Discounted Future Net Cash Flows of $133.3 million and our proved reserves in Kansas had a net pre-tax PV10 value of $0.7 million
and Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net Cash Flows of $0.6 million.
As of December 31, 2013, approximately 24% of the proved reserves have been classified as proved developed producing, or “PDP”.
Proved  developed  non-producing,  or  “PDNP”  reserves  constitute  approximately  4%  and  proved  undeveloped,  or  “PUD”,  reserves
constitute approximately 72%, of the proved reserves as of December 31, 2013.
Total proved reserves had a net pre-tax PV10 value as of December 31, 2013, of approximately $198.4 million and a Standardized
Measure  of  Discounted  Future  Net  Cash  Flows  of  approximately  $133.9  million.  Approximately  $50.5  million  and  $34.1  million,
respectively, of total proved reserves are associated with the PDP reserves, which is approximately 25.5% of total proved reserves’ pre-
tax  PV10  value.  An  additional  $9.5  million  and  $6.4  million,  respectively,  are  associated  with  the  PDNP  reserves,  which  is
approximately 4.8% of total proved reserves’ pre-tax PV10 value. The remaining $138.3 million and $93.5 million, respectively, are
associated with PUD reserves.
Proved Undeveloped Reserves
Our reserve estimates as of December 31, 2013, include 5.2 million BOE as proved undeveloped reserves. As of December 31, 2012,
our reserve estimates included 3.1 million BOE as proved undeveloped reserves. Following is a description of the changes in our PUD
reserves from December 31, 2012 to December 31, 2013.
41
Conversion of approximately 884,145 BOE of reserves from PUD to PDP or PDNP through capital expenditures of approximately $29.1
million.
Upward revision of approximately 2,124,202 BOE primarily through increased performance and proving of additional reserves through
our infill development program.
Purchase of minerals in place through leasing of new acreage and acquisitions resulted in the addition of approximately 918,616 BOE.
Our proved reserves as of December 31, 2013 are summarized in the table below.
Total
(Boe)
Oil (Bbl)   Gas (Mcf)
563,385  1,751,996 
289,330 
36,366
1,658,098 
283,269
% of
Total
Proved
Texas:
 PDP
 PDNP
PUD
4,896,688  1,856,292  5,206,070
72%
137,692
92,860
Standardized
Measure of
Discounted
Future Net
Cash Flows
(In
Pre-tax
PV10 (In
thousands) 
 
 
24%  $
 
4%
50,460  $
 
9,517
thousands)
34,031  $
 
6,418
Future
Capital
Expenditures
(In
thousands)
-
2,600
95,688
PUD
 
Total
Proved:
 
Kansas:
 PDP
 PUD
 
Total
Proved:
 
Total:
PDP
PDNP
PUD
Total
Proved:
4,896,688  1,856,292  5,206,070
6,838,055  2,456,043  7,247,396
- 
17,600
17,600
31,000 
-
31,000
5,167 
17,600
22,767
1,658,098 
283,269
594,385  1,757,163 
289,330 
36,366 
4,914,288  1,856,292  5,223,670
72%
137,692
100%  $
197,669  $
0%  $
 
0%
0%  $
24%  $
 
4% 
72%
48  $
 
650
698  $
50,508  $
 
9,517 
138,342
6,855,655  2,487,043  7,270,163
100%  $
198,367  $
92,860
133,309
$
44  $
 
595
639
$
34,075  $
 
6,418 
93,455
133,948
$
95,688
98,288
-
-
-
-
2,600
95,688
98,288
Estimated Costs Related to Conversion of Proved Undeveloped Reserves to Proved Developed Reserves
The  following  table  indicates  projected  reserves  that  we  currently  estimate  will  be  converted  from  proved  undeveloped  or  proved
developed non-producing to proved developed, as well as the estimated costs per year involved in such development.
Estimated
Estimated
Oil
Gas
Reserves
Developed
Reserves
Developed
Total
Boe
Estimated
Development
Costs
Year  
 
 
2014  
2015
(Bbls)
3,483,358 
1,714,200 
 
5,197,558
Internal Controls Over Reserves Estimates
(Mcf)
1,270,059  3,695,035  $
 
 
1,892,659  5,513,001  $
622,600  1,817,967
59,399,966
38,887,800
98,287,766
Our reserves data and estimates were compiled, prepared and audited by third party independent consultants, Cawley, Gillespie &
Associates,  Inc..,  as  described  in  more  detail  herein,  in  compliance  with  SEC  definitions  and  guidance  and  in  accordance  with
generally accepted petroleum engineering principles. The technical persons employed by Cawley, Gillespie & Associates, Inc., met the
requirements  regarding  qualifications,  independence,  objectivity  and  confidentiality  set  forth  in  the  Standards  Pertaining  to  the
Estimating and Auditing of Oil and Natural Gas Reserves Information promulgated by the Society of Petroleum Engineers. Our reserves
estimates are prepared by examination and evaluation of production data, production decline curves, reservoir pressure data, logs,
geological  data,  and  offset  analogies.  The  third  party  independent  consultants  are  provided  full  access  to  complete  and  accurate
information pertaining to the property, and to all applicable personnel of the Company.
42
Our reserves estimates and process for developing such estimates are reviewed and approved by Ring’s Vice President of Operations,
Daniel D. Wilson, a petroleum engineer, and Chief Executive Officer, Kelly Hoffman, to ensure compliance with SEC disclosure and
internal control requirements and to verify the independence of the third party consultants. Mr. Daniel Wilson, a petroleum engineer and
businessman, has 29 years of experience in operating, evaluating and exploiting oil and gas properties. Mr. Kelly Hoffman has 38 years
of well-rounded experience in the oil and gas industry. Our management is ultimately responsible for reserve estimates and reserve
disclosures and ensuring that they are in accordance with the applicable regulatory requirements and industry standards and practices.
Estimates of oil and natural gas reserves are projections based on a process involving an independent third party engineering firm’s
collection of all required geologic, geophysical, engineering and economic data, and such firm’s complete external preparation of all
required estimates and are forward-looking in nature. These reports rely upon various assumptions, including assumptions required by
the  SEC,  such  as  constant  oil  and  natural  gas  prices,  operating  expenses  and  future  capital  costs.  The  process  also  requires
assumptions relating to availability of funds and timing of capital expenditures for development of our proved undeveloped reserves.
These  reports  should  not  be  construed  as  the  current  market  value  of  our  reserves.  The  process  of  estimating  oil  and  natural  gas
reserves is also dependent on geological, engineering and economic data for each reservoir. Because of the uncertainties inherent in
the interpretation of this data, we cannot be certain that the reserves will ultimately be realized. Our actual results could differ materially.
Summary of Oil and Natural Gas Properties and Projects
Production Summary
Our estimated average daily production for the month of December 2013 is summarized below. These tables indicate the percentage of
our estimated December 2013 average daily production of 631 BOE/d attributable to each state and to oil versus natural gas production.
Average
Daily
Production 
 
 
97.66% 
 
2.34%
100.00%
Oil
100.00% 
 
-
100.00%
Natural
Gas
25.89%
74.11%
100.00%
State
Texas
 
Kansas
Total
Acreage
The following table summarizes gross and net developed and undeveloped acreage at December 31, 2013 by region (net acreage is
our  percentage  ownership  of  gross  acreage).  Acreage  in  which  our  interest  is  limited  to  royalty  and  overriding  royalty  interests  is
excluded.
Undeveloped
Developed Acreage 
Net
  Gross  
 
2,143 
3,482 
 
 
 
 
640 
640 
 
 
 
 
2,783 
 
4,122
Texas
 
Kansas
 
Total
Production History
Total Acreage
Net
8,949
14,232
23,181
Gross  
14,375 
 
16,997 
 
31,372
Net
 
6,806 
 
13,592 
 
20,398
Acreage
Gross  
10,893 
 
16,357 
 
27,250
43
The following table presents the historical information about our produced natural gas and oil volumes.
Oil production (Bbls)
 
Natural gas production (Mcf)  
 
Total production (Boe)
 
Daily production (Boe/d)
Average sales price:
Total (per Boe)
Oil (per Bbl)
 
  Natural gas (per Mcf)
 
 
Average production cost (per
 
Boe)
Average production taxes
(per Boe)
Year Ended December 31,
2011
5,297 
2,369 
5,692 
16
88.50 
7.11 
85.32
43.04
4.02
$
$
2012
20,531 
6,480 
21,611 
59
84.50 
3.50 
81.39
$
$
36.37
3.84
2013
109,673
36,047
115,681
317
92.81
3.82
89.17
$
$
10.44
4.12
The average oil sales price amounts above are calculated by dividing revenue from oil sales by the volume of oil sold, in barrels “Bbl”.
The average gas sales price amounts above are calculated by dividing revenue from gas sales by the volume of gas sold, in thousand
cubic feet “Mcf”. The total average sales price amounts are calculated by dividing total revenues by total volume sold, in BOE. The
average production costs above are calculated by dividing production costs by total production in BOE.
Productive Wells
The following table presents our ownership at December 31, 2013, in productive oil and natural gas wells by region (a net well is our
percentage ownership of a gross well).
Texas
Kansas
 
Total
Drilling Activity
Gross  
76 
 
- 
 
 
 
 
76
Net
Gross  
- 
1 
 
1
53 
- 
 
53
Net
Oil Wells
Gas wells
Total Wells
Gross  
76 
- 
1 
1 
 
 
1 
77
Net
53
1
54
During 2013, we drilled and completed thirty seven (37) developmental oil wells and had drilled or started to drill an additional four (4)
wells  that  were  not  completed  as  of  December  31,  2013.  All  thirty  seven  (37)  wells  drilled  in  2013  were  successful  and  placed  in
production. There were no exploratory wells drilled during 2013. We  drilled  five developmental oil wells and one salt water disposal
well during 2012 and all five developmental wells were successful and completed and placed in production. There were no exploratory
wells drilled during 2012. We did not drill any wells during 2011.
Cost Information
We conduct our oil and natural gas activities entirely in the United States. As noted previously in the table appearing under “Production
History”, our average production costs, per BOE, were $43.04 in 2011, $36.37 in 2012 and $10.44 in 2013, and our average production
taxes, per BOE, were $4.02 in 2011, $3.84 in 2012, and $4.12 in 2013. These amounts are calculated by dividing our total production
costs or total production taxes by our total volume sold, in BOE.
44
Costs incurred for property acquisition, exploration and development activities during the years ended December 31, 2011, December
31, 2012 and 2013 are shown below.
Acquisition of proved
properties
Acquisition of unproved
properties
Exploration costs
Development costs
Total Costs Incurred
$
For the Year Ended December 31,
2011
2012
2013
6,280,391  $
9,873,128  $
5,192,441
-
-
-
$
- 
317,042
6,597,433  $
- 
6,581,343 
 
16,454,471  $
-
29,796,379
34,988,820
Delivery Commitments
As of December 31, 2013, we were not committed to providing a fixed quantity of oil or gas under any existing contracts.
Other Properties and Commitments
Our principal executive offices are in leased office space in Midland, Texas. The leased office space consists of approximately 3,700
square feet. Additionally, we lease office space in Tulsa, Oklahoma which serves as our primary accounting office. The leased office
space consists of approximately 3,700 square feet. We also lease office space in Andrews, Texas which is currently our only field office.
The leased office space consists of approximately 2,000 square feet. We anticipate leasing or purchasing additional office space in
Midland and Andrews, Texas in the near future.
45
MANAGEMENT
Executive Officers and Directors
The following table sets forth information regarding our executive officers, certain other officers and directors as of August 13, 2014. The
Board believes that all the directors named below are highly qualified and have the skills and experience required for effective service
on the Board. The directors’ individual biographies below contain information about their experience, qualifications and skills that led
the Board to nominate them.
Name
Kelly Hoffman
David A. Fowler
Daniel D. Wilson
Age   Position
Chief Executive Officer,
Director
President, Director
  Vice President of Operations
56
55
53
Daniel D. Wilson
William R.
Broaddrick
Lloyd T. Rochford
 
Stanley M. McCabe  
Anthony B. Petrelli
 
Clayton E. Woodrum
53
37
67
82
61
73
Vice President of Operations
Chief Financial Officer
Chairman of the Board of
 
Directors
  Director
  Director
  Director
Our executive officers are elected by, and serve at the pleasure of, our Board of Directors. Our directors serve terms of one year each,
with the current directors serving until the next annual meeting of stockholders, and in each case until their respective successors are
duly elected and qualified.
Messrs. Rochford and McCabe joined the Board in June 2012 as a part of the merger between Ring and Stanford. Messrs. Hoffman,
Fowler, Woodrum and Petrelli joined the Board in January 2013.
Kelly Hoffman – Chief Executive Officer and Director. Mr. Hoffman, 55, has organized the funding, acquisition and development of
many oil and gas properties. He began his career in the Permian Basin in 1975 with Amoco Production Company. His responsibilities
included oilfield construction, crew management, and drilling and completion operations. In the early 1990s, Mr. Hoffman co-founded
AOCO and began acquiring properties in West Texas. In 1996, he arranged financing and purchased 10,000 acres in the Fuhrman
Mascho field in Andrews, Texas. In the first six months, he organized a 60 well drilling and completion program resulting in a 600%
increase in revenue and approximately 18 months later sold the properties to Lomak (Range Resources). In 1999, he again arranged
financing and acquired 12,000 acres in Lubbock and Crosby counties. After drilling and completing 19 successful wells, unitizing the
acreage, and instituting a secondary recovery project he sold his interest in the property to Arrow Operating Company. From April 2009
until December 2011, Mr. Hoffman served as President of Victory Park Resources, a privately held exploration and production company
focused on the acquisition of oil and gas producing properties in Oklahoma, Texas and New Mexico. Mr. Hoffman currently serves as a
director of Joes Jeans Inc. (NASDAQ: JOEZ), a reporting company.
David A. Fowler – President and Director. Mr. Fowler, 55, has served in several management positions for various companies in the
insurance and financial services industries. In 1994, he joined Petroleum Listing Service as Vice President of Operations, overseeing
oil and gas property listings, information packages, and marketing oil and gas properties to industry players. In late 1998, Mr. Fowler
became the Corporate Development Coordinator for the Independent Producer Finance (“IPF”) group of Range Resources Corporation.
Leaving Range IPF in April of 2001, he co-founded and became President of Simplex Energy Solutions, LLC (“Simplex”). Representing
Permian Basin oil and gas independent operators, Simplex became known as the Permian Basin’s premier oil and gas divestiture firm,
closing over 150 projects valued at approximately $675 million.
Daniel D. Wilson – Vice President of Operations. Mr. Wilson, 52, has 29 years of experience in operating, evaluating and exploiting
oil and gas properties. He has experience in production, drilling and reservoir engineering. For the last 22 years, he has served as the
Vice President and Manager of Operations for Breck Operating Corporation (“Breck”). He has overseen the building, operating and
divestiture of two companies during this time. At Breck’s peak, Mr. Wilson was responsible for over 750 wells in seven states and had
an  operating  staff  of  27  including  engineers,  foremen,  pumpers  and  clerks.  Mr.  Wilson  personally  performed  or  oversaw  all  of  the
economic evaluations for both acquisition and banking purposes.
46
William  R.  Broaddrick  –  Chief  Financial  Officer.  Mr.  Broaddrick,  36,  was  employed  from  1997  to  2000  with  Amoco  Production
Company, performing lease revenue accounting and state production tax regulatory reporting functions. During 2000, Mr. Broaddrick
was employed by Duke Energy Field Services, LLC, performing state production tax functions. From 2001 until 2010, Mr. Broaddrick
was employed by Arena Resources, Inc., as Vice President and Chief Financial Officer. During 2011, Mr. Broaddrick joined Stanford, as
Chief Financial Officer. Subsequent to and as a result of the merger transaction between Stanford and Ring, Mr. Broaddrick became
Chief Financial Officer of Ring as of July 2012.
Mr. Broaddrick received a Bachelor’s Degree in Accounting from Langston University, through Oklahoma State University – Tulsa, in
1999. Mr. Broaddrick is a Certified Public Accountant.
Lloyd T. (“Tim”) Rochford – Chairman of the Board of Directors. Mr. Rochford, 67, has been active as an individual consultant and
entrepreneur in the oil and gas industry since 1973. During that time, he has been an operator of wells in the mid-continent of the United
States, evaluated leasehold drilling and production projects, and arranged and raised in excess of $500 million in private and public
financing for oil and gas projects and development.
Mr. Rochford has successfully formed, developed and sold/merged four natural resource companies, two of which were listed on the
New York Stock Exchange. The most recent, Arena Resources, Inc. (“Arena”), was founded by Mr. Rochford and his associate Stanley
McCabe in August 2000. From inception until May of 2008, Mr. Rochford served as President, Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) and as a
director of Arena. During that time, Arena received numerous accolades from publications such as Business Week (2007 Hot Growth
Companies), Entrepreneur (2007 Hot 500), Fortune (2007, 2008, 2009 Fastest Growing Companies), Fortune Small Business (2007,
2008 Fastest Growing Companies) and Forbes (Best Small Companies of 2009). In May 2008, Mr. Rochford resigned the position of
CEO and accepted the position of Chairman of the Board. In his role as Chairman, he continued to pursue opportunities that would
enhance the then current, as well as long-term value of Arena. Through his efforts, Arena entered into a merger agreement and was
acquired by another New York Stock Exchange company for $1.6 billion in July, 2010.
Stanley  M.  McCabe  –  Director. Mr.  McCabe,  81,  has  been  active  in  the  oil  and  gas  industry  for  over  30  years,  primarily  seeking
individual oil and gas acquisition and development opportunities. In 1979, he founded and served as Chairman and CEO of Stanton
Energy, Inc., a Tulsa, Oklahoma natural resource company specializing in contract drilling and operation of oil and gas wells. In 1990,
Mr. McCabe co-founded with Mr. Rochford, Magnum Petroleum, Inc., serving as an officer and director. In 2000, Mr. McCabe co-founded
with Mr. Rochford, Arena Resources, Inc. (“Arena”), serving as Chairman of the Board until 2008 and then as a director of Arena until
2010.
Anthony B. Petrelli – Director. Mr. Petrelli, 61, is President, member of the Board of Directors, and Director of Investment Banking of
Neidiger, Tucker, Bruner, Inc., a Denver, Colorado based financial services firm founded in 1977. Beginning his career in 1972, Mr.
Petrelli  has  had  extensive  experience  in  the  areas  of  operations,  sales,  trading,  management  of  sales,  underwriting  and  corporate
finance.  He  has  served  on  numerous  regulatory  and  industry  committees  including  service  on  the  FINRA  Corporate  Finance
Committee, the NASD Small Firm Advisory Board and as Chairman of the FINRA District Business Conduct Committee, District 3. Mr.
Petrelli received his BS in Business (Finance) and his Masters of Business Administration (MBA) from the University of Colorado and a
Masters of Arts in Counseling from Denver Seminary.
Clayton E. Woodrum – Director. Mr. Woodrum, CPA, 73, is a founding partner of Woodrum, Tate & Associates, PLLC. His financial
background  encompasses  over  40  years  of  experience  from  serving  as  a  partner  in  charge  of  the  tax  department  of  a  big  eight
accounting  firm  to  chief  financial  officer  of  BancOklahoma  Corp.  and  Bank  of  Oklahoma.  His  areas  of  expertise  include  business
valuation,  litigation  support  including  financial  analysis,  damage  reports,  depositions  and  testimony,  estate  planning,  financing
techniques for businesses, asset protection vehicles, sale and liquidation of businesses, debt restructuring, debt discharge and CFO
functions for private and public companies.
Family Relationships
There are no family relationships between any director, executive officer, or person nominated or chose by us to become a director or
executive officer.
47
Involvement in Certain Legal Proceedings
During the past ten years, there have been no events under any bankruptcy act, no criminal proceedings (excluding traffic violations and
other minor offenses), and no judgments, injunctions, orders or decrees material to the evaluation of the ability and integrity of any of our
directors  or  executive  officers.  None  of  our  executive  officers  or  directors  have  been  involved  in  any  judicial  or  administrative
proceedings  resulting  from  involvement  in  mail  or  wire  fraud  or  fraud  in  connection  with  any  business  entity,  any  judicial  or
administrative proceedings based on violations of federal or state securities, commodities, banking or insurance laws or regulations,
and any disciplinary sanctions or orders imposed by a stock, commodities or derivatives exchange or other self-regulatory organization.
Board Committees
Our Board of Directors has established an Audit Committee, a Compensation Committee, a Nominating and Corporate Governance
Committee, and an Executive Committee, the composition and responsibilities of which are briefly described below. The charters for
each of these committees shall be provided to any person without charge, upon request. The charters for such committees are available
on  our  website  at  www.ringenergy.com.  The  information  on,  or  that  can  be  accessed  through  our  website,  is  not  incorporated  by
reference into this prospectus and should not be considered part of this prospectus. Requests may also be directed to Ring Energy, Inc.,
6555 S. Lewis Ave., Suite 200, Tulsa, Oklahoma 74136, Attention: William R. Broaddrick, or by calling (918) 499-3880.
Audit Committee
The Audit Committee’s principal functions are to assist the Board in monitoring the integrity of our financial statements, the independent
auditor’s qualifications and independence, the performance of our independent auditors and our compliance with legal and regulatory
requirements.  The  Audit  Committee  has  the  sole  authority  to  retain  and  terminate  our  independent  auditors  and  to  approve  the
compensation paid to our independent auditors. The Audit Committee is also responsible for overseeing our internal audit function. The
Audit Committee is comprised of Messrs. Woodrum and Petrelli, with Mr. Woodrum acting as the chairman. Our Board of Directors
determined that Mr. Woodrum qualified as “audit committee financial expert” as defined in Item 407 of Regulation S-K promulgated by
the Securities and Exchange Commission (see the biographical information for Mr. Woodrum, infra, in this discussion of “Executive
Officers and Directors”). Each of Messrs. Woodrum and Petrelli further qualified as “independent” in accordance with the applicable
regulations of the NYSE MKT, LLC definition of independent director set forth in the Company Guide, Part 8, Section 803(A). (see the
biographical information for Messrs. Woodrum and Petrelli, infra, in this discussion of “Executive Officers and Directors”).
Compensation Committee
The Compensation Committee’s principal function is to make recommendations regarding the compensation of the Company’s officers.
In accordance with the rules of the NYSE MKT, LLC, the compensation of our chief executive officer is recommended to the Board (in a
proceeding  in  which  the  chief  executive  officer  does  not  participate)  by  the  Compensation  Committee.  Compensation  for  all  other
officers  is  also  recommended  to  the  Board  for  determination,  by  the  Compensation  Committee.  The  Compensation  Committee  is
comprised of Messrs. Rochford and McCabe, with Mr. Rochford acting as the chairman.
Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee
The Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee’s principal functions are to (a) identify and recommend qualified candidates to
the  Board  of  Directors  for  nomination  as  members  of  the  Board  and  its  committees,  and  (b)  develop  and  recommend  to  the  Board
corporate governance principles applicable to the Company. The Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee is comprised of
Messrs. Rochford and McCabe, with Mr. Rochford acting as the chairman.
There have been no material changes to the procedures by which security holders may recommend nominees to our Board of Directors.
Executive Committee
The Executive Committee’s principal function is to exercise the powers and duties of the Board between Board meetings and while the
Board is not in session, and implement the policy decisions of the Board. The Executive Committee is comprised of Messrs. Rochford
and McCabe.
Code of Ethics
48
We  have  adopted  a  Code  of  Ethics  that  applies  to  our  Chief  Executive  Officer,  President,  Chief  Financial  Officer,  and  Corporate
Controller,  as  well  as  the  principal  executive  officer,  principal  financial  officer,  principal  accounting  officer  or  controller,  or  persons
performing similar functions. We have also adopted a Code of Conduct that applies to our officers, directors, and employees. We will
provide such codes to any person without charge, upon request, a copy of the Code of Ethics or Code of Conduct. Such codes are
available on our website at www.ringenergy.com. The information on, or that can be accessed through our website, is not incorporated
by reference into this prospectus and should not be considered part of this prospectus. Requests may also be directed to Ring Energy,
Inc., 6555 S. Lewis Ave., Suite 200, Tulsa, Oklahoma 74136, Attention: William R. Broaddrick, or by calling (918) 499-3880.
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance
Based solely upon a review of Section 16(a) reports furnished to us for our most recent fiscal year, we know of no director, officer or
beneficial owner of more than ten percent of our Common Stock who failed to file on a timely basis reports of beneficial ownership of the
our Common Stock as required by Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
49
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Compensation Discussion & Analysis
Roles  of  our  Compensation  Committee  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  in  Compensation  Decisions,  Use  of  Compensation
Consultants and Compensation Philosophy and Objectives
Ring  strives  to  attract,  motivate  and  retain  high-quality  executives  by  providing  total  compensation  that  is  performance-based  and
competitive  within  the  labor  market  in  which  it  competes  for  executive  talent  as  a  public  company.  Our  compensation  program  is
intended to align the interests of management with the interests of stockholders by linking pay with performance, thereby incentivizing
performance and furthering the ultimate goal of stockholder value.
This section contains a discussion of the material elements of compensation awarded to, earned by or paid to (i) all individuals serving
as the Company’s principal executive officer or acting in a similar capacity during the last completed fiscal year (“PEO”), regardless of
compensation level, (ii) all individuals serving as the Company’s principal financial officer or acting in a similar capacity during the last
completed fiscal year (“PFO”), regardless of compensation level. As of the end of the last completed fiscal year, the Company had two
executive officers other than the PEO and PFO, and this discussion includes the material elements of compensation awarded to, earned
by, or paid to such executive officers. These individuals are referred to herein as the (“Named Executive Officers”). This section omits
tables  and  columns  if  there  has  been  no  compensation  awarded  to,  earned  by,  or  paid  to  any  of  the  Named  Executive  Officers  or
directors required to be reported in such table or column in any fiscal year covered by such table.
Our current executive compensation programs are determined and approved by our Compensation Committee, after consideration of
recommendations by our Chairman of the Board and our Chief Executive Officer, as to the other Named Executive Officers. None of the
Named Executive Officers are members of the Compensation Committee. The Compensation Committee has the direct responsibility
and authority to review and approve the Company’s goals and objectives relative to the compensation of the Named Executive Officers,
and to determine and approve (either as a committee or with the other members of the Company’s Board of Directors who qualify as
“independent” directors under applicable guidelines adopted by the NYSE MKT, LLC) the compensation levels of the Named Executive
Officers.
Our  current  executive  compensation  programs  are  intended  to  achieve  two  objectives.  The  primary  objective  is  to  enhance  the
profitability of the Company, and thus, stockholder value. The second objective is to attract, motivate, reward and retain employees,
including executive personnel, who contribute to the long-term success of the Company. As described in more detail below, the material
elements of our current executive compensation program for Named Executive Officers include a base salary, discretionary annual
bonuses and discretionary stock options grants.
We believe that each element of the executive compensation program helps to achieve one or both of the compensation objectives
outlined above. The table below lists each material element of our executive compensation program and the compensation objective or
objectives that it is designed to achieve.
Compensation Element
Compensation  Objectives  Attempted  to  be
Base Salary
Bonus Compensation
Achieved
Attract and retain qualified executives;
Motivate and reward executives’ performance.
Motivate and reward executive’s performance;
Equity-Based Compensation – stock
options and restricted stock grants
profitability
of  Company
and
Enhance 
stockholder value.
Enhance
profitability
of  Company
stockholder  value  by  aligning 
incentives  with 
stockholders’ 
interests.
and
long-term
long-term
As illustrated by the table above, base salary is primarily intended to attract and retain qualified executives. This is the element of the
Ring’s  current  executive  compensation  program  where  the  value  of  the  benefit  in  any  given  year  is  not  wholly  dependent  on
performance. Base salaries are intended to attract and retain qualified executives as well as being linked to performance by rewarding
and/or motivating executives. Base salaries are reviewed annually and take into account: experience and retention considerations; past
performance; improvement in historical performance; anticipated future potential performance; and other issues specific to the individual
executive.
50
There are specific elements of the current executive compensation program that are designed to reward performance and enhance
profitability and stockholder value, and therefore, the value of these benefits is based on performance. The Company’s discretionary
annual bonus plan is primarily intended to motivate and reward Named Executive Officers’ performance to achieve specific strategies
and operating objectives, as well as improved financial performance.
The  Compensation  Committee  considers  the  salaries  of  comparable  executives  of  peer  companies  for  which  such  information  is
publicly available. The Compensation Committee believes that bonuses and equity compensation should fluctuate with our success in
achieving  financial,  operating  and  strategic  goals.  The  Committee’s  philosophy  is  that  we  should  continue  to  use  long-term
compensation  such  as  stock  options  to  align  stockholder  and  executives’  interests  and  should  allocate  a  portion  of  long-term
compensation to the entire executive compensation package.
The  Compensation  Committee  has  the  authority  to  retain  and  terminate  compensation  consultants  and  other  experts  to  assist  the
committee in its evaluation of compensation of any of the executive officers. To date, the Compensation Committee has not retained an
outside consultant in establishing its compensation program or in establishing any specific compensation for an executive officer.
Current Executive Compensation Program Elements
Base Salaries
Similar to most companies within the industry, our policy is to pay Named Executive Officers’ base salaries in cash. Mr. Owens, who
served  as  Chief  Executive  Officer  from  March  2008  through  August  31,  2012,  did  not  receive  a  salary  as  an  executive  officer  but
received a $250 per month director’s fee. Effective July 1, 2012, the Compensation Committee designated a salary of $100,000 for Mr.
Broaddrick. Effective September 1, 2012, the Compensation Committee recommended an increase of $25,000 for Mr. Broaddrick. In
approving this salary increase, the Committee took into account factors including, peer group comparisons available to the Committee,
each executive’s individual experience and increased responsibilities and improved performance for the Company.
Robert S. Owens served as Chief Executive Officer of the Company from March 2008 through August 31, 2012. Mr. Hoffman joined the
Company as its Chief Executive Officer effective January 1, 2013, and the Compensation Committee designated a salary of $175,000.
Mr. Fowler joined the Company as its President effective January 1, 2013, and the Compensation Committee designated a salary of
$150,000. Mr. Wilson joined the Company as its Executive Vice President effective January 1, 2013, and the Compensation Committee
designated a salary of $150,000.
Annual Bonuses
The Company does not have a formal policy regarding bonuses, and payment of bonuses has been purely discretionary and is largely
based on the recommendations of the Compensation Committee. Cash bonuses are not expected to be a significant portion of the
executive compensation package. Cash bonuses were granted to all employees in December 2013. The annual discretionary bonus is
reported in the “Bonus” column of the “Summary Compensation Table” for each Named Executive Officer.
Equity-Based Compensation – Options and Restricted Stock Grants
It is our policy that the Named Executive Officers’ long-term compensation should be directly linked to enhancing profitability and value
provided to shareholders of the Company’s common stock. Accordingly, the Compensation Committee grants equity awards under the
Company’s long term incentive plan designed to link an increase in shareholder value to compensation. Mr. Broaddrick was granted
non-qualified stock options in 2012 and 2013. Messrs. Hoffman, Fowler and Wilson were granted non-qualified stock options in 2013.
Stock option grants are valued using the Black-Scholes Model and are calculated as a part of the executive compensation package for
the year based on the amount of requisite service period served. Non-qualified stock options for Named Executive Officers and other
key employees generally vest ratably over five years. No restricted stock was granted to any of the Named Executive Officers.’ The
Compensation Committee believes that these awards encourage Named Executive Officers to continue to use their best professional
skills and to retain Named Executive Officers for longer terms.
51
Grants  are  determined  for  Named  Executive  Officers  based  on  his  or  her  performance  in  the  prior  year,  his  or  her  expected  future
contribution to the performance of the Company, and other competitive data on grant values of peer companies. Awards may be granted
to  new  key  employees  or  Named  Executive  Officers  on  hire  date.  Other  grant  date  determinations  are  made  by  the  Compensation
Committee, which is based upon the date the Committee met and proper communication was made to the Named Executive Officer or
key employee as defined in the definition of grant date by generally accepted accounting principles. Exercise prices are equal to the
value of the Company’s stock on the close of business on the determined grant date. The Company has no program or practice to
coordinate timing of grants with release of material, nonpublic information.
The grant date fair value as determined under generally accepted accounting principles is shown in the “Summary Compensation
Table” below.
Pension and Retirement Plans
The  Company  does  not  have  any  pension  plans,  non-qualified  deferred  compensation  plans  or  severance,  retirement,  termination,
constructive termination or change in control arrangements for any of its Named Executive Officers for the year ended December 31,
2013.
Compensation of Named Executive Officers
The “Summary Compensation Table” set forth below should be read in connection with the tables and narrative descriptions that follow.
The “Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year End Table” and “Option Exercises and Stock Vested Table” provide further information
on the Named Executive Officers’ potential realizable value and actual value realized with respect to their equity awards.
Summary Compensation Table
Option
Awards(2)
Salary(1)
Bonus
All Other
Compensation
Total
Name and Principal
Position
Year
($)
($)
($)
($)
($)
175,000
-
5,000
-
2,336,928
-
122,500(3) 2,639,428
90,833(4)
90,833
-
 
-
-
-
-
 
-
-
-
-
 
-
-
-
-
 
-
2,000(5)
3,000(5)
-
-
2,000
3,000
150,000
-
-
150,000
-
5,000
-
-
5,000
-
2,336,928
-
-
1,454,044
-
22,500(6) 2,514,428
-
-
-
-
 
- 1,609,044
-
-
Kelly Hoffman,
Chief Executive Officer,
effective January 1,
2013
 
Robert S. Owens,
Chief Executive Officer
through August 31,
2012
 
David Fowler,
President, effective
January 1, 2013
 
Danny Wilson,
Executive Vice
President, effective
December 17, 2013
2013
2012
2011
2013
2012
2011
2013
2012
2011
2013
2012
2011
William R. Broaddrick,
2013
2012
125,000
108,333
5,000
3,000
207,549
213,711
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
337,549
325,044
William R. Broaddrick,
Chief Financial Officer,
effective January 1,
2013; Interim Chief
Executive Officer from
September 1, 2012
through December 31,
2012
2012
2011
108,333
-
3,000
-
213,711
232,156
-
-
325,044
232,156
(1)
Salary information for William R. Broaddrick during 2011 and 2012 includes (i) compensation received from Stanford prior to the merger
between Stanford and Ring and (ii) compensation received from Ring subsequent to the merger.
(2)
See discussion of assumptions made in valuing these awards in the notes to our financial statements.
(3)
2013 Other Compensation to Mr. Hoffman includes a $100,000 signing bonus and $22,500 in director’s fees.
(4)
2012 Other Compensation to Mr. Hoffman consisted of consulting fees.
(5)
Robert S. Owens received a director fee of $250 per month through the date of his resignation which was effective August 31, 2012.
(6)
David Fowler received $22,500 in director’s fees.
52
The Company awards stock options to key employees and the Named Executive Officers either on the initial date of employment or due
to performance incentives throughout the year. The following table reflects the stock options granted during 2013.
Grants of Plan-Based Awards
All Other
Option
Awards:
Number of
Securities
Underlying
Options (#)
500,000  $
 
500,000 
300,000 
 
 
25,000 
 
25,000 
20,000
Exercise or
Base Price
of Option
Awards ($)
Fair Value
on Grant
Date (1)
2,077,491
2,077,491
1,246,495
259,437
259,437
207,549
4.50  $
 
4.50 
4.50 
 
 
10.00 
 
10.00 
10.00
20,000  $
10.00  $
207,549
Name
Kelly Hoffman
David Fowler
Daniel D. Wilson
Kelly Hoffman
David Fowler
Daniel D. Wilson
William R.
Broaddrick
Grant Date  
 
 
1/1/2013  
 
1/1/2013  
 
 
1/1/2013  
12/16/2013  
 
12/16/2013  
 
12/16/2013
12/16/2013
Named  Executive  Officers  are  not  separately  entitled  to  receive  dividend  equivalent  rights  with  respect  to  each  stock  option.  Each
nonqualified stock option award described in the “Grants of Plan-Based Awards Table” above expires ten years from the grant date and
vests in equal installments over the course of five years.
The following table provides certain information regarding unexercised stock options outstanding for each Named Executive Officer as
of December 31, 2013.
Outstanding Equity Awards
Number of
Securities
Underlying
Unexercised
Options (#)
Unexercisable
Options
Exercise
Price ($)
Number of
Securities
Underlying
Unexercised
Options (#)
Exercisable  
 
 
100,000 
100,000 
-
100,000 
- 
 
60,000 
-
20,000 
- 
-
Name
Kelly Hoffman
David Fowler
 
 
Daniel D. Wilson
 
 
William R.
Broaddrick
Option
Expiration
Date
12/01/21
01/01/23
12/16/23
01/01/23
12/16/23
01/01/23
12/16/23
12/01/21
09/01/22
12/16/23
2.00 
4.50 
10.00
4.50 
10.00 
 
4.50 
10.00
2.00 
4.50 
10.00
150,000  $
 
400,000 
 
25,000
400,000 
25,000 
 
240,000 
20,000
80,000 
50,000 
 
20,000  $
There were no option exercises by Named Executive Officers during 2013.
53
The Company uses the Black-Scholes option pricing model to calculate the fair-value of each option grant. The expected volatility for
the 2013 option grants is based on the historical price volatility of the Company’s Common Stock. We elected to use the simplified
method for estimating the expected term as allowed by generally accepted accounting principles for options granted through December
31,  2013  and  2012.  Under  the  simplified  method,  the  expected  term  is  equal  to  the  midpoint  between  the  vesting  period  and  the
contractual term of the stock option. The risk-free interest rate represents the U.S. Treasury bill rate for the expected life of the related
stock options. The dividend yield represents the Company’s anticipated cash dividend over the expected life of the stock options. The
following are the Black-Scholes weighted-average assumptions used for options granted during the periods ended December 31, 2013
and 2012:
Risk free
Expected
July 1, 2012
September 1,
2012
October 1, 2012  
 
 
January 1, 2013  
February 13,
 
2013
March 15, 2013  
 
June 25, 2013
December 16,
interest
rate
life
Dividend
(years)
yield
Volatility
0.67% 
 
0.80%
0.25% 
 
0.76% 
 
0.92%
0.84% 
1.49%
6.5
6.5
5.75 
 
6.5
6.5
6.5 
6.5
- 
 
-
- 
 
- 
 
-
- 
-
158%
153%
147%
138%
137%
132%
128%
December 16,
2013
1.55%
6.5
-
119%
As of December 31, 2013, there was approximately $5,250,009 of unrecognized compensation cost related to stock options that will be
recognized  over  a  weighted  average  period  of  2.6  years.  The  aggregate  intrinsic  value  of  options  vested  and  expected  to  vest  at
December 31, 2013 was $20,359,425. The aggregate intrinsic value of options exercisable at December 31, 2013 was $3,890,000. The
year end intrinsic values are based on a December 31, 2013 closing price of $12.20.
During 2013, a total of 25,000 options were exercised. The aggregate intrinsic value of the options exercised was $149,000.
Director Compensation
Beginning  in  February  2013,  all  directors  received  a  monthly  stipend  of  $2,000.  Additionally,  each  director  received  $500  for  each
meeting physically attended. Each outside director also received an annual bonus of $2,000. Director compensation to Messrs. Fowler
and Hoffman is included here but is also included in the Executive Compensation Table above. No director receives a salary as a
director.
Director Compensation Table
Fees Earned
or Paid in
Cash ($)
Option
Awards ($)
All Other
Compensation
($)
Total ($)
24,500 
24,500 
22,500 
22,500
24,500 
24,500
-(1) 
-(2) 
-(3) 
-(4)
-(5) 
-(6)
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
-
24,500
24,500
22,500
22,500
24,500
24,500
Name
Lloyd T. Rochford
 
Stanley M. McCabe  
 
David A. Fowler
Kelly Hoffman
 
Clayton E.
Woodrum
Anthony B. Petrelli
(1)
Lloyd T. Rochford has 100,000 options to purchase Ring stock.
(2)
Stanley McCabe has 100,000 options to purchase Ring stock.
(3)
David A. Fowler has an aggregate of 525,000 options to purchase Ring stock.
(4)
Kelly Hoffman has an aggregate of 775,000 options to purchase Ring stock.
(5)
Clayton E. Woodrum has 100,000 options to purchase Ring stock.
(6)
Anthony B. Petrelli has 100,000 options to purchase Ring stock.
54
Executive Stock Compensation Plans
The following table sets forth information concerning our executive stock compensation plans as of December 31, 2013.
Number of
securities to be
issued upon
exercise of
outstanding
options
(a)
Number of
securities
remaining
available for future
issuance under
compensation
plans (excluding
securities in
column (a))
(c)
Weighted-average
exercise price of
outstanding options
(b)
2,647,500
$
- 
 
2,647,500
$
4.01
- 
 
4.01
2,327,500
-
2,327,500
Equity
compensation
plans approved by
security holders
 
Equity
compensation
plans not
approved by
security holders
Total
Long Term Incentive Plan
On  January  22,  2013,  our  stockholders  acted  by  way  of  majority  written  consent  action  (pursuant  to  a  solicitation  of  consents
commenced  on  January  16,  2013,  and  in  lieu  of  a  special  meeting  of  stockholders)  to  approve  the  Ring  Energy,  Inc.  Long-Term
Incentive Plan (the “Plan”).
The Plan was in existence with Stanford and was adopted by the Board of Directors on June 27, 2012, and assumed by the Company
upon the acquisition of Stanford. The Plan was also approved by vote of a majority of stockholders on January 22, 2013. The following
is a summary of the material terms of the Plan.
Shares Available
Our Plan currently authorizes 5,000,000 shares of our Common Stock for issuance under the Plan. If any shares of Stock subject to an
Award are forfeited or if any Award based on shares of Stock is otherwise terminated without issuance of such shares of Stock or other
consideration  in  lieu  of  such  shares  of  Stock,  the  shares  of  Stock  subject  to  such  Award  shall  to  the  extent  of  such  forfeiture  or
termination, again be available for Awards under the Plan if no participant shall have received any benefits of ownership in respect
thereof The shares to be delivered under the Plan shall be made available from (a) authorized but unissued shares of Common Stock,
(b) Common Stock held in the treasury of the Company, or (c) previously issued shares of Common Stock reacquired by the Company,
including  shares  purchased  on  the  open  market,  in  each  situation  as  the  Board  of  Directors  or  the  Compensation  Committee  may
determine from time to time at its sole option.
Administration
The Committee shall administer the Plan with respect to all eligible individuals or may delegate all or part of its duties under the Plan to
a  subcommittee  or  any  executive  officer  of  the  Company,  subject  in  each  case  to  such  conditions  and  limitations  as  the  Board  of
Directors may establish. Under the Plan, “Committee” can be either the Board of Directors or a committee approved by the Board of
Directors.
Eligibility
Awards may be granted pursuant to the Plan only to persons who are eligible individuals at the time of the grant thereof or in connection
with the severance or retirement of Eligible Individuals. Under the Plan, “Eligible Individuals” means (a) employees, (b) non-employee
Directors and (c) any other person that the Committee designates as eligible for an Award (other than for Incentive Options) because the
Person performs bona fide consulting or advisory services for the Company or any of its subsidiaries (other than services in connection
with the offer or sale of securities in a capital raising transaction).
55
Stock Options
Under the Plan, the plan administrator is authorized to grant stock options. Stock options may be either designated as non-qualified
stock options or incentive stock options. Incentive stock options, which are intended to meet the requirements of Section 422 of the
Internal  Revenue  Code  such  that  a  participant  can  receive  potentially  favorable  tax  treatment,  may  only  be  granted  to  employees.
Therefore, any stock option granted to consultants and non-employee directors are non-qualified stock options.
Options granted under the Plan become exercisable at such times as may be specified by the plan administrator. In general, options
granted to participants become exercisable in five equal annual installments, subject to the optionee’s continued employment or service
with our company. However, the aggregate value (determined as of the grant date) of the shares subject to incentive stock options that
may become exercisable by a participant in any year may not exceed $100,000.
Each option will be exercisable on such date or dates, during such period, and for such number of shares of Common Stock as shall be
determined by the plan administrator on the day on which such stock option is granted and set forth in the option agreement with respect
to such stock option; provided, however the maximum term of options granted under the Plan is ten years.
Restricted Stock
Under the Plan, the plan administrator is also authorized to make awards of restricted stock. Before the end of a restricted period and/or
lapse of other restrictions established by the plan administrator, shares received as restricted stock will contain a legend restricting their
transfer, and may be forfeited in the event of termination of employment or upon the failure to achieve other conditions set forth in the
award agreement.
An award of restricted stock will be evidenced by a written agreement between us and the participant. The award agreement will specify
the number of shares of Common Stock subject to the award, the nature and/or length of the restrictions, the conditions that will result in
the  automatic  and  complete  forfeiture  of  the  shares  and  the  time  and  manner  in  which  the  restrictions  will  lapse,  subject  to  the
participant’s  continued  employment  by  us,  and  any  other  terms  and  conditions  the  plan  administrator  imposes  consistent  with  the
provisions of the Plan. Upon the lapse of the restrictions, any legends on the shares of Common Stock subject to the award will be re-
issued to the participant without such legend.
The plan administrator may impose such restrictions or conditions, to the vesting of such shares as it, in its absolute discretion, deems
appropriate. Prior to the vesting of a share of restricted stock granted under the Plan, no transfer of a participant’s rights to such share,
whether voluntary or involuntary, by operation of law or otherwise, will vest the transferee with any interest, or right in, or with respect to,
such share, but immediately upon any attempt to transfer such rights, such share, and all the rights related thereto, will be forfeited by
the participant and the transfer will be of no force or effect; provided, however, that the plan administrator may, in its sole and absolute
discretion, vest in the participant all or any portion of shares of restricted stock which would otherwise be forfeited.
Fair Market Value
Under the Plan, “Fair Market Value” means, for a particular day, the value determined in good faith by the plan administrator, which
determination shall be conclusive for all purposes of the Plan. For purposes of valuing incentive options, the fair market value of stock:
(i) shall be determined without regard to any restriction other than one that, by its terms, will never lapse; and (ii) will be determined as of
the time the option with respect to such stock is granted.
Transferability Restrictions
Notwithstanding any limitation on a holder’s right to transfer an award, the plan administrator may (in its sole discretion) permit a holder
to transfer an award, or may cause the Company to grant an award that otherwise would be granted to an eligible individual, in any of
the following circumstances: (a) pursuant to a qualified domestic relations order, (b) to a trust established for the benefit of the eligible
individual or one or more of the children, grandchildren or spouse of the eligible individual; (c) to a limited partnership or limited liability
company in which all the interests are held by the eligible individual and that person’s children, grandchildren or spouse; or (d) to
another person in circumstances that the plan administrator believes will result in the award continuing to provide an incentive for the
eligible individual to remain in the service of the Company or its subsidiaries and apply his or her best efforts for the benefit of the
Company or its subsidiaries. If the plan administrator determines to allow such transfers or issuances of awards, any holder or eligible
individual  desiring  such  transfers  or  issuances  shall  make  application  therefore  in  the  manner  and  time  that  the  plan  administrator
specifies and shall comply with such other requirements as the plan administrator may require to assure compliance with all applicable
laws, including securities laws, and to assure fulfillment of the purposes of the Plan. The plan administrator shall not authorize any such
transfer or issuance if it may not be made in compliance with all applicable federal and state securities laws. The granting of permission
for such an issuance or transfer shall not obligate the Company to register the shares of stock to be issued under the applicable award.
56
Termination and Amendments to the Plan
The Board of Directors may (insofar as permitted by law and applicable regulations), with respect to any shares which, at the time, are
not subject to awards, suspend or discontinue the Plan or revise or amend it in any respect whatsoever, and may amend any provision
of the Plan or any award agreement to make the Plan or the award agreement, or both, comply with Section 16(b) of the Exchange Act
and the exemptions therefrom, the Internal Revenue Code, as amended (the “Code”), the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1974, as amended (“ERISA”), the regulations promulgated under the Code or ERISA, or any other law, rule or regulation that may affect
the Plan. The Board of Directors may also amend, modify, suspend or terminate the Plan for the purpose of meeting or addressing any
changes in other legal requirements applicable to the Company or the Plan or for any other purpose permitted by law. The Plan may not
be amended without the consent of the holders of a majority of the shares of Common Stock then outstanding to increase materially the
aggregate number of shares of stock that may be issued under the Plan except for certain adjustments.
57
COMPENSATION COMMITTEE INTERLOCKS AND
INSIDER PARTICIPATION
As  of  December  31,  2013,  the  Compensation  Committee  was  comprised  of  two  directors,  Messrs.  Rochford  and  McCabe,  with  Mr.
Rochford  acting  as  the  chairman.  Messrs.  Rochford  and  McCabe  are  currently  serving  as  the  members  of  the  Compensation
Committee. None of our directors who currently serve as members of our compensation committee is, or has at any time in the past
been,  an  officer  or  employee  of  the  Company  or  any  of  its  subsidiaries.  The  office  space  being  leased  by  the  Company  in  Tulsa,
Oklahoma, is owned by Arenaco, LLC, a company that is owned by Messrs. Rochford and McCabe.  During the years ended December
31, 2013 and 2012, the Company paid $47,000 to this company.
None of our executive officers currently serves, or in the past year has served, as a member of the compensation committee of any other
entity that has one or more executive officers serving on our board of directors. None of our executive officers currently serves, or in the
past year has served, as a member of the board of directors of any other entity that has one or more executive officers serving on our
compensation committee.
58
MARKET PRICE AND DIVIDENDS ON REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
Market for our Common Stock
Our common stock is listed on the NYSE MKT under the trading symbol “REI.” Prior to September 1, 2013, our Common stock was
quoted on the OTCQB and the OTC Bulletin Board under the trading symbol “RNGE”. We have only one class of common stock, and
we have 50,000,000 authorized but unissued shares of preferred stock. The table below sets forth for the periods indicated the quarterly
high and low bid prices of our common stock based on information provided to us by OTC Markets, and the high and low sale prices of
our common stock as reported on the NYSE MKT. All over-the-counter quotations reflect inter-dealer prices, without retail mark-up,
mark-down, or commission and may not necessarily represent actual transactions. At the time of the over-the-counter quotations below,
we were not listed on an established trading market and the transactions in our common stock were limited and the bid prices provided
below may not be indicative of prices if our common stock was trading in an established public trading market.
OTCQB/OTC Bulletin Board
Period
High Sale  Low Sale
4.01
  $
1st Quarter 2012
4.25
 
 
2nd Quarter 2012
 
 
5.12
3rd Quarter 2012
 
 
5.82
4th Quarter 2012
 
 
 
  $
1st Quarter 2013
 
 
2nd Quarter 2013
 
3rd Quarter 2013 (through August 31)
5.85
6.60
8.65
5.10  $
 
7.50 
7.00 
 
 
7.00 
 
 
9.51  $
8.76 
 
 
15.27
NYSE MKT
Period
3rd Quarter 2013 (September 1 -
September 30)
4th Quarter 2013
 
1st Quarter 2014
2nd Quarter 2014
High Sale  Low Sale
$
 
 
 
 
  $
15.75  $
 
14.39 
 
 
15.26  $
 
20.35
13.50
11.05
12.10
15.86
As of August 18, 2014, the last reported sales price of our Common Stock was $18.00 per share.
Security Holders
As of August 5, 2014, there are approximately 232 holders of record of our Common Stock. As of August 13, 2014, 5,055,438 shares, or
approximately 20%, of the 25,711,218 shares issued and outstanding as of such date are held by management or affiliated parties.
Dividends and Other Distributions
We have not paid any dividends on our Common Stock during the last three years, and we do not anticipate paying any cash dividends
on our Common Stock in the foreseeable future. We currently intend to retain future earnings, if any, to finance the expansion of our
business. Our future dividend policy is within the discretion of our board of directors and will depend upon various factors, including our
results of operations, financial condition, capital requirements and investment opportunities.
Securities Authorized for Issuance Under Equity Compensation Plans
In December 2011, our board of directors adopted a long term incentive plan which has been subsequently approved and amended by
votes of our stockholders in January 2013. The Plan was in existence with Stanford and was adopted by the Board of Directors on June
27, 2012, and assumed by the Company upon the acquisition of Stanford.
59
The following table sets forth information concerning our executive stock compensation plans as of December 31, 2013.
Equity
compensation
plans approved by
security holders
 
Equity
compensation
plans not
approved by
security holders
Total
Number of
securities
remaining
available for future
issuance under
compensation
plans (excluding
Weighted-average
exercise price of
outstanding options
(b)
securities in
column (a))
(c)
$
4.01
- 
 
4.01
2,327,500
-
2,327,500
Number of
securities to be
issued upon
exercise of
outstanding
options
(a)
2,647,500
2,647,500  $
-
61
SELECTED HISTORICAL CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL
AND OTHER DATA
You  should  read  the  following  selected  consolidated  financial  data  in  conjunction  with  “Management’s  Discussion  and  Analysis  of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and our consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in
this prospectus.
The consolidated statements of operations data for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2012 and 2013, and the consolidated balance
sheet data at December 31, 2011, 2012 and 2013, are derived from our audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere
in this prospectus.  The consolidated statements of operations data for the years ended December 31, 2010, and the consolidated
balance sheet data at December 31, 2010, are derived from our audited consolidated financial statements that are not included in this
prospectus.  The consolidated statements of operations data for the six months ended June 30, 2013 and 2014 and the consolidated
balance sheet data for the six months ended June 30, 2014 are derived from our unaudited consolidated financial statements included
in this prospectus.  We do not have any financial data to report for fiscal year 2009.
The unaudited consolidated financial statements include, in the opinion of management, all adjustments that management considers
necessary for the fair presentation of the financial information set forth in those statements.  The historical results are not necessarily
indicative of the results to be expected in any future period.
Statement of Operations
Data:
  Revenues
Predecessor
Carve-Out
Successor
For the
Year
Ended  
December
31,
2010
278,010 $
For the
Four
Months
Ended  
April 30,
2011
96,956 $
For the
Eight
Months
Ended  
December
31,
2011
For the
Years Ended
December 31,
2012
2013
388,674 $ 1,757,444 $ 10,315,701
126,128
71,656
173,310
785,959
1,207,529
12,819
4,468
18,428
82,995
476,964
$
$
Oil and gas production
costs
Oil and gas production
taxes
Depreciation, depletion
and amortization
Accretion
 
  General and administrative 
Total Costs and Operating
Expenses
Net Other Income
 
  Net Income (Loss)
Income Tax Provision
Basic income per common
share
Diluted income per common
share
10,339 
10,737 
18,000
178,023 
- 
- 
99,987
0.01 $
0.01
Balance Sheet Data:
  Current assets
Predecessor  
 
 
   
 
223,695 $
2010
$
2,778 
3,732 
6,000
88,634 
- 
- 
8,322
89,376 
5,547 
428,575
715,236 
389,727 
- 
63,165
506,786 
20,906 
2,392,645
2,284,091
53,681
6,682,760
3,789,291  10,705,025
14,816
(77,701)
(452,209)
62,240 
300,324 
(1,669,283)
- $
-
0.01 $
(0.21) $
(0.02)
0.01
(0.21)
(0.02)
As of December 31,
2011
Successor
2012
2013
223,695 $ 5,882,530 $ 56,305,036
Current assets
Oil and gas properties subject
to amortization
Total assets
Total current
liabilities
Total long-term
liabilities
Total Stockholders Equity
(Deficit)
$
223,695 $
223,695 $ 5,882,530 $ 56,305,036
6,597,433 
6,742,885
6,597,433  23,051,904 
58,040,724
6,742,885  28,513,378  111,723,418
477,057
477,057
1,191,431
7,231,643
10,372,338
10,372,338
1,122,236
1,886,061
(4,106,510)
(4,106,510)  26,199,711  102,605,714
Statement of Operations Data:
  Revenues
Oil and gas production costs
Oil and gas production taxes
Depreciation, depletion and
amortization
Accretion
General and administrative
Total Costs and Operating
Expenses
Net Other Income
 
  Net Income (Loss)
Income Tax Provision
Basic income (loss) per common
share
Diluted income (loss) per common
share
For the Six Months
June 30,
2013
2014
$ 2,443,536 $ 17,174,690
1,848,978
793,013
355,723 
112,676
740,270 
23,277 
3,067,263
5,008,012
61,694
3,199,268
4,299,209  10,910,965
62,349
(2,340,647)
3,985,427
- 
- 
(1,855,673)
$
(0.13) $
(0.13)
0.17
0.16
As of June 30,
2013
2014
$18,989,034 $ 50,575,075
62
Balance Sheet Data:
  Current assets
Oil and gas properties subject to
 
amortization
  Total assets
Total current
liabilities
Total long-term
liabilities
30,606,490  107,371,894
  48,488,639  150,555,825
2,031,052
8,654,340
5,321,143
  Total Stockholders Equity (Deficit)   45,033,031  136,580,342
1,424,556
Reorganization  into  Ring – On June 28, 2012, Ring completed the acquisition of Stanford through the closing of a stock-for-stock
exchange  agreement  dated  May  3,  2012.    As  a  result,  Stanford’s  stockholders  obtained  control  of  Ring  under  current  accounting
guidance. Since the Stanford stockholders obtained a controlling interest in Ring’s Common Stock and stock options, Stanford was
determined to be the accounting acquirer and its historical financial statements have been adjusted to reflect its reorganization in a
manner equivalent to a 2,500-for-1 stock split. The accompanying historical financial statements prior to the reorganization into Ring are
Stanford’s financial statements, adjusted to reflect the authorized capital and par value of Ring and to reflect the effects of the stock split
for all periods presented.
Predecessor  Carve-Out  Financial  Statements –  On  May  23,  2011,  prior  to  Ring’s  acquisition  of  Stanford,  Stanford  acquired
developed and undeveloped properties referred to as the “Fisher I Property.” The Fisher I Property represents Stanford’s predecessor
under Rule 405 of Regulation C of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, as the Fisher I Property was Stanford’s first interest in
producing  oil  and  natural  gas  properties  and  Stanford’s  own  operations  before  the  acquisition  were  insignificant  relative  to  the
operations acquired. In that regard, upon consummation of the acquisition, the historical financial statements of the Fisher I Property
became the historical financial statements of the Company. The accompanying predecessor financial statements present the full carve-
out revenues earned, the costs and expenses incurred and the cash flows of the predecessor owners relative to the Fisher I Property.
Subsequent to the acquisition of the Fisher I Property, the successor financial statements present the financial position, operations and
cash flows of the assets acquired, the liabilities assumed and operations of the Fisher I Property as well as those of other properties
acquired subsequently and are reflected at their purchase-date fair values. Those fair values are reflected as the cost of the assets
acquired and the carrying amounts of the liabilities assumed, and are the basis of the resulting operations of the successor.
Prior  to  the  acquisition  of  the  Fisher  I  Property,  Stanford  had  little  activity  and  was  a  development  stage  company.  Its  planned
operations were to acquire, develop and operate oil and natural gas properties. Stanford had no revenue, expenses or income during
the four months ended April 30, 2011. Changes in Stanford’s stockholders’ equity for the four months ended April 30, 2011, on a post-
split basis, were as follows:
Common Stock  
 
 
 Shares  Amount  
Balance, December 31, 2010 5,000,000 $ 5,000 $
Common stock issued for no
consideration
Cash paid in from shareholders
without
  the issuance of additional
shares
Balance, April 30, 2011
6,250,000 $ 6,250 $
1,250,000
1,250
-
-
Additional 
 Paid-in  
 Capital
(5,000) $
(1,250)
Total
Stockholders'
Equity
-
-
206,000 
199,750 $
206,000
206,000
Stanford’s cash flows during the four months ended April 30, 2011 were as follows:
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Payments to purchase oil and gas
properties
Cash Flows From Financing Activities
  Capital contributions from shareholders
Net Increase in Cash
Cash at Beginning of Period
Cash at End of Period
$ (176,000)
206,000
30,000
-
30,000
$
63
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements
and the related notes to our financial statements. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis
contains forward–looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results and timing of selected events
may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward–looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed
under “Risk Factors”.
Overview
Ring  is  a  Midland-based  exploration  and  production  company  that  is  engaged  in  oil  and  natural  gas  acquisition,  exploration,
development and production activities. Our exploration and production interests are currently focused in Texas and Kansas. We take a
conventional  approach  to  our  drilling  program  and  seek  to  develop  our  traditional  core  areas,  as  well  as  look  for  new  growth
opportunities.
Our goal is to increase stockholder value by investing in oil and gas projects with attractive rates of return on capital employed. We plan
to achieve this goal by exploiting and developing our existing oil and natural gas properties and pursuing acquisitions of additional
properties.
Business Description and Plan of Operation
Ring is currently engaged in oil and natural gas acquisition, exploration, development and production, with activities currently in Texas
and Kansas. We focus on developing our existing properties, while continuing to pursue acquisitions of oil and gas properties with
upside potential.
Our goal is to increase stockholder value by investing in oil and gas projects with attractive rates of return on capital employed. We plan
to achieve this goal by exploiting and developing our existing oil and natural gas properties and pursuing acquisitions of additional
properties. Specifically, our business strategy is to increase our stockholders value through the following:
·
Growing production and reserves by developing our oil-rich resource base. Ring intends to actively drill and develop its acreage base in
an effort to maximize its value and resource potential. Ring’s portfolio of proved oil and natural gas reserves consists of 94% oil and 6%
natural gas. Of those reserves, 24% of the proved reserves are classified as proved developed producing, or “PDP,” 4% are classified
as proved developed non-producing, or “PDNP,” and approximately 72% are classified as proved undeveloped, or “PUD.” Through the
conversion  of  undeveloped  reserves  to  developed  reserves,  Ring  will  seek  to  increase  production,  reserves  and  cash  flow  while
gaining favorable returns on invested capital.
Through  December  31,  2013,  we  increased  our  proved  reserves  to  approximately  7.3  million  BOE  (barrel  of  oil  equivalent).  As  of
December 31, 2013, our estimated proved reserves had a pre-tax PV10 (present value of future net revenues before income taxes
discounted  at  10%)  of  approximately  $198.4  million  and  a  Standardized  Measure  of  Discounted  Future  Net  Cash  Flows  of
approximately $133.9 million. The difference between these two amounts is the effect of income taxes. The Company presents the pre-
tax PV-10 value, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, because it is a widely used industry standard which we believe is useful to
those  who  may  review  this  Annual  Report  when  comparing  our  asset  base  and  performance  to  other  comparable  oil  and  gas
exploration and production companies. We spent approximately $58.2 million on acquisitions and capital projects during 2011,  2012
and 2013, and we intend to continually actively drill and develop our acreage in an effort to maximize shareholder value.
·
Employ industry leading drilling and completion techniques. Ring’s executive team, which has over 100 years combined experience in
the  oil  and  gas  industry,  intends  to  utilize  new  and  innovative  technological  advancements  and  careful  geological  evaluation  in
reservoir  engineering  to  generate  value  for  its  stockholders  and  to  build  development  opportunities  for  years  to  come.  Improved
efficiency through employing technological advancements can provide a significant benefit in a continuous drilling program such as the
one Ring contemplates for its current inventory of drilling locations. Additionally, Ring believes that the experience of its executive team
will help reduce the time and cost associated with drilling and completing both conventional and horizontal wells, while potentially
increasing recovery.
64
·
Pursue strategic acquisitions with exceptional upside potential. Ring has a history of acquiring leasehold positions that it believes to
have substantial resource potential and to meet its targeted returns on invested capital. Ring has historically pursued acquisitions of
properties that it believes to have exploitation and development potential comparable to its existing inventory of drilling locations. The
Company has developed and refined an acquisition program designed to increase reserves and complement existing core properties.
Ring’s experienced team of management and engineering professionals identify and evaluate acquisition opportunities, negotiate and
close  purchases  and  manage  acquired  properties.  Management  intends  to  continue  to  pursue  strategic  acquisitions  that  meet  the
Company’s  operational  and  financial  targets.  The  executive  team,  with  its  extensive  experience  in  the  Permian  Basin,  has  many
relationships  with  operators  and  service  providers  in  the  region.  Ring  believes  that  leveraging  its  contacts  will  be  a  competitive
advantage in identifying acquisition targets. Management’s proven ability to evaluate resource potential will allow Ring to successfully
acquire acreage and bring out more value in the assets.
Recent Developments
On  February  27,  2014,  Ring  completed  an  acquisition  of  certain  assets  pursuant  to  its  previously  announced  Purchase  and  Sale
Agreement,  for  a  purchase  price  of  approximately $6.51 million  in  cash.  The  assets  acquired  by  Ring  pursuant  to  the  Purchase
Agreement consist of approximately 2,481 gross (1,5767 net) acres, located in Andrews and Gaines Counties, in the Permian Basin of
Texas. The acreage, comprised of 92 separate leases, includes both “developed” and “undeveloped” parcels and is in close proximity
to Ring’s existing Permian Basin assets. The “developed” area is comprised of approximately 907 net acres with current net production
of 42 BOEs (Barrel of Oil Equivalent) per day from the San Andres and Glorieta formations and is over 92% oil. The “undeveloped” area
is comprised of approximately 660 net acres.
On June 18, 2014, we closed our offering of 2,000,001 shares of our Common Stock, for gross proceeds of $30,000,015 in the Private
Placement. Offering  costs,  including  sales  commissions,  for  the  Private  Placement  totaled  $1,334,884. The  shares  were  placed  by
SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, Inc., acting as lead placement agent and Global Hunter Securities, LLC, acting as co-placement agent
in the transaction. These shares were issued without registration under the Securities Act by reason of the exemption from registration
afforded by the provisions of Section 4(a)(5) and/or Section 4(a)(2) thereof, and Rule 506 promulgated thereunder, as a transaction by
an issuer not involving any public offering. Each of the investors in this offering was an accredited investor as defined in Regulation D.
Each investor delivered appropriate investment representations with respect to their investment, including their status as “accredited
investors”. The Resale Shares are being registered with the SEC to fulfill Ring’s commitment to register such shares in connection with
the Private Placement.
On July 1, 2014, the Company entered into the Credit Facility with SunTrust Bank. The Credit Facility provides for a senior secured
revolving credit facility with a maximum borrowing amount of $150 million and an initial borrowing base of $40 million, which is subject
to periodic redeterminations, mandatory reductions and further adjustments from time to time. The Credit Facility matures on July 1,
2019, and is secured by substantially all of the Company’s assets. As of August  13, 2014, no amount was outstanding on the Credit
Facility. Upon entering into this Credit Facility, the Company terminated its prior credit facility with The F&M Bank and Trust Company
and has paid off all amounts outstanding under such credit facility.
Results of Operations – For the Three Months Ended June 30, 2014 and 2013
Oil  and  natural  gas  sales.   For the three months ended June 30, 2014, oil and natural gas sales revenue increased $9,912,659 to
$11,204,238,  compared  to  $1,291,579  for  the  same  period  during  2013.    Oil  sales  increased  $9,899,071  and  natural  gas  sales
increased  $13,588.  The  increases  were  the  result  of  higher  production,  which  occurred  primarily  as  a  result  of  our  ongoing  drilling
program.  For the three months ended June 30, 2014, oil sales volume increased 104,272 barrels to 118,533 barrels, compared to
14,261 barrels for the same period in 2013.  The average realized per barrel oil price increased 5% from $89.02 for the three months
ended June 30, 2013, to $93.84 for the three months ended June 30, 2014.  For the three months ended June 30, 2014, gas sales
volume increased 50 thousand cubic feet (MCF) to 7,142 MCF, compared to 7,092 MCF for the same period in 2013.  The average
realized natural gas price per MCF increased 61% from $3.10 for the three months ended June 30, 2013, to $4.98 for the three months
ended June 30, 2014.
Oil  and  gas  production  costs.  Our lease operating expenses (LOE) increased from $214,468 or $13.89 per barrel of oil equivalent
(BOE) for the three months ended June 30, 2013, to $1,077,878 or $9.00 per BOE for the three months ended June 30, 2014.  In total,
lease operating expenses increased as a result of drilling additional wells.  The decrease on a per BOE basis is the result of increased
production, resulting from our drilling activity.
Production  taxes.   Production taxes as a percentage of oil and natural gas sales were 5% during the three months ended June 30,
2013, and remained steady at 5% for the three months ended June 30, 2014.  These rates are expected to stay relatively steady unless
we make acquisitions in other states with differing production tax rates or the state of Texas or Kansas changes its production tax rates.
65
Depreciation,  depletion  and  amortization.   Our  depreciation,  depletion  and  amortization  expense  increased  by  $3,081,154  to
$3,447,816 for the three months ended June 30, 2014, compared to $396,662 during the same period in 2013. The increase was the
result of higher production volume and an increase in the average depletion rate from $23.33 per BOE during the six months ended
June 30, 2013 to $26.80 per BOE during the six months ended June 30, 2014.
General  and  administrative  expenses.   General and administrative expenses were $1,634,807 for the three months ended June 30,
2014, as compared to $1,499,559 for the three months ended June 30, 2013.  Compensation related expenses, both cash based and
stock based, make up the majority of our general and administrative expense.  As we continue to grow and hire additional personnel,
this amount is likely to increase.
Net income.  For the three months ended June 30, 2014, there was net income of $2,821,738, as compared to a net loss of $890,393 for
the three months ended June 30, 2013.  The primary reason for this change was increased revenues from increased production.
Results of Operations – For the Six Months Ended June 30, 2014 and 2013
Oil  and  natural  gas  sales.   For the six months ended June 30, 2014, oil and natural gas sales revenue increased $14,731,154 to
$17,174,690,  compared  to  $2,443,536  for  the  same  period  during  2013.    Oil  sales  increased  $14,690,869  and  natural  gas  sales
increased $40,285.  The increases were the result of higher production, which occurred primarily as a result of our ongoing drilling
program.  For the six months ended June 30, 2014, oil sales volume increased 153,971 barrels to 182,477 barrels, compared to 28,506
barrels for the same period in 2013.  The average realized per barrel oil price increased 11% from $84.41 for the six months ended June
30, 2013 to $93.69 for the six months ended June 30, 2014.  For the six months ended June 30, 2014, gas sales volume increased
2,910 thousand cubic feet (MCF) to 15,759 MCF, compared to 12,849 MCF for the same period in 2013.  The average realized natural
gas price per MCF increased 69% from $2.91 for the six months ended June 30, 2013 to $4.93 for the six months ended June 30, 2014.
Oil  and  gas  production  costs.  Our lease operating expenses (LOE) increased from $355,723 or $11.61 per barrel of oil equivalent
(BOE) for the six months ended June 30, 2013 to $1,848,978 or $9.99 per BOE for the six months ended June 30, 2014.  In total, lease
operating  expenses  increased  as  a  result  of  drilling  additional  wells.    The  decrease  on  a  per  BOE  basis  is  the  result  of  increased
production, resulting from our drilling activity.
Production taxes.   Production taxes as a percentage of oil and natural gas sales were 5% during the six months ended June 30, 2013
and remained steady at 5% for the six months ended June 30, 2014.  These rates are expected to stay relatively steady unless we make
acquisitions in other states with differing production tax rates or the state of Texas or Kansas changes its production tax rates.
Depreciation,  depletion  and  amortization.   Our  depreciation,  depletion  and  amortization  expense  increased  by  $4,267,742  to
$5,008,012 for the six months ended June 30, 2014, compared to $740,270 during the same period in 2013. The increase was the result
of higher production volume and an increase in the average depletion rate from $23.33 per BOE during the six months ended June 30,
2013 to $26.80 per BOE during the six months ended June 30, 2014.
General and administrative expenses.   General and administrative expenses increased by $132,005 to $3,199,268 for the six months
ended June 30, 2014, compared to $3,067,263 during the same period in 2013.  Compensation related expenses, both cash based and
stock based, make up the majority of our general and administrative expense.  As we continue to grow and hire additional personnel,
this amount is likely to increase.
Net income.  For the six months ended June 30, 2014, there was net income of $3,985,427, as compared to a net loss of $1,855,673 for
the six months ended June 30, 2013.   The primary reason for this change was increased revenues from increased production.
Capital Resources and Liquidity – For the Six Months Ended June 30, 2014 and 2013
As  shown  in  the  financial  statements  for  the  six  months  ended  June  30,  2014,  the  Company  had  cash  on  hand  of  $45,535,352,
compared to $52,350,583 as of December 31, 2013.  The Company had net cash from operating activities for the six months ended
June  30,  2014,  of  $13,032,776,  compared  to  cash  from  operating  activities  of  $1,370,465  for  the  same  period  of  2013.    The  most
significant  cash  outflows  during  the  six  months  ended  June  30,  2014  and  2013,  were  capital  expenditures  of  $48,537,639  and
$7,329,984, respectively.  The most significant cash inflows during the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013, were proceeds from
issuance of common stock of $28,667,132 and $18,987,272, respectively.
66
In  May  2014,  the  Company  amended  a  credit  agreement  with  Prosperity  Bank,  successor  by  merger  to  The  F&M  Bank  and  Trust
Company, that provides for a revolving line of credit with a borrowing base increased to $25 million for borrowings and letters of credit
effective May 1, 2014. As of June 30, 2014, no amounts were outstanding under this credit facility.  The credit agreement includes a
non-usage  commitment  fee  of  0.25%  per  annum  and  covenants  limiting  other  indebtedness,  liens,  transfers  or  sales  of  assets,
distributions or dividends and merger or consolidation activity.  The facility has an interest rate of the bank’s prime rate plus 0.25%.  The
maturity date on the note was extended to October 30, 2015.
To  the  extent  possible,  we  intend  to  acquire  producing  properties  and/or  developed  undrilled  properties  rather  than  exploratory
properties.  We do not intend to limit our evaluation to any one State. We presently have no intention to evaluate off-shore properties or
properties located outside of the United States of America.
The  pursuit  of  and  acquisition  of  additional  oil  and  gas  properties  may  require  substantially  greater  capital  than  we  currently  have
available, and obtaining additional capital would require that we enter into the sale of either short-term or long-term notes payable or the
sale of our common stock.  Furthermore, it may be necessary for us to retain outside consultants and others in our endeavors to locate
desirable oil and gas properties.  The cost to retain one or more consultants or a firm specializing in the purchase and sale of oil and
gas properties would have an impact on our financial position and our future cash flows.
The process of acquiring one or more additional oil and gas properties will impact our financial position and reduce our cash position.
 The types of costs that we may incur include travel costs relating to meeting with individuals instrumental to our acquisition of one or
more oil and gas properties, obtaining petroleum engineer reports relative to the oil and gas properties that we are investigating, legal
fees  associated  with  any  such  acquisitions  including  title  reports,  and  accounting  fees  relative  to  obtaining  historical  information
regarding such oil and gas properties.  Even though we may incur such costs, there is no assurance that we will ultimately be able to
consummate a transaction resulting in our acquisition of an oil and/or gas property.
Results of Operations – For the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
We have increased our reserves significantly by investing approximately $35 million in acquisitions and development in 2013, following
total capital expenditures of approximately $16.5 million in 2012 and $6.6 million in 2011.
Our business plan is to increase our base of proven reserves primarily through acquisition until we have acquired a sufficient core to
enable us to utilize cash from existing production to fund further development activities.  We believe this allows us to lessen our risks,
including risks associated with borrowing funds to undertake exploration activities at an earlier time.  Our focus has been on acquiring
operated properties (i.e. properties with respect to which we serve as the operator on behalf of all joint interest owners) so that we can
better control the timing and implementation of capital spending.  However, we do plan on exploiting our existing properties and also
growing reserves through development.
Our revenue, profitability and future growth rate depend substantially on factors beyond our control, such as economic, political and
regulatory developments and competition from other sources of energy. Oil and natural gas prices historically have been volatile and
may  fluctuate  widely  in  the  future.  Sustained  periods  of  low  prices  for  oil  or  natural  gas  could  materially  and  adversely  affect  our
financial position, our results of operations, the quantities of oil and natural gas reserves that we can economically produce and our
access to capital.
In a worst case scenario, future drilling operations could be largely unsuccessful, oil and gas prices could further decline and/or other
factors  beyond  our  control  could  cause  us  to  greatly  modify  or  substantially  curtail  our  development  plans,  which  could  negatively
impact our earnings, cash flow and most likely the trading price of our securities, as well as the acceleration of debt repayment and a
reduction in our borrowing base under our credit facility.
67
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth selected operating data for the periods indicated:
Net production:
  Oil (Bbls)
  Natural gas (Mcf)
 
Net sales:
  Oil
  Natural gas
 
Average sales price:
  Oil (per Bbl)
 
  Natural gas (per Mcf)
 
 
Production costs and expenses  
  Oil and gas production costs
  Production taxes
  Depreciation, depletion and
 
  Accretion expense
amortization expense
General and administrative
expenses
$
$
$
For the Years Ended December 31,
2011
5,297 
2,369
2012
20,531 
6,480
2013
109,673
36,047
468,798 $ 1,734,739 $ 10,178,176
16,832 
137,525
22,705
88.50 $
7.11
244,966 $
22,896 
 
92,154 
9,279 
434,575
92.81
3.82
84.50 $
3.50
785,959 $ 1,207,529
82,995 
476,964
 
506,786 
20,906
2,284,091
53,681
2,392,645
6,682,760
Year Ended December 31, 2013 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2012
Oil and natural gas sales. Oil and natural gas sales revenue increased approximately $8.6 million to $10.3 million in 2013. Oil sales
increased approximately $8.5 million while natural gas sales increased by $0.1 million. The oil sales increase was the result of an
increase in sales volume from 20,531 barrels of oil in 2012 to 109,673 barrels of oil in 2013 and an increase of 10% in the average
realized per barrel oil price from $84.50 in 2012 to $92.81 in 2013. These per barrel amounts are calculated by dividing revenue from oil
sales by the volume of oil sold, in barrels. The natural gas sales increase was the result of an increase in sales volume from 6,480 Mcf
in 2012 to 36,047 Mcf in 2013 and a 9% increase in the average realized per Mcf gas price from $3.50 in 2012 to $3.82 in 2013. These
per Mcf amounts are calculated by dividing revenue from gas sales by the volume of gas sold, in Mcf. The volume increases for both oil
and natural gas are the result of both the acquisitions we made during the year and the result of our development of existing properties.
68
Oil and gas production costs. Our aggregate oil and gas production costs increased from $785,959 in 2012 to $1,207,500 in 2013, and
decreased  on  a  BOE  basis  from  $36.37  in  2012  to  $10.44  in  2013.  These  per  BOE  amounts  are  calculated  by  dividing  our  total
production costs by our total volume sold, in BOE. This increase in the aggregate production costs is the result of additional acquisitions
and  development  while  the  decrease  on  a  per  BOE  basis  was  the  result  of  increasing  production  and  the  results  of  work  done
previously to get wells into proper working order.
Oil and gas production taxes. Oil and gas production taxes as a percentage of oil and natural gas sales were 4.72% during 2012 and
decreased slightly to 4.62% in 2013. Production taxes vary from state to state. Therefore, these taxes are likely to vary in the future
depending on the mix of production we generate from various states, and on the possibility that any state may raise its production tax.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization. Our depreciation, depletion and amortization expense increased by $1,777,305 to $2,284,091
in 2013. The increase was a result of increased production volumes partially offset by a decrease in the average depreciation, depletion
and amortization rate from $21.94 per BOE during 2012 to $20.27 per BOE during 2013. These per BOE amounts are calculated by
dividing  our  total  depreciation,  depletion  and  amortization  expense  by  our  total  volume  sold,  in  BOE.  The  decreased  depreciation,
depletion and amortization rate was the result of development throughout the year and adding additional reserves.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses increased by $4,290,115 to $6,682,760 during 2013. This
increase was primarily related to an increase in stock based compensation expense of $2,544,341 and an increase in salaries and
wages of $1,228,778, partially offset by a decrease in contract labor of $526,125.
Interest income. Interest income was $24,706 in 2013 as compared to $4,309 in 2012. The increase was the result of higher cash on
hand during 2013.
Interest expense. Interest expense decreased by $208,915 to $9,890 in 2013. The decrease was the results of having smaller amounts
borrowed on our credit facility for a portion of 2013.
Net loss. Net loss decreased from $1,669,283 in 2012 to net loss of $452,209 during 2013. The primary reason for this change was
increased revenues partially offset by an increase in general and administrative expenses and depreciation, depletion and amortization.
Year Ended December 31, 2012 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2011
Oil and natural gas sales. Oil and natural gas sales revenue increased approximately $1.3 million to $1.8 million in 2012.  Oil sales
increased approximately $1.3 million while the increased natural gas sales were negligible. The oil sales increase was the result of an
increase  in  sales  volume  from  5,297  barrels  of  oil  in  2011  to  20,531  barrels  of  oil  in  2012,  despite  a  5%  decrease  in  the  average
realized per barrel oil price from $88.50 in 2011 to $84.50 in 2012.  These per barrel amounts are calculated by dividing revenue from
oil sales by the volume of oil sold, in barrels.  The natural gas sales increase was the result of an increase in sales volume from 2,369
Mcf in 2011 to 6,480 Mcf in 2012, despite a 51% decrease in the average realized per Mcf gas price from $7.11 in 2011 to $3.50 in
2012.  These  per  Mcf  amounts  are  calculated  by  dividing  revenue  from  gas  sales  by  the  volume  of  gas  sold,  in  Mcf.    The  volume
increases for both oil and natural gas are the result of both the acquisitions we made during the year and the result of our development
of existing properties.
Oil and gas production costs. Our aggregate oil and gas production costs increased from $244,966 in 2011 to $785,959 in 2012, and
decreased  on  a  BOE  basis  from  $43.04  in  2011  to  $36.37  in  2012.    These  per  BOE  amounts  are  calculated  by  dividing  our  total
production  costs  by  our  total  volume  sold,  in  BOE.    This  increase  in  the  aggregate  production  costs  is  the  result  of  additional
acquisitions and development while the decrease on a per BOE basis was the result of increasing production and the results of work
done previously to get wells into proper working order.  We expect further reductions in our production costs per BOE as we move
forward.
Oil and gas production taxes. Oil and gas production taxes as a percentage of oil and natural gas sales were 4.71% during 2011 and
increased slightly to 4.72% in 2012.  Production taxes vary from state to state.  Therefore, these taxes are likely to vary in the future
depending on the mix of production we generate from various states, and on the possibility that any state may raise its production tax.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization. Our depreciation, depletion and amortization expense increased by $414,632 to $506,786 in
2012.    The  increase  was  a  result  of  increased  production  volumes  and  an  increase  in  the  average  depreciation,  depletion  and
amortization rate from $19.19 per BOE during 2011 to $21.94 per BOE during 2012.  These per BOE amounts are calculated by dividing
our total depreciation, depletion and amortization expense by our total volume sold, in BOE.  The increased depreciation, depletion and
amortization rate was the result of acquisitions throughout the year.
69
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses increased by $1,958,070 to $2,392,645 during 2012. This
increase was primarily related to an increase in stock based compensation expense of $848,784 and increases in other compensation
expense to both company employees and contract employees.
Interest  income. Interest income was $4,309 in 2012 with no interest income recorded during 2011. The increase was the result of
higher cash on hand during 2012.
Interest expense. Interest expense increased by $124,586 to $218,805 in 2012. The increase was the results of having larger amounts
borrowed on our credit facility for a portion of 2012.
Net income (loss). Net loss was $1,669,283 in 2012 compared to net income of $71,487 during 2011.  The primary reason for this
change was the increase in general and administrative expenses and depreciation, depletion and amortization.
Liquidity and Capital Resources – For the Years Ended December 31, 2013 and 2012
Historical Financing. We have historically funded our operations through cash available from operations and from equity offerings of our
stock.
Credit Facility. In May 2012, May 2013, August 2013 and October 2013, the Company extended a credit agreement with a bank that
provides for a revolving line of credit of up to $10 million for borrowings and letters of credit. As of December 31, 2013, no amounts were
outstanding and $9,905,000 was available to be drawn on the line of credit. The credit agreement includes a non-usage commitment
fee of 0.20% per annum and covenants limiting other indebtedness, liens, transfers or sales of assets, distributions or dividends and
merger or consolidation activity. The facility has an interest rate of the bank’s prime rate plus 0.75% with the total interest rate to be
charged being no less than 4.00%. The maturity date on the note was extended to April 10, 2014.
Cash Flows. Historically, our primary source of cash has been from equity offerings and borrowings either on our credit facility or from
Ring prior to the merger with Stanford. During 2013, we also had new cash inflow of $8,116,408 from operations. During the two years
ended December 31, 2013, we financed $86,210,752 through proceeds from the sale of stock and $1,150,000 through borrowings. We
primarily used this cash to fund our capital expenditures and development aggregating $44,513,405 over the two years end December
31,  2013  and  reducing  debt  of  $9,244,428.  At  December  31,  2013,  we  had  cash  on  hand  of  $52,350,583  and  working  capital  of
$49,073,394, compared to December 31, 2012 when our cash was $5,404,167 and we had working capital of $4,691,099.
70
Schedule of Contractual Obligations. The following table summarizes our future estimated lease payments for periods subsequent to
December 31, 2013. The leases pertain to approximately 3,700 square feet of space for our corporate headquarters in Midland, Texas,
approximately 3,700 square feet of office space for our accounting offices in Tulsa, Oklahoma and approximately 2,000 square feet of
office space for our field office in Andrews, Texas. The Company incurred lease expenses of $141,593 and $208,091 for the years
ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. The following table reflects the future minimum lease payments under the operating
leases as of December 31, 2013.
Year
Lease
Obligation
($)
2014
2015
2016
2017
145,665
147,525
73,185
55,935
$ 422,310
Liquidity and Capital Resources – For the Years Ended December 31, 2012 and 2011
Historical Financing.  We have historically funded our operations through cash available from operations and from equity offerings of
our stock.
Credit Facility.  In May 2011, the Company entered into a credit agreement with a bank that provides for a revolving line of credit of up to
$10 million for borrowings and letters of credit. As of December 31, 2012, $9,950,000 was available to be drawn on the line of credit
with the remainder being reserved by letters of credit to State regulatory agencies.  The agreement includes a non-usage commitment
fee  of  0.20%  per  annum  and  covenants  limiting  other  indebtedness,  liens,  transfer  or  sale  of  assets,  distributions  or  dividends  and
merger or consolidation activity.  The facility has an interest rate of the bank’s prime rate plus 0.75% with the total interest rate to be
charged being no less than 4.00%.  As of December 31, 2012, the interest rate being charged was 4.00%. The note matured on May 10,
2012  and  was  extended  to  May  10,  2013.  Two  of  the  Company’s  stockholders  are  jointly  and  severally  obligated  for  outstanding
borrowings under the credit facility.
Cash Flows.  Our primary source of cash has been from equity offerings and borrowings either on our credit facility or from Ring prior to
the merger.  During the two years ended December 31, 2012, we financed $23,896,623 through proceeds from the sale of stock and
$11,244,428  through  borrowings.  We  primarily  used  this  cash  to  fund  our  capital  expenditures  and  development  aggregating
$15,850,289 over the two years end December 31, 2012, reducing debt of $11,244,428 and redemption of common stock prior to the
merger of $4,521,572.  At December 31, 2012, we had cash on hand of $5,404,167 and working capital of $4,691,099, compared to
December 31, 2011 when our cash was $11,372 and we had negative working capital of $253,362.
Schedule of Contractual Obligations.  The following table summarizes our future estimated lease payments for periods subsequent to
December 31, 2012.  The leases pertain to approximately 3,000 square feet of space for our corporate headquarters in Midland, Texas,
approximately 3,700 square feet of office space that we may relocate to in Midland, Texas, approximately 3,700 square feet of office
space for our accounting offices in Tulsa, Oklahoma and approximately 2,000 square feet of office space for our field office in Andrews,
Texas.  The Company incurred lease expense of $208,091 and $0 for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively.  The
following table reflects the future minimum lease payments under the operating lease as of December 31, 2012.
Year
 
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Lease
Obligation
$
138,897
117,465
71,325
73,185
55,935
 
456,807
71
Selected Quarterly Financial Data (Unaudited) of Ring
The following table presents select historical quarterly consolidated statements of operations data and other operations data for our ten
most  recently  completed  fiscal  quarters.    This  quarterly  information  has  been  prepared  using  our  unaudited  consolidated  financial
statements  and,  in  the  opinion  of  management,  includes  all  adjustments  (consisting  of  normal  recurring  adjustments)  considered
necessary for a fair statement of the results of the interim periods.
The  quarterly  results  presented  below  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  the  sections  entitled  “Selected  Historical  Consolidated
Financial  and  Other  Data”  and  our  audited  and  unaudited  consolidated  financial  statements  and  the  related  notes  thereto  included
elsewhere in this prospectus.  These quarterly results may not be indicative of our results of operations for a full year or any future
period.
June 30,   March 30,   December
Quarter Ended
September
June 30,   March 30,   December
September
June 30,   March
2014
2014
31,
2013
30,
2013
2013
2013
31,
2012
30,
2012
2012
30,
2012
Total
Revenue
Income (loss)
from
operations
Net income
(loss)
 
Basic
income
(loss) per
share
Diluted
$
$17,174,690$ 5,970,452$ 5,051,434$ 2,820,731$ 1,291,579$ 1,151,957$
712,180$
374,739$ 342,522$ 328,003
6,263,725  1,804,352  1,610,084
(143,735)
(890,393)
(965,280)
(301,701)
(652,933)  (488,086)  (589,127)
3,985,427  1,163,689  1,534,957
(131,493)
(890,393)
(965,280)
133,821
(631,453)  (541,377)  (630,274)
0.12$
0.05$
0.08$
(0.01)$
(0.06)$
(0.07)$
0.01$
(0.06)$
(0.15)$
(0.18)
0.11
0.05
0.08
(0.06)
(0.07)
(0.01)
income (loss)
per share
Basic
Weighted-
Average
  Shares
Outstanding  23,907,651  23,581,357  19,058,161  17,801,313  14,350,284  14,229,166  13,735,214  11,433,730  3,584,611  3,440,000
Diluted
Weighted-
Average
  Shares
Outstanding  25,151,932  24,704,652  19,763,499  17,801,313  14,350,284  14,229,166  14,036,735  11,433,730  3,584,611  3,440,000
(0.15)
0.01
(0.06)
(0.18)
Disclosure of Contractual Obligations
The following table reflects the contractual obligations over the periods shown as of December 31, 2013.
Contractual
obligations
Total
Payments due by period
Less
than 1
year
3-5
years
1-3
years
More than
5 years
Operating Lease
Obligations
$
$
$
$  423,310
145,665
220,710
55,935 $             -
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
As of June 30, 2014, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, and it is not anticipated that we will enter into any off-balance
sheet arrangements.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
The financial statements and supplementary data required by this item are included beginning at page F-1 of this Prospectus.
72
CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING METHODS AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
On September 1, 2013, Hansen, Barnett & Maxwell, P.C. (“HBM”) resigned as the Company’s independent registered public accounting
firm. HBM entered into an agreement with Eide Bailly LLP (“Eide Bailly”), pursuant to which Eide Bailly acquired the operations of HBM
as of September 1, 2013. In connection with such acquisition, certain of the professional staff and stockholders of HBM joined Eide
Bailly  either  as  employees  or  partners  of  Eide  Bailly  and  will  continue  to  practice  as  members  of  Eide  Bailly.  Concurrent  with  the
resignation  of  HBM,  the  Company,  through  and  with  the  approval  of  its  Audit  Committee,  engaged  Eide  Bailly  as  its  independent
registered public accounting firm.
The reports of HBM on the Company’s financial statements for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011 did not contain an
adverse opinion or a disclaimer of opinion, and was not qualified or modified as to uncertainty, audit scope, or accounting principles.
Prior to engaging Eide Bailly, the Company did not consult with Eide Bailly regarding the application of accounting principles to a
specific completed or contemplated transaction or regarding the type of audit opinions that might be rendered by Eide Bailly on the
Company’s financial statements, and Eide Bailly did not provide any written or oral advice that was an important factor considered by
the Company in reaching a decision as to any such accounting, auditing or financial reporting issue.
In connection with the audit for the past two fiscal years and through September 1, 2013, there were no disagreements with HBM on any
matter of accounting principles or practices, financial statement disclosure, or auditing scope or procedure, which disagreements, if not
resolved  to  the  satisfaction  of  HBM,  would  have  caused  HBM  to  make  reference  to  the  subject  matter  of  the  disagreements  in
connection with its audit reports on the Company’s financial statements.
In accordance with Item 304(a)(3) of Regulation S-K, the Company provided to Hansen, Barnett & Maxwell, P.C. a copy of the foregoing
disclosure and Hansen, Barnett & Maxwell, P.C. furnished the Company with a letter addressed to the SEC stating Hansen, Barnett &
Maxwell, P.C.’s agreement with such disclosure. A copy of such letter, dated September 1, 2013, is attached as Exhibit 99.1 to the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on September 5, 2013.
73
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISKS
Interest Rate Risk
The  Company  is  subject  to  market  risk  exposure  related  to  changes  in  interest  rates  on  its  indebtedness  under  its  revolving  credit
facility, which bears variable interest based upon a prime rate. Changes in interest rates affect the interest earned on the Company’s
cash and cash equivalents and the interest rate paid on borrowings under its bank credit facility. If we draw funds on this credit facility,
interest rate changes will impact future results of operations and cash flows.
Currently, the Company does not use interest rate derivative instruments to manage exposure to interest rate changes.
Commodity Price Risk
Our major market risk exposure is in the pricing applicable to our oil and natural gas production. Market risk refers to the risk of loss from
adverse changes in oil and natural gas prices. Realized pricing is primarily driven by the prevailing domestic price for crude oil and spot
prices applicable to the region in which we produce natural gas. Historically, prices received for oil and natural gas production have
been volatile and unpredictable. We expect pricing volatility to continue.
The prices we receive depend on many factors outside of our control. Oil prices we received during 2013 ranged from a low of $75.80
per barrel to a high of $105.77 per barrel, and natural gas prices we received during 2013 ranged from a low of $2.22 per Mcf to a high
of $7.09 per Mcf. Oil prices we received during the six month period ended June 30, 2014, ranged from a low of $87.62 per barrel to a
high of $95.90 per barrel. Natural gas prices we received during the same period ranged from a low of $3.12 per Mcf to a high of $8.24
per Mcf. A significant decline in the prices of oil or natural gas could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results
of operations.
The Company’s revenues, profitability and future growth depend substantially on prevailing prices for oil and natural gas. Prices also
affect the amount of cash flow available for capital expenditures and Ring’s ability to borrow and raise additional capital. The amount
the Company can borrow under its bank credit facility is subject to periodic redetermination based in part on changing expectations of
future  prices.  Lower  prices  may  also  reduce  the  amount  of  oil  and  natural  gas  that  the  Company  can  economically  produce.  Ring
currently sells all of its oil and natural gas production under price sensitive or market price contracts.
Customer Credit Risk
Our principal exposures to credit risk is through receivables from the sale of our oil and natural gas production (approximately $4.8
million  at June  30,  2014). We are subject to credit risk due to the concentration of our oil and natural gas receivables with our most
significant customers. We do not require our customers to post collateral, and the inability of our significant customers to meet their
obligations to us or their insolvency or liquidation may adversely affect our financial results.
For  the  fiscal  year  2013,  sales  to  one  customer,  HollyFrontier  represented  97%  of  oil  and  gas  revenues.  At  December  31,  2013,
HollyFrontier  represented  99%  of  our  accounts  receivable.  For  the s i x months  ended June  30, 2014,  sales  to  one  customer,
HollyFrontier represented 86% of oil and gas revenues and 78% of our accounts receivable.
Currency Exchange Rate Risk
Foreign sales accounted for none of the Company’s sales; further, the Company accepts payment for its commodity sales only in U.S.
dollars; hence, Ring is not exposed to foreign currency exchange rate risk on these sales.
74
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER
MATTERS
The  following  table  sets  forth  certain  information  furnished  by  current  management  and  others,  concerning  the  ownership  of  our
Common Stock as of August 13, 2014, of (i) each person who is known to us to be the beneficial owner of more than 5 percent of our
Common Stock, without regard to any limitations on conversion or exercise of convertible securities or warrants; (ii) all directors and
Named Executive Officers; and (iii) our directors and executive officers as a group. Except as otherwise provided herein, the mailing
address for each of the persons indicated is our corporate headquarters. The percentage ownership is based on 25,711,218 shares
outstanding at August 13, 2014.
Beneficial  ownership  is  determined  under  the  rules  of  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission.  In  general,  these  rules  attribute
beneficial ownership of securities to persons who possess sole or shared voting power and/or investment power with respect to those
securities  and  includes,  among  other  things,  securities  that  an  individual  has  the  right  to  acquire  within  60  days.  Unless  otherwise
indicated, the stockholders identified in the following table have sole voting and investment power with respect to all shares shown as
beneficially owned by them.
Shares of Common Stock
Name
5% Stockholders
 
MSD Credit Opportunity
Master Fund, L.P.(1)
 
Directors and Executive
Officers:
Kelly Hoffman
David A. Fowler
1,333,334 (2)
206,546 (3)
308,000 (4)
Beneficially Owned
Number
Percent
5%
1%
1%
Daniel D. Wilson
 
William R. Broaddrick
 
Lloyd T. Rochford
 
Stanley M. McCabe
 
Anthony B. Petrelli
 
Clayton E. Woodrum
 
Robert S. Owens
 
All directors and executive
officers as a group (9
persons)
175,000 (5) 
 
110,000 (6) 
 
2,294,667 (7) 
 
2,311,50 (8) 
 
80,000 (9) 
 
59,723 (10) 
 
0
1%
*
9%
9%
*
*
*
5,585,438 (11)
22%
*
Represents beneficial ownership of less than 1%.
75
(1)
The mailing address for MSD Credit Opportunity Master Fund, L.P. is c/o MSDC Management, L.P., 645 Fifth Avenue, 21st Floor, New
York, NY 10022.
(2)
MSDC Management, L.P. is the investment manager of, and may be deemed to have or share voting and dispositive power over, and/or
beneficially own securities owned by MSD Credit Opportunity Master Fund, L.P.  MSDC Management (GP), LLC is the general partner
of  and  may  be  deemed  to  have  or  share  voting  and  dispositive  power  over,  and/or  beneficially  own  securities  owned  by  MSDC
Management, L.P.  Each of Glenn R. Fuhrman, John C. Phelan and Marc R. Lisker is manager of MSDC Management (GP), LLC and
may be deemed to have or share voting and/or dispositive power over, and beneficially own, the common stock beneficially owned by
MSD Management (GP), LLC.  Each of Mr. Fuhrman, Mr. Phelan and Mr. Lisker disclaim beneficial ownership of such common stock,
except to the extent of the pecuniary interest of such person in such shares.
(3)
Includes 200,000 shares issuable upon the exercise of stock options that are currently exercisable.
(4)
Includes 100,000 shares issuable upon the exercise of stock options that are current exercisable.
(5)
Includes 60,000 shares issuable upon the exercise of stock options that are current exercisable.
(6)
Includes 10,000 shares issuable upon the exercise of stock options that will be exercisable within 60 days.
(7)
Includes 40,000 shares issuable upon the exercise of stock options that are currently exercisable. Includes 2,220,000 shares held by a
family trust controlled by Mr. Rochford.
(8)
Includes 40,000 shares issuable upon the exercise of stock options that are currently exercisable. Also includes 1,646,502 shares held
by a family trust controlled by Mr. McCabe.
(9)
Includes 40,000 shares issuable upon the exercise of stock options that are currently exercisable.
(10)
Includes 40,000 shares issuable upon the exercise of stock options that are currently exercisable.
(11)
Includes 570,000 shares issuable upon the exercise of stock options that are currently exercisable and 10,000 shares issuable upon the
exercise of stock options that will be exercisable within the next 60 days.
Changes in Control
There  are  no  arrangements  known  to  us,  including  any  pledge  by  any  person  of  our  securities,  the  operation  of  which  may  at  a
subsequent date result in a change in control of the Company.
76
TRANSACTIONS WITH RELATED PERSONS, PROMOTERS AND CERTAIN CONTROL PERSONS
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions
The  office  space  being  leased  by  the  Company  in  Tulsa,  Oklahoma,  is  owned  by  Arenaco,  LLC,  a  company  that  is  owned  by  Mr.
Rochford, Chairman of the Board of the Company, and Mr. McCabe, a Director of the Company. During the years ended December 31,
2013 and 2012, the Company paid $47,000 to this company.
Review, Approval or Ratification of Transactions with Related Parties
The Board of Directors will review and approve all relationships and transactions in which it and its directors, director nominees and
executive officers and their immediate family members, as well as holders of more than 5% of any class of its voting securities and their
family members, have a direct or indirect material interest. In approving or rejecting such proposed relationships and transactions, the
Board shall consider the relevant facts and circumstances available and deemed relevant to this determination.
Director Independence
The standards relied upon the Board in determining whether a director is “independent” are those set forth in the rules of the NYSE MKT
LLC (formerly, NYSE Amex). The NYSE MKT LLC generally defines “independent directors” as a person other than an executive officer
or  employee  of  a  company,  who  does  not  have  a  relationship  with  the  company  that  would  interfere  with  the  director’s  exercise  of
independent judgment in carrying out the responsibilities of a director. Because the Board of Directors believes it is not possible to
anticipate or provide for all circumstances that might give rise to conflicts of interest or that might bear on the materiality of a relationship
between a director and the Company, the Board has not established specific objective criteria, apart from the criteria set forth in the
NYSE MKT, LLC rules, to determine “independence”. In addition to such criteria, in making the determination of “independence”, the
Board  of  Directors  considers  such  other  matters  including  (i)  the  business  and  non-business  relationships  that  each  independent
director has or may have had with the Company and its other Directors and executive officers, (ii) the stock ownership in the Company
held by each such Director, (iii) the existence of any familial relationships with any executive officer or Director of the Company, and (iv)
any other relevant factors which could cause any such Director to not exercise his independent judgment.
Consistent with these standards, our Board of Directors has determined that Messrs. Woodrum and Petrelli, are each “independent”
directors within the meaning the NYSE MKT, LLC definition of independent director set forth in the Company Guide, Part 8, Section
803(A). The Board has also determined that Messrs. Rochford and McCabe are “independent” directors under the same definitions.
77
DISCLOSURE OF COMMISSION POSITION ON INDEMNIFICATION OF SECURITIES ACT LIABILITIES
Our  Bylaws  provide  that  we  may  indemnify  our  officers,  directors,  employees  or  agents.  The  general  effect  of  the  foregoing  is  to
indemnify such persons from liability, thereby making us responsible for any expenses or damages incurred by such control person,
officer or director in any action brought against them based on their conduct in such capacity, provided they did not engage in fraud or
criminal activity.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to our directors, officers or control persons
pursuant to the foregoing provisions, we have been informed that in the opinion of the SEC such indemnification is against public policy
as expressed in the Securities Act and is therefore unenforceable.
78
LEGAL MATTERS
Burleson LLP has provided its opinion on the validity of the Common Stock offered by this prospectus.
79
EXPERTS
Eide Bailly LLP, our independent registered public accounting firm, has audited our balance sheet as of December 31, 2013, and the
related consolidated statements of operations, statements of stockholders’ equity and cash flows for the year then ended. We have
included our financial statements in this prospectus and elsewhere in the registration statement of which it is a part in reliance on Eide
Bailly LLP’s report, given on their authority as experts in accounting and auditing.
Hansen, Barnett & Maxwell, P.C., an independent registered public accounting firm, has audited our balance sheet as of December 31,
2012, and the related consolidated statements of operations, statements of stockholders’ equity and cash flows for the year then ended.
We have included our financial statements in this prospectus and elsewhere in the registration statement of which it is a part in reliance
on Hansen, Barnett & Maxwell, P.C.’s report, given on their authority as experts in accounting and auditing.
The information regarding estimated quantities of oil and natural gas reserves and the discounted present value of future pre-tax cash
flows therefrom is based upon estimates of such reserves and present values prepared by or derived from estimates included in this
prospectus, prepared by independent third party engineers and audited by Cawley, Gillespie & Associates, Inc., independent petroleum
engineers.  The  information  contained  in  this  prospectus  regarding  the  estimated  quantities  of  oil  and  natural  gas  reserves  and  the
discounted present value of future pre-tax cash flows therefrom is based upon estimates of such reserves and present values as of
December 31, 2013, prepared by or derived from the “Evaluation Summary” dated March 7, 2014, prepared by Cawley, Gillespie &
Associates,  Inc.  All  such  information  in  this  prospectus  has  been  included  in  reliance  on  the  authority  of  said  firm  as  experts  in
petroleum engineering.
80
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We are subject to the information requirements of the Exchange Act and in accordance therewith, file reports and other information with
the SEC. Such reports and other information filed by us can be inspected and copied at the public reference facilities of the SEC at 100
F Street N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. Requests for copies should be directed to the SEC’s Public Reference Section, Judiciary Plaza,
100 F Street N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. Please call the SEC at 1–800–SEC–0330 for more information on the public reference
rooms. The SEC maintains a web site (www.sec.gov) that contains reports, proxy and information statements and other information
regarding registrants, including us, that file electronically.
We have filed with the SEC a Registration Statement on Form S–1 (the “Registration Statement”) of which this prospectus constitutes a
part, under the Securities Act. For further information pertaining to us, reference is made to the Registration Statement. Statements
contained in this prospectus concerning the provisions of documents are necessarily summaries of such documents, and each such
statement is qualified in its entirety by reference to the copy of the applicable document filed with the SEC. Copies of the Registration
Statement are on file at the offices of the SEC and may be inspected without charge at the offices of the SEC, the addresses of which is
set forth above, and copies may be obtained from the SEC at prescribed rates. The Registration Statement has been filed electronically
through the SEC’s Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis and Retrieval System and may be obtained through the Commission’s web site
(www.sec.gov).
81
RING ENERGY, INC.
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Unaudited Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
 
Unaudited  Condensed  Consolidated  Balance  Sheet  as  of June  30, 2 0 1 4 and
December 31, 2013
 
Unaudited  Condensed  Consolidated  Statements  of  Operations  for  the  three and  six
months ended
June 30, 2014 and 2013
 
Unaudited Condensed Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for the six months ended
June 30, 2014 and 2013
 
Notes to Unaudited Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
 
Audited Consolidated Financial Statements
F-2
F-3
F-4
F-5
Audited Consolidated Financial Statements
 
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
 
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2013 and 2012
 
Condensed  Statements  of  Operations  for  the  years  ended  December  31,  2013  and
2012
 
Condensed Statements of Stockholders’ Equity for the years ended December 31, 2013
and 2012
 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2013 and
2012
 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
 
Supplemental Information on Oil and Gas Producing Activities
 
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
 
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2012 and 2011
 
Condensed  Statements  of  Operations  for  the  years  ended  December  31,  2012  and
2011
 
Condensed Statements of Stockholders’ Equity for the years ended December 31, 2012
and 2011
 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2012 and
2011
 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
 
Supplemental Information on Oil and Gas Producing Activities
F-11
F-13
F-14
F-15
F-16
F-17
F-26
F-28
F-29
F-30
F-31
F-32
F-33
F-47
F-1
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(UNAUDITED)
ASSETS
Current Assets
Cash
Accounts receivable
Prepaid expenses and retainers
$
June 30,
2014
45,535,352  $
 
4,780,627 
259,096
2013
December 31,
52,350,583
3,888,402
66,051
Prepaid expenses and retainers
Total Current Assets
Properties and Equipment
Oil and natural gas properties subject to amortization
Office equipment
Total Properties and Equipment
Accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization
Net Properties and Equipment
Total Assets
 
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
 (DEFICIT)
Current Liabilities
Accounts payable
Other accrued liabilities
Total Current Liabilities
Noncurrent Liabilities
Deferred income taxes
Asset retirement obligations
Total Noncurrent Liabilities
Stockholders' Equity (Deficit)
Preferred stock - $0.001 par value; 50,000,000 shares
authorized;
no shares issued or outstanding
Common stock - $0.001 par value; 150,000,000 shares
authorized;
  25,645,614 shares and 23,576,313 shares outstanding,
respectively
Additional paid-in capital
Accumulated deficit
Total Stockholders' Equity
Total Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity
66,051
56,305,036
259,096 
 
50,575,075 
 
 
 
  107,371,894 
 
497,121 
  107,869,015 
(7,888,265) 
 
 
99,980,750
58,040,724
 
257,911
 
58,298,635
 
(2,880,253)
 
 
55,418,382
  $ 150,555,825  $ 111,723,418
$
7,944,774  $
709,566 
8,654,340 
 
3,044,298 
2,276,845 
5,321,143
-
6,229,490
1,002,153
7,231,643
703,651
1,182,410
1,886,061
-
25,646 
  139,005,296 
 
(2,450,600) 
  136,580,342
23,576
  109,018,165
 
 
(6,436,027)
 
 
  102,605,714
  $ 150,555,825  $ 111,723,418
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements.
F-2
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
(UNAUDITED)
Oil and Gas Revenues
 
Costs and Operating Expenses
  Oil and gas production costs
  Oil and gas production taxes
Depreciation, depletion and
amortization
Accretion expense
General and administrative
expense
Total Costs and Operating
For The Six Months
Ended June 30,
2014
2013
Ended June 30,
For The Three Months
$ 11,204,238  $ 1,291,579  $ 17,174,690  $
1,077,878 
517,052
1,848,978 
793,013
214,468 
59,459
2014
2013
2,443,536
355,723
112,676
740,270
23,277
3,067,263
3,477,816 
37,312
396,662 
11,824
1,634,807
1,499,559
5,008,012 
61,694
3,199,268
Interest income
Expenses
 
Other Income
 
 
Net Other Income
 
Income (loss) before tax
provision
 
 
 
 
 
Income tax provision
 
 
 
 
 
Net Income (Loss)
  $
 
 
 
Basic Earnings (Loss) per Share   $
Diluted Earnings (Loss) per Share  $
6,744,865 
 
 
19,576 
 
19,576
2,181,972 
 
 
 
 
- 
 
 
 
-
10,910,965 
 
 
 
 
62,349 
 
 
 
62,349
6,326,074 
 
 
(2,340,647)
4,478,949 
 
 
(1,657,211)
(890,393) 
 
 
-
2,821,738  $ (890,393)  $
 
(0.06)  $
(0.06)  $
0.12  $
0.11  $
3,985,427  $ (1,855,673)
0.17  $
0.16  $
(0.13)
(0.13)
4,299,209
-
-
(1,855,673)
-
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements.
F-3
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(UNAUDITED)
For the Six Months Ended June 30,
Cash Flows From Operating Activities
Net income (loss)
$
2014
2013
3,985,427  $ (1,855,673)
Adjustments to reconcile net income (loss)
to net cash
 
  provided by (used in) operating activities:
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
  Accretion expense
  Share-based compensation
  Provision for income taxes
  Changes in assets and liabilities:
  Accounts receivable
  Prepaid expenses
  Accounts payable
Net Cash Provided by Operating
Activities
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Payments to purchase oil and natural gas
properties
Payments to develop oil and natural gas
properties
Purchase of office equipment
  Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
 
Cash Flows From Financing Activities
 
  Proceeds from option exercise
 
  Proceeds from issuance of common stock
5,008,012 
61,694 
1,299,569 
2,340,647 
 
(892,225) 
(193,045) 
1,422,697
13,032,776
(10,974,396)
(37,324,033) 
(239,210) 
(48,537,639) 
 
 
22,500 
28,667,132
740,270
23,277
1,701,721
-
(45,956)
(32,795)
839,621
1,370,465
(1,751,342)
(5,524,201)
(54,441)
(7,329,984)
-
18,987,272
Net Cash Provided by Financing
Activities
Net Increase (Decrease) in Cash
Cash at Beginning of Period
Cash at End of Period
$
18,987,272
28,689,632 
13,027,753
(6,815,231) 
52,350,583 
5,404,167
45,535,352  $ 18,431,920
Cash at End of Period
Noncash Investing and Financing
Activities
Revision of asset retirement obligation
estimate
Asset retirement obligation acquired
Asset retirement obligation incurred during
development
$
45,535,352  $ 18,431,920
$
-  $
294,772
211,691
-
737,969
67,352
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements.
F-4
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(UNAUDITED)
NOTE 1 – BASIS OF PRESENTATION AND SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Condensed Financial Statements – The accompanying condensed consolidated financial statements prepared by Ring Energy, Inc.
and its subsidiary (the “Company” or “Ring”) have not been audited by an independent registered public accounting firm. In the opinion
of  the  Company’s  management,  the  accompanying  unaudited  financial  statements  contain  all  adjustments  necessary  for  fair
presentation of the results of operations for the periods presented, which adjustments were of a normal recurring nature, except as
disclosed herein. The results of operations for the three and six months ended June 30, 2014, are not necessarily indicative of the
results to be expected for the full year ending December 31, 2014.
Certain notes and other disclosures have been omitted from these interim financial statements. Therefore, these financial statements
should be read in conjunction with the Company’s 2013 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Organization and Nature of Operations – The Company is a Nevada corporation that owns interests in oil and natural gas properties
located in Texas and Kansas. The Company’s oil and natural gas sales, profitability and future growth are dependent upon prevailing
and future prices for oil and natural gas and the successful acquisition, exploration and development of oil and natural gas properties.
Oil and natural gas prices have historically been volatile and may be subject to wide fluctuations in the future. A substantial decline in
oil and natural gas prices could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial position, results of operations, cash flows
and quantities of oil and natural gas reserves that may be economically produced.
Use of Estimates – The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities,
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual
results could differ from those estimates. Changes in the future estimated oil and natural gas reserves or the estimated future cash flows
attributable to the reserves that are utilized for impairment analysis could have a significant impact on the Company’s future results of
operations.
Consolidation – The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts, operations and cash flows of Stanford
Energy, Inc. (“Stanford”) for all periods presented and the consolidated operations and cash flows of Ring Energy, Inc. from June 28,
2012. All significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
Concentration of Credit Risk and Major Customer – The Company had cash in excess of federally insured limits at June 30, 2014.
During the six months ended June 30, 2014, sales to two customers represented 86% and 11%, respectively, of the Company’s oil and
gas revenues. At June 30, 2014, these customers made up 78% and 12%, respectively, of the Company’s accounts receivable.
Oil and Gas Properties – The Company uses the full cost method of accounting for oil and gas properties. Under this method, all costs
associated with the acquisition, leasing, exploration, and development of oil and gas reserves are capitalized. Costs capitalized include
acquisition costs, estimated future costs of abandonment and site restoration, geological and geophysical expenditures, lease rentals
on  undeveloped  properties  and  costs  of  drilling  and  equipping  productive  and  non-productive  wells.  Drilling  costs  include  directly
related  overhead  costs.  Capitalized  costs  are  generally  categorized  either  as  being  subject  to  amortization  or  not  subject  to
amortization. All of the Company’s costs are subject to amortization.
All capitalized costs of oil and gas properties, plus estimated future costs to develop proved reserves, are amortized on the unit-of-
production method using estimates of proved reserves as determined by independent engineers. The Company evaluates oil and gas
properties for impairment at least annually. Amortization expense for the three and six months ended June 30, 2014, was $3,477,816
and $5,008,012, based on depletion at the rate of $26.80 per barrel of oil equivalent compared to $396,662 and $740,270, respectively,
for the three and six months ended June 30, 2013, based on depletion at the rate of $23.33 per barrel of oil equivalent. These amounts
include $25,741 and $47,427, respectively, of depreciation for the three and six months ended June 30, 2014 compared to $13,902 and
$25,406 of depreciation for the three and six months ended June 30, 2013, respectively.
F-5
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(UNAUDITED)
In addition, capitalized costs are subject to a ceiling test which limits such costs to the estimated present value of future net revenues
from proved reserves, discounted at a 10% interest rate, based on current economic and operating conditions, plus the lower of cost or
fair value of unproved properties. Consideration received from sales or transfers of oil and gas property is accounted for as a reduction
of capitalized costs. Revenue is not recognized in connection with contractual services performed on properties in which the Company
holds an ownership interest.
Office Equipment – Office equipment is valued at historical cost adjusted for impairment loss less accumulated depreciation. Historical
costs include all direct costs associated with the acquisition of office equipment and placing such equipment in service. Depreciation is
calculated using the straight-line method based upon an estimated useful life of 5 to 7 years.
Asset  Retirement  Obligation –  The  Company  records  a  liability  in  the  period  in  which  an  asset  retirement  obligation  (“ARO”)  is
incurred,  in  an  amount  equal  to  the  discounted  estimated  fair  value  of  the  obligation  that  is  capitalized.  Thereafter,  this  liability  is
accreted up to the final estimated retirement cost. An ARO is a future expenditure related to the disposal or other retirement of certain
assets. The Company’s ARO relates to future plugging and abandonment expenses of its oil and natural gas properties and related
facilities disposal.
Revenue Recognition – The Company predominantly derives its revenues from the sale of produced oil and natural gas. Revenue is
recorded in the month the product is delivered to the purchasers. At the end of each month, the Company recognizes oil and natural gas
sales based on estimates of the amount of production delivered to purchasers and the price to be received. Variances between the
Company’s estimated oil and natural gas sales and actual receipts are recorded in the month the payments are received.
Share-Based  Employee  Compensation – The Company has outstanding stock option grants to directors, officers and employees,
which are described more fully in Note 6. The Company recognizes the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award of
equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award and recognizes the related compensation expense over the period
during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award, which is generally the vesting period.
Share-Based Compensation to Non-Employees – The Company accounts for share-based compensation issued to non-employees
as  either  the  fair  value  of  the  consideration  received  or  the  fair  value  of  the  equity  instruments  issued,  whichever  is  more  reliably
measurable. The measurement date for these issuances is the earlier of (i) the date at which a commitment for performance by the
recipient to earn the equity instruments is reached or (ii) the date at which the recipient’s performance is complete.
Recent  Accounting  Pronouncements –  In  May  2014,  the  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  issued  Accounting  Standards
Update 2014-09 establishing Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (ASC 606). ASC
606 establishes a comprehensive new revenue recognition model designed to depict the transfer of goods or services to a customer in
an  amount  that  reflects  the  consideration  the  entity  expects  to  be  entitled  to  receive  in  exchange  for  those  goods  or  services  and
requires significantly enhanced revenue disclosures. The standard is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December
15, 2016, and interim periods within the reporting period. Accordingly, we expect to adopt this standard in the first quarter of 2017. ASC
606 allows either full retrospective or modified retrospective transition and early adoption is not permitted. We are currently evaluating
the impact of this new pronouncement on our financial statements.
Basic and Diluted Earnings (Loss) per Share – Basic earnings (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the
weighted-average  number  of  common  shares  outstanding  during  the  period.  Diluted  earnings  (loss)  per  share  reflects  the  potential
dilution that could occur if all contracts to issue common stock were converted into common stock, except for those that are anti-dilutive.
The dilutive effect of stock options and other share-based compensation is calculated using the treasury method with an offset from
expected proceeds upon exercise of the stock options and unrecognized compensation expense.
F-6
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(UNAUDITED)
NOTE 2 – EARNINGS (LOSS) PER SHARE INFORMATION
Net Income (Loss)
Basic Weighted-Average
Shares Outstanding
Effect of dilutive securities:
Stock options
Diluted Weighted-Average
Shares Outstanding
Basic Earnings (Loss) per
Share
Diluted Earnings (Loss) per
Share
$
For The Three Months
Ended June 30,
2014
2,821,738  $
2013
(890,393)  $
For The Six Months
Ended June 30,
2014
3,985,427  $
2013
(1,855,673)
23,907,651 
 
 
 
1,244,281
25,151,932
14,350,284 
 
 
-
14,350,284
23,745,406 
 
 
1,180,682
24,926,088
14,290,060
-
14,290,060
$
$
0.12  $
(0.06)  $
0.11  $
(0.06)  $
0.17  $
0.16  $
(0.13)
(0.13)
Stock options to purchase 5,000 and 105,000 shares of common stock, respectively, were excluded from the computation of diluted
earnings per share during the three and six months ended June 30, 2014, as their effect would have been anti-dilutive. Stock options to
purchase 2,562,500 shares of common stock were excluded from the computation of diluted loss per share during both the three and six
months ended June 30, 2013 as their effect would have been anti-dilutive.
NOTE 3 – ACQUISITIONS
In February 2014, Ring acquired additional proved developed and undeveloped oil and natural gas reserves (the “RAW Properties”)
located in the Permian Basin, Andrews County, Texas. The RAW Properties consist of varied working interests (81% to 93%) and net
revenue interests (61% to 70%) in eleven producing leases which included 907 net acres. The transaction also included 660 net acres
of non-producing leasehold.  Consideration given consisted of cash payments totaling $6,510,791.  The Company incurred $20,003 in
acquisition-related costs, which were recognized in general and administrative expense during the three months ended March 31, 2014.
The acquisition was recognized as a business combination whereby Ring recorded the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at
their fair values as of February 27, 2014, which is the date the Company obtained control of the properties and was the acquisition date
for financial reporting purposes. The estimated fair value of RAW Properties approximated the consideration paid, which the Company
concluded approximated the fair value that would be paid by a typical market participant. The following table summarizes the fair values
of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed:
Proved oil and natural gas
properties
Asset retirement obligations
Total Identifiable Net Assets
$ 6,805,563
 
(294,772)
  $ 6,510,791
Subsequent to the initial acquisition, Ring spent $1,914,386 to acquire or lease additional interests in the acreage, including deeper
lease rights and acquire an additional 397 net acres.
NOTE 4 – REVOLVING LINE OF CREDIT
In  May  2014,  the  Company  amended  a  credit  agreement  with  Prosperity  Bank,  successor  by  merger  to  The  F&M  Bank  and  Trust
Company; whereby the borrowing base increased to $25 million for borrowings and letters of credit effective May 1, 2014. As of June
30, 2014, no amounts were outstanding under this credit facility. The credit agreement includes a non-usage commitment fee of 0.25%
per  annum  and  covenants  limiting  other  indebtedness,  liens,  transfers  or  sales  of  assets,  distributions  or  dividends  and  merger  or
consolidation activity. The facility has an interest rate of the bank’s prime rate plus 0.25%. The maturity date on the note was extended
to October 30, 2015.
F-7
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(UNAUDITED)
NOTE 5 – ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATION
The Company provides for the obligation to plug and abandon oil and gas wells at the dates properties are either acquired or the wells
are drilled. The asset retirement obligation is adjusted each quarter for any liabilities incurred or settled during the period, accretion
expense and any revisions made to the estimated cash flows. The asset retirement obligation incurred upon each of the acquisitions or
at the time of drilling was computed using the annual credit-adjusted risk-free discount rate at the applicable dates, which rates ranged
from 4.65% to 7.09% per annum. Changes in the asset retirement obligation were as follows:
Balance, December 31,
2013
Liabilities acquired
Liabilities incurred
Accretion expense
Balance, June 30, 2014
$
 
 
 
 
 
 
  $
1,182,410
294,772
737,969
61,694
2,276,845
NOTE 6 – STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Common Stock Issued in Option Exercise – In January 2014, the Company issued 5,000 shares of common stock as the result of an
option exercise. The Company received the exercise price of $4.50 per share for an aggregate amount of $22,500.
Also, in January 2014, the Company issued 20,361 shares of common stock as the result of the cashless exercise of 20,000 stock
options with an exercise price of $2.00 and 5,000 stock options with an exercise price of $5.50. The Company withheld 4,639 shares,
valued at $67,500 or $14.55 per share.
In April 2014, the Company issued 43,632 shares of common stock as the result of the cashless exercise of 42,500 stock options with
an exercise price of $2.00 and 10,000 stock options with an exercise price of $4.50. The Company withheld 8,868 shares, valued at
$130,000 or $14.66 per share.
In June 2014, the Company issued 307 shares of common stock as the result of the cashless exercise of 500 stock options with an
exercise price of $7.50. The Company withheld 193 shares, valued at $3,750 or $19.39 per share.
In June 2014, the Company closed on an offering of 2,000,001 shares of common stock at $15.00 per share for gross proceeds of
$30,000,015.  The  shares  were  sold  without  registration  under  the  Securities  Act  by  reason  of  the  exemption  from  the  registration
afforded  by  the  provisions  of  Section  4(a)(2)  and/or  Section  4(a)(5)  of  the  Securities  Act  of  1933,  as  amended,  and  Rule  506
promulgated thereunder for sales of unregistered securities. Offering costs totaled $1,332,884. The Company has filed a registration
statement with the SEC to register such shares.
NOTE 7 – EMPLOYEE STOCK OPTIONS
Compensation expense charged against income for share-based awards during the three and six months ended June 30, 2014, was
$640,101 and $1,299,569, respectively, as compared to $885,958 and $1,701,721, respectively, for the three and six months ended
June 30, 2013. These amounts are included in general and administrative expense in the accompanying financial statements.
In 2011, Stanford’s Board of Directors and stockholders approved and adopted a long-term incentive plan which allows for the issuance
of up to 2,500,000 shares of common stock through the grant of qualified stock options, non-qualified stock options and restricted stock.
In 2013, the Company’s stockholders approved an amendment to the long-term incentive plan, increasing the number of shares eligible
under the plan to 5,000,000 shares. As of June 30, 2014, there were 2,384,500 shares remaining eligible for issuance under the plan.
F-8
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(UNAUDITED)
The fair value of each option award is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and using certain
assumptions. The expected volatility is based on the historical price volatility of the Company’s common stock. The Company uses the
simplified method for estimating the expected term for options granted. Under the simplified method, the expected term is equal to the
midpoint between the vesting period and the contractual term of the stock option. The risk-free interest rate represents the U.S. Treasury
bill rate for the expected life of the related stock options. The dividend yield represents the Company’s anticipated cash dividend over
the expected life of the stock options. The following are the assumptions used to determine the fair value of options granted during the
six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013:
Expected volatility
Weighted-average
volatility
Expected dividends
Expected term (in years)
Risk-free interest rate
2014
2013
114%  128% - 138%
114% 
0 
6.5
1.58%
137%
0
6.5
0.76% -
1.49%
A summary of the stock option activity as of June 30, 2014, and changes during the six months then ended is as follows:
Outstanding, December
31, 2013
Granted
Forfeited
Exercised
Outstanding, June 30,
2014
Exercisable, June 30,
2014
Weighted-
Weighted-  
Average  
Average   Remaining  
Exercise   Contractual
Term
Price
Shares
2,647,500  $
5,000 
(62,000) 
(83,000)
2,507,500  $
621,500  $
4.01 
16.99 
4.60 
3.00
4.06
3.36
Aggregate
Intrinsic
Value
8.2 Years  $ 33,602,125
8.0 Years
-
The intrinsic value was calculated using the closing price on June 30, 2014 of $17.45. As of June 30, 2014, there was approximately
$4,018,052 of unrecognized compensation cost related to stock options that is expected be recognized over a weighted-average period
of 2.4 years. The total intrinsic value of options exercised during the six months ended June 30, 2014, was $987,295.
NOTE 8 – CONTINGENCIES AND COMMITMENTS
Standby Letters of Credit – A commercial bank issued standby letters of credit on behalf of the Company to the states of Texas and
Kansas totaling $145,000 to allow the Company to do business in those states. The standby letters of credit are valid until cancelled or
matured and are collateralized by the revolving credit facility with the bank. The terms of these letters of credit are extended for a term of
one year at a time. The Company intends to renew the standby letters of credit for as long as the Company does business in the states
of Texas and Kansas. No amounts have been drawn under the standby letters of credit.
NOTE 9 – SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
In July 2014, the Company entered into a Credit Agreement with SunTrust Bank, as lender, issuing bank and administrative agent for
several banks and other financial institutions and lenders (“Administrative Agent”) (the “Credit Facility”). The Credit Facility provides for
a senior secured revolving credit facility with a maximum borrowing amount of $150 million. The Credit Facility matures on July 1, 2019,
and is secured by substantially all of the Company’s assets.
F-9
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
NOTES TO CONDENSED CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(UNAUDITED)
The initial borrowing base under the Credit Facility is $40 million (the “Borrowing Base”). The Borrowing Base is subject to periodic
redeterminations, mandatory reductions and further adjustments from time to time. The Borrowing Base will be redetermined (i) quarterly
on each January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1, beginning October 1, 2014 through October 1, 2015, and (ii) semi-annually on each
October 1 and April 1 beginning on April 1, 2016. In addition, the Company may elect to cause the Borrowing Base to be redetermined
one time during each of the following periods (i) between the October 1, 2014 and April 1, 2015 redeterminations, (ii) between the April
1, 2015 and October 1, 2015 redeterminations and (iii) starting with the October 1, 2015 redetermination, during any six month period
between redeterminations. The Borrowing Base will also be reduced in certain circumstances such as the sale or disposition of certain
oil and gas properties of the Company or its subsidiaries and cancellation of certain hedging positions.
The Credit Facility allows for Eurodollar Loans and Base Rate Loans (each as defined in the Credit Facility). The interest rate on each
Eurodollar Loan will be the adjusted LIBO rate for the applicable interest period plus a margin between 1.75% and 5.00% (depending
on  the  then-current  level  of  borrowing  base  usage).  The  annual  interest  rate  on  each  Base  Rate  Loan  is  (a)  the  greatest  of  (i)  the
Administrative Agent’s prime lending rate, (ii) the federal funds rate plus 0.5% per annum or the (iii) adjusted LIBO rate determined on a
daily basis for an interest period of one-month, plus 1.00% per annum, plus (b) a margin between 2.75% and 6.00% (depending on the
then-current level of borrowing base usage).
The credit facility contains certain covenants, which, among other things, require the maintenance of (i) a total leverage ratio of not more
than 4.0 to 1.0 and (ii) a minimum current ratio of 1.0 to 1.0. The Credit Facility also contains other customary affirmative and negative
covenants and events of default.
In connection with the closing of the Credit Facility, the Company terminated its credit facility with The F&M Bank & Trust Company,
predecessor-in-interest to Prosperity Bank (the “Previous Credit Facility”). The Company has paid off all amounts outstanding under
such credit facility.
F-10
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and
Stockholders of Ring Energy, Inc.
We  have  audited  the  accompanying  balance  sheet  of  Ring  Energy,  Inc.  as  of  December  31,  2013,  and  the  related  consolidated
statements of operations, stockholders’ equity, and cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2013. Ring Energy’s management is
responsible for these financial statements. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audit.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of
material  misstatement.  The  company  is  not  required  to  have,  nor  were  we  engaged  to  perform,  an  audit  of  its  internal  control  over
financial reporting. Our audit included consideration of internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit procedures
that  are  appropriate  in  the  circumstances,  but  not  for  the  purpose  of  expressing  an  opinion  on  the  effectiveness  of  the  company’s
internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes examining, on a test basis,
evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audit provide a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of Ring Energy Inc.
as of December 31, 2013, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2013 in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
/s/ EideBailly LLP
Salt Lake City, Utah
March 20, 2014
F-11
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and the Shareholders
Ring Energy, Inc.
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheet of Ring Energy, Inc. and subsidiary (the “Company”) as of December
31,  2012,  and  the  related  consolidated  statements  of  operations,  stockholders’  equity  (deficit),  and  cash  flows  for  the  year  ended
December 31, 2012. These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express
an opinion on these financial statements based on our audit.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of
material misstatement. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over
financial  reporting.  Our  audits  included  consideration  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  as  a  basis  for  designing  audit
procedures  that  are  appropriate  in  the  circumstances,  but  not  for  the  purpose  of  expressing  an  opinion  on  the  effectiveness  of  the
Company’s internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes examining, on a
test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and
significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audit
provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of
Ring Energy, Inc. and subsidiary as of December 31, 2012, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for the year ended
December 31, 2012, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
/s/ HANSEN, BARNETT & MAXWELL, P.C.
Salt Lake City, Utah
April 1, 2013
F-12
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
As of December 31,
ASSETS
Current Assets
Cash
Accounts receivable
Prepaid expenses and retainers
Total Current Assets
Properties and Equipment
$
2013
52,350,583  $
3,888,402 
 
 
66,051 
 
56,305,036
2012
5,404,167
417,965
60,398
5,882,530
AND
STOCKHOLDERS'
Properties and Equipment
Oil  and  natural  gas  properties  subject  to
amortization
Office equipment
Total Properties and Equipment
Accumulated  depreciation,  depletion  and
amortization
Net Properties and Equipment
Total Assets
 
LIABILITIES 
EQUITY
Current Liabilities
Accounts payable
Other accrued liabilities
Total Current Liabilities
Noncurrent Liabilities
Deferred income taxes
Asset retirement obligation
Total Noncurrent Liabilities
Stockholders' Equity
Preferred stock - $0.001 par value; 50,000,000
shares authorized;
no shares issued or outstanding
Common stock - $0.001 par value; 150,000,000
shares authorized;
  23,576,313  shares  and  14,166,011  shares
outstanding, respectively
Additional paid-in capital
Accumulated deficit
Total Stockholders' Equity
Total Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity
58,040,724
257,911 
58,298,635
(2,880,253)
55,418,382 
  111,723,418
$
6,229,490  $
 
1,002,153 
 
7,231,643 
 
 
703,651 
 
 
1,182,410 
 
1,886,061
-
109,018,165 
 
 
(6,436,027) 
 
  102,605,714 
 
$ 111,723,418  $
23,051,904
175,106
23,227,010
(596,162)
22,630,848
28,513,378
1,191,431
-
1,191,431
625,950
496,286
1,122,236
-
14,166
32,169,363
(5,983,818)
26,199,711
28,513,378
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-13
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
For the years ended December 31,
 
Oil and Gas Revenues
 
Costs and Operating Expenses
  Oil and gas production costs
  Oil and gas production taxes
Depreciation, depletion and
amortization
Accretion expense
General and administrative
expense
Total Costs and Operating
Expenses
2013
$ 10,315,701  $
1,207,529 
476,964
2,284,091 
53,681
6,682,760
10,705,025
2012
1,757,444
785,959
82,995
506,786
20,906
2,392,645
3,789,291
Interest income
Interest expense
Other Income (Expense)
  Gain on derivative put options
 
 
 
Net Other Income
 
Loss Before Provision for Income
Taxes
 
Provision for Income Taxes
 
Net Loss
 
Basic and Diluted Loss per Share
$
 
 
  $
- 
24,706 
(9,890) 
 
14,816
(374,508) 
 
(77,701)
276,736
4,309
(218,805)
62,240
(1,969,607)
300,324
(452,209)  $ (1,669,283)
(0.03)  $
(0.21)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-14
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Successor
Balance, December 31,
2011
Share-based
compensation
Common stock issued to
purchase
 Ring Energy, Inc.
Common stock issued for
cash
Common stock issued in
property acquisitions
Net loss
Balance, December 31,
2012
Share-based
compensation
Common stock issued for
cash
Common stock issued for
services
Options exercised
(cashless exercise)
Options exercised
Net loss
Balance, December 31,
2013
Shares   Amount
Common Stock
Additional
Paid-in
Capital
Accumulated
Deficit
Total
Stockholders'
Equity
(Deficit)
3,440,000  $
3,440  $
204,585  $ (4,314,535)  $
(4,106,510)
-
6,579,808
3,148,425
997,778 
-
-
6,580
3,148
998 
-
944,681
13,525,180
13,005,914
4,489,003 
-
-
-
-
- 
(1,669,283)
944,681
13,531,760
13,009,062
4,490,001
(1,669,283)
14,166,011  $
14,166  $
32,169,363  $ (5,983,818)  $
26,199,711
-
9,378,580
10,000
6,722 
15,000 
-
-
9,378
10
7 
15 
-
3,489,022
73,192,312
99,990
(7) 
67,485 
-
-
-
-
- 
- 
(452,209)
3,489,022
73,201,690
100,000
-
67,500
(452,209)
23,576,313  $
23,576  $ 109,018,165  $ (6,436,027)  $ 102,605,714
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-15
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
used in operating activities:
For the Years Ended December 31,
Cash Flows From Operating Activities
  Net loss
  Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash
 
  Depreciation, depletion and amortization
  Accretion expense
  Share-based compensation
  Stock issued as finders fee
  Gain on derivative put options
  Provision for income taxes
 
  Accounts receivable
  Prepaid expenses
  Accounts payable
  Accrued compensation
  Net Cash Provided by (used in) Operating
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Changes in assets and liabilities:
Activities
$
2013
(452,209)  $
2,284,091 
53,681 
3,489,022 
100,000 
- 
77,701 
 
(3,470,437) 
(5,653) 
6,040,212 
-
8,116,408
2012
(1,669,283)
506,786
20,906
944,681
-
(276,736)
(300,324)
(326,943)
87,845
1,081,217
(100,000)
(31,851)
(3,684,674)
(6,532,898)
(159,977)
-
(10,377,549)
1,150,000
13,009,062
-
10,887,561
(9,244,428)
15,802,195
5,392,795
11,372
5,404,167
221,927
9,689,488
(1,362,665)
(152,148)
-
(14,214)
(4,490,001)
-  $
-
13,531,760
9,893
Payments to purchase oil and natural gas
properties
Ring Energy, Inc. shareholders
Payments to develop oil and natural gas properties 
 
 
  Purchase of office equipment
 
 
  Plugging and abandonment cost incurred
  Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
 
 
Cash Flows From Financing Activities
 
 
 
 
  Proceeds from borrowings from Ring Energy, Inc.
 
 
  Proceeds from issuance of common stock
 
 
  Proceeds from option exercise
 
  Proceeds from issuance of common stock to
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Principal payments on revolving line of credit
  Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
 
 
Net Increase in Cash
 
 
Cash at Beginning of Period
 
 
Cash at End of Period
  $
Supplemental Cash Flow Information
 
 
  $
  Cash paid for interest
Noncash Investing and Financing Activities
 
 
  $
  Oil and gas properties acquired
 
 
  Deferred tax liability assumed (net)
 
 
  Asset retirement obligation assumed
  Revision of asset retirement obligation estimate
Asset retirement obligation incurred during
development
Payments with Ring Energy, Inc. shares
Issuance of common stock to Ring Energy, Inc.
shareholders
Accounts payable assumed
$
(5,192,441) 
 
(29,103,392) 
 
(82,805) 
 
(60,544) 
 
(34,439,182) 
 
 
 
 
- 
 
73,201,690 
 
67,500 
 
 
 
- 
 
- 
 
73,269,190 
 
46,946,416 
5,404,167 
 
52,350,583  $
 
9,890  $
 
 
-  $
 
- 
 
- 
211,691
481,296 
-
Accounts payable assumed
  Less: Tax benefit
Less: Elimination of note payable to Ring Energy,
Inc.
Less: Prepaid expenses acquired
  Less: Property and equipment acquired
  Proceeds from issuance of common stock to
- 
-
- 
- 
-
9,893
(436,391)
(2,003,122)
(26,942)
(187,637)
Ring Energy, Inc. shareholders
$
-  $
10,887,561
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-16
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE 1 – ORGANIZATION AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Organization and Nature of Operations – Ring Energy, Inc. is a Nevada corporation. Ring Energy, Inc. and Stanford Energy, Inc., its
wholly-owned subsidiary, are referred to herein as the “Company.” The Company owns interests in oil and gas properties located in
Texas  and  Kansas  and  is  engaged  primarily  in  the  acquisition,  exploration  and  development  of  oil  and  gas  properties  and  the
production and sale of oil and natural gas.
Reorganization into Ring Energy, Inc. – On June 28, 2012, Ring Energy, Inc. (“Ring”) completed the acquisition of Stanford Energy,
Inc. (“Stanford”) through the closing of a stock-for-stock exchange agreement dated May 3, 2012. As a result, Stanford became a wholly-
owned  subsidiary  of  Ring.  At  the  closing,  the  Stanford  shareholders  exchanged  their  1,376  shares  of  Stanford  common  stock  for
3,440,000  shares  of  Ring  common  stock.  In  addition,  Ring  assumed  and  adopted  Stanford’s  equity  compensation  plan  and  its
outstanding options to purchase 450 shares of Stanford common stock, which represented the right to purchase 1,125,000 shares of
Ring  common  stock  at  $2.00  per  share.  On  February  6,  2012,  the  date  the  terms  of  the  exchange  agreement  were  agreed  to  and
announced, Ring has 5,786,884 shares of common stock outstanding, of which Stanford shareholders held 793,317 shares. In addition,
Stanford’s  shareholders  obtained  the  right  to  appoint  to  a  majority  of  the  members  of  the  Ring  board  of  directors  and  senior
management of the combined company.
Under current accounting guidance, as a result of the number of shares and stock options to acquire shares issued to the Stanford
shareholders and option holders, Stanford was determined to be the accounting acquirer and its historical financial statements have
been adjusted to reflect its reorganization in a manner equivalent to a 2,500-for-1 stock split. The accompanying historical financial
statements prior to the reorganization into Ring are Stanford’s financial statements, adjusted to reflect the authorized capital and par
value of Ring and to reflect the effects of the stock split for all periods presented.
Consolidation  –  The  basis  of  presentation  of  the  predecessor  carve-out  financial  statements  is  presented  above.  Except  for  the
predecessor carve-out financial statements, the accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts, operations and
cash  flows  of  Stanford  for  all  periods  presented  and  the  consolidated  operations  and  cash  flows  of  Ring  from  June  28,  2012.  All
significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
Use of Estimates – The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities,
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual
results could differ from those estimates. Changes in the future estimated oil and natural gas reserves or the estimated future cash flows
attributable to the reserves that are utilized for impairment analysis could have a significant impact on the future results of operations.
Fair Values of Financial Instruments – The carrying amounts reported for the revolving line of credit approximates fair value because
the underlying instruments are at interest rates which approximate current market rates.
Concentration  of  Credit  Risk  and  Accounts  Receivable  –  Financial  instruments  that  potentially  subject  the  Company  to  a
concentration of credit risk consist principally of cash and accounts receivable. The Company has cash in excess of federally insured
limits of $52,100,583 at December 31, 2013. The Company places its cash with a high credit quality financial institution.
Substantially all of the Company’s accounts receivable is from purchasers of oil and gas. Oil and gas sales are generally unsecured.
The  Company  has  not  had  any  significant  credit  losses  in  the  past  and  believes  its  accounts  receivable  are  fully  collectable.
Accordingly, no allowance for doubtful accounts has been provided. The Company also has a joint interest billing receivable. Joint
interest billing receivables are collateralized by the pro rata revenue attributable to the joint interest holders and further by the interest
itself.
Cash  – The Company considers all highly liquid investments purchased with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash
equivalents.
F-17
Oil and Gas Properties – The Company uses the full cost method of accounting for oil and gas properties. Under this method, all costs
associated  with  acquisition,  exploration,  and  development  of  oil  and  gas  properties  are  capitalized.  Costs  capitalized  include
acquisition  costs,  geological  and  geophysical  expenditures,  lease  rentals  on  undeveloped  properties  and  costs  of  drilling  and
equipping productive and non-productive wells. Drilling costs include directly related overhead costs. Capitalized costs are categorized
either as being subject to amortization or not subject to amortization.
The Company records a liability in the period in which an asset retirement obligation (“ARO”) is incurred, in an amount equal to the
discounted estimated fair value of the obligation that is capitalized. Thereafter this liability is accreted up to the final retirement cost. An
ARO is a future expenditure related to the disposal or other retirement of certain assets. The Company’s ARO relate to future plugging
and abandonment expenses of its oil and gas properties and related facilities disposal.
All capitalized costs of oil and gas properties, including the estimated future costs to develop proved reserves and estimated future
costs to plug and abandon wells and costs of site restoration, less the estimated salvage value of equipment associated with the oil and
gas  properties,  are  amortized  on  the  unit-of-production  method  using  estimates  of  proved  reserves  as  determined  by  independent
engineers.  If  the  results  of  an  assessment  indicate  that  the  properties  are  impaired,  the  amount  of  the  impairment  is  added  to  the
capitalized costs to be amortized. The following table shows total depletion and depletion per barrel-of-oil-equivalent rate, for the years
ended December 31, 2013 and 2012.
For the Years Ended
Depletion
Depletion 
rate, 
equivalent (BOE)
2013
$ 2,223,477  $
December 31,
2012
474,056
per
barrel-of-oil-
$
20.27  $
21.94
In addition, capitalized costs less accumulated amortization and related deferred income taxes shall not exceed an amount (the full cost
ceiling) equal to the sum of:
1)
the present value of estimated future net revenues discounted ten percent computed in compliance with SEC guidelines;
2)
plus the cost of properties not being amortized;
3)
plus the lower of cost or estimated fair value of unproven properties included in the costs being amortized;
4)
less income tax effects related to differences between the book and tax basis of the properties.
Land, Buildings, Equipment and Leasehold Improvements – Land, buildings, equipment and leasehold improvements are valued at
historical cost, adjusted for impairment loss less accumulated depreciation. Historical costs include all direct costs associated with the
acquisition of land, buildings, equipment and leasehold improvements and placing them in service.
Depreciation of buildings and equipment is calculated using the straight-line method based upon the following estimated useful lives:
Buildings 
improvements
Office 
software
Machinery and equipment
equipment
and
and
30 years
5-7 years
  5-7 years
Depreciation expense was $60,574 and $35,369 for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively.
Revenue recognition – The Company predominantly derives its revenue from the sale of produced crude oil and natural gas. Revenue
is recorded in the month the product is delivered to the purchaser. At the end of each month, the Company estimates the amount of
production delivered to purchasers and the price received. Variances between the Company’s estimated revenue and actual payment
are recorded in the month the payment is received; however, differences have been insignificant.
Income  Taxes  –  Provisions  for  income  taxes  are  based  on  taxes  payable  or  refundable  for  the  current  year  and  deferred  taxes.
Deferred taxes are provided on differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial
statements,  and  tax  carry  forwards.  Deferred  tax  assets  and  liabilities  are  included  in  the  financial  statements  at  currently  enacted
income  tax  rates  applicable  to  the  period  in  which  the  deferred  tax  assets  and  liabilities  are  expected  to  be  realized  or  settled.  As
changes in tax laws or rates are enacted, deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted through the provision for income taxes.
F-18
Earnings  Per  Share – Basic earnings per share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of common
shares outstanding during the year. Diluted earnings per share are calculated to give effect to potentially issuable dilutive common
shares.
Major Customers – During the year ended December 31, 2013, sales to one customer represented 97% of total sales, respectively. At
December 31, 2013, this one customer made up 99% of accounts receivable. During the year ended December 31, 2012, sales to three
customers represented 50% 25% and 23% of total sales, respectively. At December 31, 2012, one of these customers made up 94% of
accounts receivable. The loss of this customer would not have a material adverse effect on the Company as there is an available market
for its crude oil and natural gas production from other purchasers.
Stock-Based Employee and Non-Employee Compensation – The Company has outstanding stock options to directors, employees
and contract employees, which are described more fully in Note 8. The Company accounts for its stock options grants in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles. Generally accepted accounting principles require the recognition of the cost of employee
services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments in the financial statements and is measured based on the grant date
fair value of the award. Generally accepted accounting principles also requires stock option compensation expense to be recognized
over the period during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award (the vesting period).
Stock-based  employee  compensation  incurred  for  the  years  ended  December  31,  2013  and  2012  was  $3,489,022  and  $944,681,
respectively.
Recently  Adopted  Accounting  Pronouncement  – In  December  2011,  the  FASB  issued  Accounting  Standards  Update  2011-11,
“Disclosures about Offsetting Assets and Liabilities” (“ASU 2011-11”), and in January 2013 issued Accounting Standards Update 2013-
01, “Clarifying the Scope of Disclosures about Offsetting Assets and Liabilities” (“ASU 2013-01”). These updates require disclosures
about  the  nature  of  an  entity’s  rights  of  offset  and  related  arrangements  associated  with  its  recognized  derivatives  contracts.  The
guidance is effective for interim and annual periods beginning on or after January 1, 2013. The implementation of ASU 2011-11 and
ASU 2013-01 had no impact on the Company’s financial position or results of operations.
NOTE 2 – EARNINGS PER SHARE INFORMATION
For the years ended December 31,
Net Loss
Basic and Diluted Weighted-Average Shares
Outstanding
Basic and Diluted Loss per Share
$
2013
(452,209)  $ (1,669,283)
2012
$
16,376911
(0.03)  $
8,073,176
(0.21)
Stock options to purchase 2,647,500 and 1,125,000 shares of common stock were excluded from the computation of diluted earnings
(loss) per share during the year ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively, as their effect would have been anti-dilutive.
NOTE 3 – OIL AND GAS PROPERTIES
On October 16, 2013, Ring Energy, Inc. (“Ring”) entered into a Joint Development Agreement (the “Agreement”), effective immediately,
with Torchlight Energy Resources, Inc. (“Torchlight”), to develop Ring’s existing Kansas leasehold, consisting of approximately 17,000
acres in Gray, Haskell and Finney counties.
Pursuant to the Agreement, Ring will operate the Kansas leasehold acreage. In consideration of entering into the Agreement, Torchlight
will pay 100% of all drilling and completion costs until an amount equal to Ring’s total costs related to the Kansas leases has been met
(approximately $6.2 million). After Torchlight has matched Ring’s total costs related to the Kansas leases, Ring and Torchlight will
equally share all drilling and development costs related to the continued ongoing development of the leases. Ring and Torchlight will
share  equally  in  any  production  and  revenue  in  connection  with  the  development  of  the  Kansas  leasehold  acreage  from  the
commencement of the first well pursuant to the terms of the Agreement.
F-19
NOTE 4 – OIL AND GAS PRODUCING ACTIVITIES
Set forth below is certain information regarding the aggregate  capitalized  costs  of  oil  and  gas  properties  and  costs  incurred  by  the
Company for its oil and gas property acquisitions, development and exploration activities:
Capitalized Costs Relating to Oil and Natural Gas Producing Activities
Proved oil and natural gas properties
Office equipment
Total capitalized costs
Accumulated depletion, depreciation and
amortization
 
Net Capitalized Costs
$
$
As of
December 31,
As of
December 31,
2013
58,040,724  $
 
58,298,635
257,911
(2,880,253)
55,418,382  $
2012
23,051,904
175,106
23,227,010
(596,162)
22,630,848
Net Costs Incurred in Oil and Gas Producing Activities
Acquisition of proved properties
Development costs
 
Total Net Costs Incurred
$
 
 
 
 
  $
For the Year
Ended
December 31,
2013
For the Year
Ended
December 31,
2012
5,192,441  $
29,796,379   
  
34,988,820  $
9,873,128
6,581,343
 
16,454,471
NOTE 5 – NOTES PAYABLE
Notes Payable – In May 2012, May 2013, August 2013 and October 2013, the Company extended a credit agreement with a bank that
provides for a revolving line of credit of up to $10 million for borrowings and letters of credit. As of December 31, 2013, no amounts were
outstanding and $9,855,000 was available to be drawn on the line of credit. The credit agreement includes a non-usage commitment
fee of 0.20% per annum and covenants limiting other indebtedness, liens, transfers or sales of assets, distributions or dividends and
merger or consolidation activity. The facility has an interest rate of the bank’s prime rate plus 0.75% with the total interest rate to be
charged being no less than 4.00%. The maturity date on the note was extended to April 10, 2014.
NOTE 6 – ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATION
A reconciliation of the asset retirement obligation for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2013 is as follows:
Balance, December 31,
2011
Liabilities incurred
Accretion expense
Balance, December 31,
2012
Liabilities incurred
Revision of estimate
Liabilities settled
Accretion expense
Balance, December 31,
2013
$
$
274,788
200,593
20,906
496,286
481,296
211,691
(60,544)
53,681
$ 1,182,410
NOTE 7 – STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
The Company is authorized to issue 150,000,000 common shares, with a par value of $0.001 per share and 50,000,000 shares of
Preferred Stock.
F-20
Reorganization  into  Ring  Energy,  Inc.  –  On  June  28,  2012  Ring  completed  the  acquisition  of  Stanford  Energy,  Inc.  through  the
closing of a stock-for-stock exchange agreement dated May 3, 2012. As a result, Stanford’s shareholders obtained control of Ring under
current accounting guidance. Since the Stanford shareholders obtained a controlling interest in Ring’s common stock and stock options
Stanford  was  determined  to  be  the  accounting  acquirer  and  its  historical  financial  statements  have  been  adjusted  to  reflect  its
reorganization  in  a  manner  equivalent  to  a  2,500-for-1  stock  split.  This  treatment  results  in  3,440,000  shares  held  by  Stanford
shareholders. As a result of the Stanford being determined to be the accounting acquirer, the transaction was accounted for as the
issuance by Stanford of the 6,579,808 common shares of Ring that remained outstanding.
Common Stock Issued in Private Offering  –  In  January  2013,  the  Company  issued  100,000  shares  of  common  stock,  valued  at
$450,000, or $4.50 per share, in a private placement. There were no related offering costs.
In  June  2013,  the  Company  issued  3,528,580  shares  of  common  stock,  valued  at  $19,407,190,  or  $5.50  per  share,  in  a  private
placement. Proceeds from the offering totaled $18,522,657, net of offering costs and expenses paid of $884,533.
Common Stock Issued in Public Offering – In December 2013, the Company issued 5,750,000 shares of common stock, valued at
$57,500,000, or $10.00 per share, in a public offering. Proceeds from the offering totaled $54,229,033, net of underwriters fees, offering
costs and expenses paid totaling $3,270,967.
Common Stock Issued for Services – In October 2013, the Company issued 10,000 shares of common stock, valued at $100,000, or
$10.00 per share, as compensation for services provided.
Common Stock Issued as a Result of Option Exercises – In January 2013, the Company issued 6,722 shares of common stock as
the result of the cashless exercise of 10,000 stock options with an exercise price of $2.00. The Company withheld 3,278 shares, valued
at $20,000 or $6.10 per share, as the exercise price.
In  December  2013,  the  Company  issued  15,000  shares  of  common  stock  as  the  result  of  an  option  exercise.  The  options  had  an
exercise price of $4.50 per share. The company received the $67,500 exercise price.
NOTE 8 – EMPLOYEE STOCK OPTIONS AND RESTRICTED STOCK AWARD PLAN
In 2011, the Company’s Board of Directors approved and adopted a long term incentive plan, which was subsequently approved and
amended by the shareholders. There are 2,327,500 shares eligible for grant, either as options or as restricted stock, at December 31,
2013.
Employee Stock Options – Following is a table reflecting the issuances during 2012 and 2013 and their related exercise prices:
Grant date
July 1, 2012
September 1,
# of options
75,000
Exercise price
$
4.50
September 1,
 
2012
October 1, 2012  
 
 
January 1, 2013  
March 15, 2013  
June 25, 2013
 
December 16,
2013
50,000
40,000 
 
1,400,000 
150,000 
35,000
100,000
1,850,000
$
4.50
4.50
4.50
5.50
7.50
10.00
F-21
All granted options vest at the rate of 20% each year over five years beginning one year from the date granted and expire ten years from
the grant date. A summary of the status of the stock options as of December 31, 2013 and changes during the years ended December
31, 2013 and 2012 is as follows:
Outstanding at beginning of the
year
Issued
Forfeited
Exercised
 
Outstanding at end of year
 
Exercisable at end of year
 
 
 
Weighted average fair value of
 options granted during the year
2013
2012
Options
Weighted-
Average
Exercise
Price
Options
Weighted-
Average
Exercise
Price
1,125,000  $
1,685,000 
 
 
(137,500) 
 
(25,000) 
 
 
2,647,500  $
 
662,500  $
 
 
 
 
  $
2.37 
4.98 
2.55 
3.50 
 
4.01 
 
3.13 
 
 
4.35
1,125,000 
165,000 
(165,000) 
- 
 
1,125,000 
 
200,000
2.00
4.50
2.00
-
2.37
2.00
4.26
The Company uses the Black-Scholes option pricing model to calculate the fair-value of each option grant. The expected volatility is
based on the historical price volatility of the Company’s common stock. We elected to use the simplified method for estimating the
expected term as allowed by generally accepted accounting principles for options granted through December 31, 2013 and 2012.
Under the simplified method, the expected term is equal to the midpoint between the vesting period and the contractual term of the stock
option. The risk-free interest rate represents the U.S. Treasury bill rate for the expected life of the related stock options. The dividend
yield  represents  the  Company’s  anticipated  cash  dividend  over  the  expected  life  of  the  stock  options.  The  following  are  the  Black-
Scholes weighted-average assumptions used for options granted during the periods ended December 31, 2013 and 2012:
Risk free
Expected
July 1, 2012
September 1,
2012
October 1, 2012
interest
rate
0.67%
0.80%
0.25%
life
Dividend
(years)
yield
Volatility
6.5
6.5
5.75
-
-
-
158%
153%
147%
October 1, 2012  
 
 
January 1, 2013  
February 13,
 
2013
March 15, 2013  
 
June 25, 2013
December 16,
 
2013
0.25% 
 
0.76% 
 
0.92%
0.84% 
1.49% 
 
1.55%
5.75 
 
6.5
6.5
6.5 
6.5
6.5
- 
 
- 
 
-
- 
- 
 
-
147%
138%
137%
132%
128%
119%
As of December 31, 2013, there was approximately $5,250,009 of unrecognized compensation cost related to stock options that will be
recognized  over  a  weighted  average  period  of  2.6  years.  The  aggregate  intrinsic  value  of  options  vested  and  expected  to  vest  at
December 31, 2013 was $20,359,425. The aggregate intrinsic value of options exercisable at December 31, 2013 was $3,890,000. The
year end intrinsic values are based on a December 31, 2013 closing price of $12.20.
During 2013, a total of 25,000 options were exercised. The aggregate intrinsic value of the options exercised was $149,000.
F-22
The following table summarizes information related to the Company’s stock options outstanding at December 31, 2013:
Options Outstanding
Weighted-
Average
Remaining
Contractual
Life
(in years)
7.92 
8.96 
9.29 
9.48 
9.96 
 
8.69
Number
Exercisable
362,500
300,000
-
-
-
662,500
Exercise price  
2.00 
4.50 
5.50 
7.50 
10.00 
 
-
Number
Outstanding  
842,500 
1,520,000 
150,000 
35,000 
100,000 
 
2,647,500
Any excess tax benefits from the exercise of stock options will not be recognized in paid-in capital until the Company is in a current tax
paying position. Presently, the company has a net loss and therefore not yet subject to income taxes. Accordingly, no excess tax
benefits have been recognized for the years ended December 31, 2013 or 2012.
NOTE 9 – RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
The  company  is  leasing  office  space  from  Arenaco,  LLC,  a  company  that  is  owned  by  two  of  stockholders’  of  the  company,  Mr.
Rochford, Chairman of the Board of the Company, and Mr. McCabe, a Director of the Company. During the years ended December 31,
2013 and 2012, the Company paid $47,000 to this company.
The Company entered into a promissory note for $1,000,000 in January 2012 to cover $850,000 in advances from Ring Energy, Inc. to
Stanford Energy, Inc. in 2011 and $150,000 in advances made during early 2012. This was settled as part of the merger.
NOTE 10 – COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENT LIABILITIES
Standby Letters of Credit – A commercial bank has issued standby letters of credit on behalf of the Company to the states of Texas
and Kansas totaling $145,000 to allow the Company to do business in those states. The Company intends to renew the standby letters
of credit for as long as the Company does business in those states. No amounts have been drawn under the standby letters of credit.
Operating  leases – The following table summarizes our future estimated lease payments for periods subsequent to December 31,
2013. The leases pertain to approximately 3,700 square feet of space for our corporate headquarters in Midland, Texas, approximately
3,700 square feet of office space for our accounting offices in Tulsa, Oklahoma and approximately 2,000 square feet of office space for
our field office in Andrews, Texas. The Company incurred lease expense of $141,593 and $208,091 for the years ended December 31,
2013 and 2012, respectively. The following table reflects the future minimum lease payments under the operating lease as of December
31, 2013.
Year
2014
2015
2016
2017
$
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  $
Lease Obligation
133,515
143,475
73,185
55,935
406,110
F-23
NOTE 11 – INCOME TAXES
For the year ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, the Company calculated a net tax benefit of $516,531 and $300,324, respectively.
The benefit from income taxes consisted of the following:
Provision for Income Taxes
Deferred
Effect of offset from Kansas property
acquisition
$
$
2013
77,701  $
2012
(707,270)
-
77,701  $
406,946
(300,324)
The following is a reconciliation of income taxes computed using the U.S. federal statutory rate to the provision for income taxes:
Rate Reconciliation
 
  $ (127,333)  $ (669,666)
Tax at federal statutory rate (34%)
 
1,098
Non-deductible expenses
406,946
True-up prior return
 
States taxes, net of Federal benefit  
(93,950)
 
Effect of tax rates lower than
statutory rate
5,017
55,248
77,701  $ (300,324)
4,450 
213,431 
17,864
$
2013
2012
As  of  December  31,  2013,  the  Company  had  net  operating  loss  carry  forwards  for  federal  income  tax  reporting  purposes  of
approximately $17.8 million which, if unused, will expire in 2033.
The net deferred tax liability consisted of the following at December 31, 2013 and 2012:
Deferred Taxes:
 
Deferred tax liabilities
 
 
  Property and equipment
  $
 
 
 
 
Deferred tax assets
 
  Stock-based compensation
 
 
 
  Operating loss and IDC carryforwards  
  Deferred tax assets
 
 
Net deferred income tax liability
  $
2013
9,009,106  $
 
 
 
 
 
703,651  $
1,682,601 
 6,622,853 
8,305,439
2012
3,094,811
386,541
2,082,319
2,468,860
625,951
Accounting  for  Uncertainty  in  Income  Taxes  –  In  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles,  the  Company  has
analyzed its filing positions in all jurisdictions where it is required to file income tax returns for the open tax years in such jurisdictions.
The Company has identified its federal income tax return and its state income tax returns in Texas and Kansas in which it operates as
“major”  tax  jurisdictions.  The  Company’s  federal  income  tax  returns  for  the  years  ended  December  31,  2010  through  2012  remain
subject to examination. The Company’s income tax returns in Kansas remain subject to examination for years ended December 31,
2010 through 2012. The Company’s income tax returns in Texas remain subject to examination for years ended 2009 through 2012.
The  Company  currently  believes  that  all  significant  filing  positions  are  highly  certain  and  that  all  of  its  significant  income  tax  filing
positions and deductions would be sustained upon audit. Therefore, the Company has no significant reserves for uncertain tax positions
and no adjustments to such reserves were required by generally accepted accounting principles. No interest or penalties have been
levied against the Company and none are anticipated; therefore, no interest or penalty has been included in our provision for income
taxes in the consolidated statements of operations.
NOTE 12 – SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
On February 3, 2014 the Company received the second payment from Torchlight regarding the joint development agreement on the
Kansas acreage. The payment was $2,089,801, bringing the amount received from Torchlight to $3,089,801 or one half of the total to be
received from Torchlight per the joint development agreement.
F-24
On  February  6,  2014,  the  Company’s  resale  registration  statement  on  Form  S-1  in  connection  with  the  offering  by  certain  selling
stockholders named therein of up to 3,528,580 outstanding shares of common stock (the “Resale Shares”) became effective. Pursuant
to the registration statement, such selling stockholders may sell all or a portion of these shares from time to time in market transactions
through any market on which the common stock is then traded, in negotiated transactions or otherwise, and at prices and on terms that
will be determined by the then prevailing market price or at negotiated prices directly or through a broker or brokers, who may act as
agents or as principals or by a combination of such methods of sale. The selling stockholders will receive all proceeds from such sales
of  the  Resale  Shares,  and  the  Company  will  not  receive  any  proceeds  from  the  sale  of  any  Resale  Shares  sold  by  the  selling
stockholders.
On February 27, 2014, the Company completed the Acquisition, in which it acquired certain assets pursuant to its previously announced
Purchase  and  Sale  Agreement,  for  a  purchase  price  of  approximately  $6.45  million  in  cash.  The  assets  acquired  by  the  Company
pursuant to the Purchase Agreement consist of approximately 2,481 gross (1,5767 net) acres, located in Andrews and Gaines Counties,
in the Permian Basin of Texas. The acreage, comprised of 92 separate leases, includes both “developed” and “undeveloped” parcels
and is in close proximity to the Company’s existing Permian Basin assets. The “developed” area is comprised of approximately 907 net
acres with current net production of 42 BOEs (Barrel of Oil Equivalent) per day from the San Andres and Glorieta formations and is over
92% oil. The “undeveloped” area is comprised of approximately 660 net acres.
F-25
RING ENERGY, INC.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION ON OIL AND GAS PRODUCING ACTIVITIES
(Unaudited)
Results of Operations from Oil and Gas Producing Activities – The Company’s results of operations from oil and gas producing
activities exclude interest expense, gain from change in fair value of put options, and other financing expense. Income taxes are based
on statutory tax rates, reflecting allowable deductions.
For the years ended December 31,
Oil and gas sales
Production costs
Production taxes
Depreciation, depletion, amortization and
accretion
General and administrative (exclusive of
corporate overhead)
Results of Oil and Gas Producing
Operations
2012
2013
$ 10,315,701  $ 1,757,444
(785,959)
 
 
(82,995)
(1,207,529) 
(476,964)
(2,337,772)
(646,625)
(527,692)
(322,821)
$
5,646,811  $
37,977
Reserve  Quantities  Information  –  The  following  estimates  of  proved  and  proved  developed  reserve  quantities  and  related
standardized measure of discounted net cash flow are estimates only, and do not purport to reflect realizable values or fair market
values of the Company’s reserves. The Company emphasizes that reserve estimates are inherently imprecise and that estimates of new
discoveries are more imprecise than those of producing oil and gas properties. Accordingly, these estimates are expected to change as
future information becomes available. All of the Company’s reserves are located in the United States of America.
Proved reserves are estimated reserves of crude oil (including condensate and natural gas liquids) and natural gas that geological and
engineering  data  demonstrate  with  reasonable  certainty  to  be  recoverable  in  future  years  from  known  reservoirs  under  existing
economic and operating conditions. Proved developed reserves are those expected to be recovered through existing wells, equipment
and methods.
The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows is computed by applying the price according to the SEC guidelines for oil
and gas to the estimated future production of proved oil and gas reserves, less estimated future expenditures (based on year-end costs)
to  be  incurred  in  developing  and  producing  the  proved  reserves,  less  estimated  future  income  tax  expenses  (based  on  year-end
statutory  tax  rates)  to  be  incurred  on  pretax  net  cash  flows  less  tax  basis  of  the  properties  and  available  credits,  and  assuming
continuation of existing economic conditions. The estimated future net cash flows are then discounted using a rate of 10 percent per
year to reflect the estimated timing of the future cash flows.
For the Year Ended December 31,
2013
Natural
Oil (1)
Gas (1)
Proved Developed and Undeveloped Reserves  
Beginning of year
Purchases of minerals in place
Improved recovery and extensions
Sale of minerals in place
Production
Revision of previous estimate
3,646,743  1,733,780 
208,013 
 
934,716 
595,729 
  2,676,934 
 
(16,100) 
- 
(36,047) 
(109,673) 
 
(14,433) 
(276,965)
2012
Natural
Gas (1)
1,749,100
430,800
30,250
-
(6,480)
(469,890)
Oil (1)
2,493,560 
780,669 
149,149 
- 
(20,531) 
243,896
End of year
 
Proved Developed at end of year
6,855,655  2,487,042 
 
 
 
630,751 
  1,941,367
3,646,743 
 
 
364,110
1,733,780
63,840
1
Oil reserves are stated in barrels; gas reserves are stated in thousand cubic feet.
F-26
December 31,
Future cash flows
Future production costs
Future development costs
Future income taxes
Future net cash flows
10% annual discount for estimated timing of
cash flows
 
Standardized Measure of Discounted Cash
Flows
$
$
2013
2012
648,958,812  $ 331,489,046
(73,667,753)
(66,835,270)
(62,412,466)
128,573,357
(165,478,373) 
(98,287,766) 
(125,104,471) 
260,088,202
(126,140,275)
(57,215,111)
133,947,927  $
71,358,446
Beginning of the year
Purchase of minerals in place
Extensions, discoveries and improved recovery, less
related costs
Development costs incurred during the year
Sales of oil and gas produced, net of production
costs
Sales of minerals in place
Accretion of discount
Net changes in price and production costs
Net change in estimated future development costs
Revision of previous quantity estimates
Revision of estimated timing of cash flows
Net change in income taxes
 
End of the Year
2013
 
71,358,446 
24,631,148
$
72,635,671 
29,103,392 
 
(994,793)
 
(1,039,031) 
 
8,568,497 
 
5,568,442 
 
(6,499,395) 
 
(10,313,017) 
 
(29,859,746) 
 
(29,211,687) 
 
 
 
 
$ 133,947,927
2012
60,755,575
19,027,746
6,279,507
6,532,898
(972,881)
-
6,524,980
(8,004,160)
(2,968,626)
6,364,907
(19,303,858)
(2,877,642)
71,358,446
$
$
F-27
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and the Shareholders
Ring Energy, Inc.
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Ring Energy, Inc. and subsidiary (the “Company”) as of December
31, 2012 and 2011, and the related consolidated statements of operations, stockholders’ equity (deficit), and cash flows for the year
ended December 31, 2012 and for the eight months ended December 31, 2011. We have also audited the accompanying predecessor
carve-out statements of operations, owners’ net investment (deficit), and cash flows of the Fisher I Property for the four months ended
April 30, 2011. These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an
opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States).  Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of
material misstatement. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over
financial  reporting.  Our  audits  included  consideration  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  as  a  basis  for  designing  audit
procedures  that  are  appropriate  in  the  circumstances,  but  not  for  the  purpose  of  expressing  an  opinion  on  the  effectiveness  of  the
Company’s internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes examining, on a
test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and
significant  estimates  made  by  management,  as  well  as  evaluating  the  overall  financial  statement  presentation.  We  believe  that  our
audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of
Ring Energy, Inc. and subsidiary as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for the year
ended December 31, 2012 and for the eight months ended December 31, 2011, and the predecessor carve-out financial statements of
the Fisher I Property referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the results of operations and the cash flows of the Fisher I
Property for the four months ended April 30, 2011, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
/s/ HANSEN, BARNETT & MAXWELL, P.C.
Salt Lake City, Utah
April 1, 2013
F-28
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
December 31,
 
ASSETS
Current Assets
Cash
Accounts receivable
Prepaid expenses and retainers
Total Current Assets
Properties and Equipment
Oil and natural gas properties subject to
amortization
Office equipment
Total Properties and Equipment
Accumulated depreciation, depletion and
amortization
Net Properties and Equipment
Total Assets
 
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
(DEFICIT)
Current Liabilities
Accounts payable
Accrued compensation
Derivative put option
Total Current Liabilities
Noncurrent Liabilities
Revolving line of credit
Note payable to Ring Energy, Inc.
Deferred income taxes
Asset retirement obligations
Total Noncurrent Liabilities
Stockholders' Equity (Deficit)
Preferred stock - $0.001 par value; 50,000,000
shares authorized;
no shares issued or outstanding
Common stock - $0.001 par value; 150,000,000
shares authorized;
14,166,011 shares and 3,440,000 shares
outstanding, respectively
Additional paid-in capital
Accumulated deficit
Total Stockholders' Equity (Deficit)
Total Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity
(Deficit)
$
$
$
2012
5,404,167  $
417,965 
60,398 
5,882,530
23,051,904 
175,106 
23,227,010
(596,162) 
22,630,848 
 
28,513,378  $
1,191,431  $
- 
- 
1,191,431 
 
- 
- 
625,950 
496,286 
1,122,236
-
14,166 
32,169,363 
(5,983,818) 
26,199,711
2011
11,372
91,022
121,301
223,695
6,597,433
11,133
6,608,566
(89,376)
6,519,190
6,742,885
100,321
100,000
276,736
477,057
9,244,428
853,122
-
274,788
10,372,338
-
3,440
204,585
(4,314,535)
(4,106,510)
$
28,513,378  $
6,742,885
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-29
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
Successor
For the
Year ended
December
December
Oil and Natural Gas Sales
 
Costs and Operating Expenses
  Lease operating expenses
  Production taxes  
  Depreciation, depletion and amortization
$
31,
2012
1,757,444  $
785,959 
82,995 
506,786
Accretion
expense
General and administrative expenses
(including $944,681 and   $95,897,
respectively, in share-based compensation)  
 
 
 
 
             Total Costs and Operating Expenses 
 
 
Income (Loss) from Operations
 
 
 
Other Income
(Expense)
  Gain on derivative put options
Gain on change in value of Ring Energy, Inc.
common stock
Interest income  
Interest expense
Non-refundable transaction fee
 
 
 
             Other Income, net
 
Income (Loss) Before Provision for Income
Taxes
 
Benefit from Income Taxes
 
 
Net Income (Loss)  
 
 
Basic and Diluted Earnings (Loss) per
Share
20,906
2,392,645 
 
3,789,291 
 
 
(2,031,847)
276,736
- 
- 
4,309 
(218,805) 
 
62,240
(1,969,607) 
 
 
300,324 
 
 
(1,669,283)
For the
Eight
Months
ended
31,
2011
388,674 
 
 
173,310 
18,428 
89,376
5,547
428,575 
 
715,236 
 
(326,562)
73,946
160,000 
250,000 
- 
(94,219) 
 
389,727
63,165 
 
- 
 
63,165
Predecessor
For the Four
Months
ended
April 30,
2011
96,956
71,656
4,468
2,778
3,732
6,000
88,634
8,322
-
-
-
-
-
-
8,322
-
8,322
$
$
(0.21)  $
0.01
$
0.00
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-30
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF PREDECESSOR OWNERS’
NET INVESTMENT (DEFICIT)
FOR THE FOUR MONTHS ENDED APRIL 30, 2011
Predecessor
Balance, December 31, 2010
Distributions to owners
Net income
Balance, April 30, 2011
Owners'
Net
Investment
(Deficit)
$ 11,686
(26,416)
8,322
$ (6,408)
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
FOR THE EIGHT MONTHS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2011 AND FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2012
Successor
Balance, May 1, 2011
Capital contributions from
shareholders
Common Stock
Additional
Shares
6,250,000 $
Amount
6,250 $
Paid-in   Accumulated 
Capital
Deficit
199,750 $
- $
of available-for-sale securities
Net capital distributions to
shareholders
Share-based compensation
Redemption of common stock and
distributions to shareholders
Net income
Balance, December 31, 2011
Share-based compensation
-
-
200,000
-
- 
- 
 
 
(2,810,000)
- 
- 
 
(2,810)
(150,000) 
95,897 
 
(141,062)
- 
- 
 
(4,377,700)
- 
3,440,000 
-
- 
3,440 
-
- 
204,585 
944,681
63,165 
 (4,314,535) 
-
Common stock issued to purchase
Stockholders'
Total
Equity
(Deficit)
206,000
200,000
(150,000)
95,897
(4,521,572)
63,165
(4,106,510)
944,681
Common stock issued to purchase
Ring Energy, Inc.
Common stock issued for cash
Common stock issued in property
acquisitions
Net loss
Balance, December 31, 2012
6,579,808 
3,148,425
6,580 
3,148
13,525,180 
13,005,914
- 
-
13,531,760
13,009,062
997,778 
-
998 
-
4,489,003 
-
14,166,011 $ 14,166 $ 32,169,363 $
- 
(1,669,283) 
(5,983,818) $
4,490,001
(1,669,283)
26,199,711
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-31
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
Cash Flows From Operating Activities
Successor
For the Eight
For the
Predecessor
  Carve-Out
 
  For the Four
Year Ended
December 31,
2012
Months
Ended
December
31, 2011
Months
Ended
  April 30,
2011
Net income (loss)
$
(1,669,283)  $
63,165
$
8,322
Adjustments to reconcile net income to
net cash provided by operating
activities:
Depreciation, depletion and
amortization
Accretion expense
  Share-based compensation
  Gain on derivative put options
Gain on change in value of Ring
Energy, Inc. common stock
Interest expense on advances from
Ring Energy, Inc.
Changes in assets and liabilities:
Provision for incomes taxes
 
  Accounts receivable
  Prepaid expenses
  Accounts payable
  Accrued compensation
Net Cash Provided by (Used in)
Operating Activities
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Payments to purchase oil and natural
gas properties
Payments to develop oil and natural
gas properties
Purchase of office equipment
Net Cash Used in Investing
Activities
Cash Flows From Financing Activities
Proceeds from borrowings from Ring
506,786 
20,906 
944,681 
(276,736)
-
- 
(300,324) 
 
(326,943) 
87,845 
1,081,217 
(100,000)
(31,851)
(3,684,674)
(6,532,898) 
(159,977)
(10,377,549)
1,150,000
89,376 
5,547 
95,897 
(73,946)
(160,000)
3,122 
- 
 
(38,744) 
(121,301) 
68,140 
100,000
31,256
(5,144,565)
(317,042) 
(11,133)
(5,472,740)
850,000
2,778
3,732
-
-
-
4,677
-
6,907
-
26,416
-
-
-
-
-
Proceeds from borrowings from Ring
Energy, Inc.
Proceeds from borrowings under
revolving line of credit
Proceeds from issuance of common
stock
Proceeds from issuance of common
stock to Ring Energy, Inc. shareholders  
Principal payments on revolving line of
credit
Redemption of common stock
 
  Capital contributions from shareholders 
  Capital distributions to owners
1,150,000
-
13,009,062
10,887,561
(9,244,428) 
- 
- 
-
Net Cash Provided by (Used in)
Financing Activities
Net Increase (Decrease) in Cash
Cash at Beginning of Period
Cash at End of Period
Supplemental Cash Flow Information
$
$
Cash paid for interest
Noncash Investing and Financing
Activities
 
  Oil and natural gas properties acquired   $
 
 
  Accounts receivable acquired
 
 
  Deferred tax liability assumed (net)
 
  Accounts payable assumed
 
  Asset retirement obligations assumed
15,802,195 
5,392,795 
11,372
5,404,167  $
221,927  $
9,689,488  $
- 
(1,362,665) 
- 
(152,148)
850,000
9,244,428
-
-
- 
(4,521,572) 
100,000 
(250,000)
5,422,856 
(18,628) 
30,000 
11,372
$
91,097
$
6,104,391 
52,278 
- 
(32,181) 
(269,241)
$
Payments with Ring Energy, Inc.
shares
Derivative put option incurred
Cash payments for oil and natural gas
properties acquired
Issuance of common stock to Ring
Energy, Inc. shareholders
Accounts payable assumed
  Less: Tax benefit
$
$
Less: Elimination of note payable to
Ring Energy, Inc.
Less: Prepaid expenses acquired
 
  Less: Property and equipment acquired
Proceeds from issuance of common
stock to Ring Energy, Inc. shareholders   $
Capital contribution of Ring Energy,
Inc. common stock
$
(4,490,001) 
-
(360,000) 
(350,682)
3,684,674  $
5,144,565
$
13,531,760  $
9,893 
(436,391)
(2,003,122) 
(26,942) 
(187,637)
10,887,561  $
- 
-
- 
- 
-
-
$
$
-  $
200,000
$
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(26,416)
(26,416)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-32
RING ENERGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE 1 – ORGANIZATION AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Organization and Nature of Operations – Ring Energy, Inc. is a Nevada corporation. Ring Energy, Inc. and Stanford Energy, Inc., its
wholly-owned subsidiary, are referred to herein as the “Company.” The Company owns interests in oil and gas properties located in
Texas  and  Kansas  and  is  engaged  primarily  in  the  acquisition,  exploration  and  development  of  oil  and  gas  properties  and  the
production and sale of oil and natural gas.
Reorganization into Ring Energy, Inc. – On June 28, 2012, Ring Energy, Inc. (“Ring”) completed the acquisition of Stanford Energy,
Inc.  (“Stanford”)  through  the  closing  of  a  stock-for-stock  exchange  agreement  dated  May  3,  2012.    As  a  result,  Stanford  became  a
wholly-owned subsidiary of Ring. At the closing, the Stanford shareholders exchanged their 1,376 shares of Stanford common stock for
3,440,000  shares  of  Ring  common  stock.  In  addition,  Ring  assumed  and  adopted  Stanford’s  equity  compensation  plan  and  its
outstanding options to purchase 450 shares of Stanford common stock, which represented the right to purchase 1,125,000 shares of
Ring  common  stock  at  $2.00  per  share.  On  February  6,  2012,  the  date  the  terms  of  the  exchange  agreement  were  agreed  to  and
announced, Ring has 5,786,884 shares of common stock outstanding, of which Stanford shareholders held 793,317 shares. In addition,
Stanford’s  shareholders  obtained  the  right  to  appoint  to  a  majority  of  the  members  of  the  Ring  board  of  directors  and  senior
management of the combined company.
Under current accounting guidance, as a result of the number of shares and stock options to acquire shares issued to the Stanford
shareholders and option holders, Stanford was determined to be the accounting acquirer and its historical financial statements have
been adjusted to reflect its reorganization in a manner equivalent to a 2,500-for-1 stock split. The accompanying historical financial
statements prior to the reorganization into Ring are Stanford’s financial statements, adjusted to reflect the authorized capital and par
value of Ring and to reflect the effects of the stock split for all periods presented.
Predecessor Carve-Out Financial Statements – On May 1, 2011, Stanford acquired developed and undeveloped properties referred
to as the Fisher I Property. The Fisher I Property represents Stanford’s predecessor under Rule 405 of Regulation C of the Securities
Act of 1933, as amended, as the Fisher I Property was Stanford’s first interest in producing oil and natural gas properties and Stanford’s
own operations before the acquisition were insignificant relative to the operations acquired. In that regard, upon consummation of the
acquisition, the historical financial statements of the Fisher I Property became the historical financial statements of the Company. The
accompanying predecessor financial statements present the full carve-out revenues earned, the costs and expenses incurred and the
cash flows of the predecessor owners relative to the Fisher I Property.
Subsequent to the acquisition, the successor financial statements present the financial position, operations and cash flows of the assets
acquired, the liabilities assumed and operations of the Fisher I Property as well as those of other properties acquired subsequently and
are  reflected  at  their  purchase-date  fair  values.  Those  fair  values  are  reflected  as  the  cost  of  the  assets  acquired  and  the  carrying
amounts of the liabilities assumed, and are the basis of the resulting operations of the successor.
Prior  to  the  acquisition  of  the  Fisher  I  Property,  Stanford  had  little  activity  and  was  a  development  stage  company.  Its  planned
operations were to acquire, develop and operate oil and natural gas properties. Stanford had no revenue, expenses or income during
the four months ended April 30, 2011. Changes in Stanford’s stockholders’ equity for the four months ended April 30, 2011, on a post-
split basis, were as follows:
Balance, December 31, 2010
Common stock issued for no
consideration
Cash paid in from shareholders
without
  the issuance of additional shares
Balance, April 30, 2011
Common Stock  
 Shares  Amount
5,000,000 $
5,000 $
Additional 
 Paid-in  
 Capital
(5,000) $
1,250,000
1,250
(1,250)
Total
Stockholders'
Equity
-
-
-
-
6,250,000 $
6,250 $
206,000 
199,750 $
206,000
206,000
F-33
Stanford’s cash flows during the four months ended April 30, 2011 were as follows:
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Payments to purchase oil and gas
properties
Cash Flows From Financing Activities
  Capital contributions from shareholders
Net Increase in Cash
Cash at Beginning of Period
Cash at End of Period
$(176,000)
206,000
30,000
-
30,000
$
Consolidation –  The  basis  of  presentation  of  the  predecessor  carve-out  financial  statements  is  presented  above.  Except  for  the
predecessor carve-out financial statements, the accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts, operations and
cash  flows  of  Stanford  for  all  periods  presented  and  the  consolidated  operations  and  cash  flows  of  Ring  from  June  28,  2012.    All
significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
Use of Estimates – The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities,
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual
results could differ from those estimates.  Changes in the future estimated oil and natural gas reserves or the estimated future cash flows
attributable to the reserves that are utilized for impairment analysis could have a significant impact on the future results of operations.
Fair Values of Financial Instruments – The carrying amounts reported for the revolving line of credit approximates fair value because
the underlying instruments are at interest rates which approximate current market rates.  The derivative put options are carried at fair
value.
Concentration  of  Credit  Risk  and  Accounts  Receivable –  Financial  instruments  that  potentially  subject  the  Company  to  a
concentration of credit risk consist principally of cash and accounts receivable.  The Company has cash in excess of federally insured
limits of $5,202,580 at December 31, 2012.  The Company places its cash with a high credit quality financial institution.
Substantially all of the Company’s accounts receivable is from purchasers of oil and gas.  Oil and gas sales are generally unsecured.
The  Company  has  not  had  any  significant  credit  losses  in  the  past  and  believes  its  accounts  receivable  are  fully  collectable.
Accordingly, no allowance for doubtful accounts has been provided.  The Company also has a joint interest billing receivable.  Joint
interest billing receivables are collateralized by the pro rata revenue attributable to the joint interest holders and further by the interest
itself.
Cash – The Company considers all highly liquid investments purchased with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash
equivalents.
Oil and Gas Properties – The Company uses the full cost method of accounting for oil and gas properties.  Under this method, all costs
associated  with  acquisition,  exploration,  and  development  of  oil  and  gas  properties  are  capitalized.  Costs  capitalized  include
acquisition  costs,  geological  and  geophysical  expenditures,  lease  rentals  on  undeveloped  properties  and  costs  of  drilling  and
equipping productive and non-productive wells. Drilling costs include directly related overhead costs. Capitalized costs are categorized
either as being subject to amortization or not subject to amortization.
The Company records a liability in the period in which an asset retirement obligation (“ARO”) is incurred, in an amount equal to the
discounted estimated fair value of the obligation that is capitalized.  Thereafter this liability is accreted up to the final retirement cost. An
ARO is a future expenditure related to the disposal or other retirement of certain assets.  The Company’s ARO relate to future plugging
and abandonment expenses of its oil and gas properties and related facilities disposal.
F-34
All capitalized costs of oil and gas properties, including the estimated future costs to develop proved reserves and estimated future
costs to plug and abandon wells and costs of site restoration, less the estimated salvage value of equipment associated with the oil and
gas  properties,  are  amortized  on  the  unit-of-production  method  using  estimates  of  proved  reserves  as  determined  by  independent
engineers.    If  the  results  of  an  assessment  indicate  that  the  properties  are  impaired,  the  amount  of  the  impairment  is  added  to  the
capitalized costs to be amortized.  The following table shows total depletion and depletion per barrel-of-oil-equivalent rate, for the years
ended December 31, 2012 and 2011.
Depletion
Depletion rate, per barrel-of-oil-
equivalent (BOE)
$
$
For the Years Ended
December 31,
2012
474,056  $
2011
89,376
21.94  $
19.19
In addition, capitalized costs less accumulated amortization and related deferred income taxes shall not exceed an amount (the full cost
ceiling) equal to the sum of:
1) the present value of estimated future net revenues discounted ten percent computed in compliance with SEC guidelines;
2) plus the cost of properties not being amortized;
3) plus the lower of cost or estimated fair value of unproven properties included in the costs being amortized;
4) less income tax effects related to differences between the book and tax basis of the properties.
Land, Buildings, Equipment and Leasehold Improvements – Land, buildings, equipment and leasehold improvements are valued at
historical cost, adjusted for impairment loss less accumulated depreciation.  Historical costs include all direct costs associated with the
acquisition of land, buildings, equipment and leasehold improvements and placing them in service.
Depreciation of buildings and equipment is calculated using the straight-line method based upon the following estimated useful lives:
Buildings and
improvements
Office equipment and
software
Machinery and equipment
30 years
5-7 years
5-7 years
Depreciation expense was $35,369 and $2,778 for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
Revenue recognition – The Company predominantly derives its revenue from the sale of produced crude oil and natural gas. Revenue
is recorded in the month the product is delivered to the purchaser.  At the end of each month, the Company estimates the amount of
production delivered to purchasers and the price received. Variances between the Company’s estimated revenue and actual payment
are recorded in the month the payment is received; however, differences have been insignificant.
Income  Taxes –  Provisions  for  income  taxes  are  based  on  taxes  payable  or  refundable  for  the  current  year  and  deferred  taxes.
 Deferred taxes are provided on differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial
statements, and tax carry forwards.  Deferred tax assets and liabilities are included in the financial statements at currently enacted
income tax rates applicable to the period in which the deferred tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled.  As
changes in tax laws or rates are enacted, deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted through the provision for income taxes.
Earnings  Per  Share – Basic earnings per share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of common
shares outstanding during the year.  Diluted earnings per share are calculated to give effect to potentially issuable dilutive common
shares.
Major Customers – During the year ended December 31, 2012, sales to three customers represented 50% 25% and 23% of total sales,
respectively.  At December 31, 2012, one of these customers made up 94% of accounts receivable.  During the year ended December
31, 2011, sales to two customers represented 52% and 42% of total sales, respectively.  At December 31, 2011, these customers made
up 71% of accounts receivable.  The loss of any of the foregoing customers would not have a material adverse effect on the Company
as there is an available market for its crude oil and natural gas production from other purchasers.
F-35
Stock-Based Employee and Non-Employee Compensation – The Company has outstanding stock options to directors, employees
and contract employees, which are described more fully in Note 8.  The Company accounts for its stock options grants in accordance
with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles.    Generally  accepted  accounting  principles  require  the  recognition  of  the  cost  of
employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments in the financial statements and is measured based on the
grant date fair value of the award. Generally accepted accounting principles also requires stock option compensation expense to be
recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award (the vesting period).
Stock-based  employee  compensation  incurred  for  the  years  ended  December  31,  2012  and  2011  was  $944,681  and  $95,897,
respectively.
Recently  Adopted  Accounting  Pronouncement  – In  May  2011,  the  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  (“FASB”)  issued
Accounting Standards Update 2011-04, “Amendments to Achieve Common Fair Value Measurement and Disclosure Requirements in
U.S. GAAP and IFRS” (“ASU 2011-04”), which clarifies the FASB’s intent regarding the application of existing fair value measurements
and requires additional disclosure of information regarding valuation processes and inputs used. The new disclosure requirements,
which are effective for interim and annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2011, were implemented by the Company in
the  first  quarter  of  2012.  The  implementation  of  ASU  2011-04  had  no  impact  on  the  Company’s  financial  position  or  results  of
operations. See Note 5 for the Company’s fair value disclosures.
Recent Accounting Pronouncement Not Yet Adopted –  In December 2011, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update 2011-
11, “Disclosures about Offsetting Assets and Liabilities” (“ASU 2011-11”), and in January 2013 issued Accounting Standards Update
2013-01,  “Clarifying  the  Scope  of  Disclosures  about  Offsetting  Assets  and  Liabilities”  (“ASU  2013-01”).  These  updates  require
disclosures about the nature of an entity’s rights of offset and related arrangements associated with its recognized derivatives contracts.
The guidance is effective for interim and annual periods beginning on or after January 1, 2013. As the additional requirements under
ASU 2011-11 and ASU 2013-01, which will be implemented January 1, 2013, pertain to disclosures of offsetting assets and liabilities,
no effect on the Company’s financial position or results of operations is expected.
NOTE 2 – EARNINGS PER SHARE INFORMATION
Successor
For the
For the
Eight
Months
Predecessor
For the Four
Months
Year ended
Months
ended
December
Net income
Basic and diluted weighted-average common
shares outstanding
Basic and diluted earnings per share
Months
ended
April 30,
2011
8,322
December 31, 
 
 
  $ (1,669,283)  $
2012
31,
2011
63,165
$
$
8,073,176
(0.21)  $
6,077,959 
0.01
$
6,250,000
0.00
Stock options to purchase 1,125,000 and 1,125,000 shares of common stock were excluded from the computation of diluted earnings
(loss) per share during the year ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively, as their effect would have been anti-dilutive.
F-36
NOTE 3 – ACQUISITION OF OIL AND GAS PROPERTIES
Fisher I Property – On May 23, 2011, Stanford purchased proved developed and undeveloped oil and natural gas reserves (the “Fisher
I Property”) located in the Permian Basin, Andrews County, Texas. The Fisher I Property acquired consisted of 100% of the working
interest (75% net revenue interest) in four producing leases, a 99.6% working interest (74.7% net revenue interest) in 640 undeveloped
acres and a 92.0% working interest (69.0% net revenue interest) in 960 undeveloped acres. The Fisher I Property was acquired for
$2,296,228 of total consideration consisting of cash of $2,183,306, the transfer of 20,000 shares of Ring Energy, Inc. (“Ring”) common
stock, valued at $2.00 per share or $40,000, and the issuance of a put option relating to the Ring shares valued at $72,922, whereby the
holders could put the Ring shares back to Stanford for $5.00 per share through November 24, 2011.
For purposes of acquisition accounting, the fair value of the Ring shares transferred was determined based on the price stockholders of
the Company paid to purchase the shares in May 2011 (See Note 11) since there was not an active market for the Ring shares. The
value of the put option was determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model based on the following assumptions: risk-free
interest rate of 0.11%; expected life of 0.5 years; dividend yield of 0% and volatility of 207%. Stanford incurred $30,673 of acquisition-
related costs, which have been included in general and administrative expense in the accompanying statement of income.
The acquisition qualified as a business combination and as such, Stanford recognized the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed
at their fair values as of the May 23, 2011 acquisition date, which is the date the Company obtained control of the properties. Oil and
natural  gas  sales  receivable  and  production  costs  payable  at  May  23,  2011  were  not  material.  The  estimated  fair  value  of  these
properties approximated the consideration paid, which the Company concluded approximated the fair value that would be paid by a
typical market participant. As a result, neither goodwill nor a bargain purchase gain was recognized related to the acquisition. The
following table summarizes the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed:
Proved developed and undeveloped oil and
gas properties
Asset retirement obligation
Total Identifiable Net Assets
$ 2,358,483
(62,255)
$ 2,296,228
Oil and natural gas sales and income from operations before general and administrative expense from the Fisher I Property, included in
the accompanying statement of operations for the eight months ended December 31, 2011, were $166,250 and $49,116, respectively.
Miocene  Property –  On  August  17,  2011,  Stanford  purchased  additional  proved  developed  and  undeveloped  oil  and  natural  gas
reserves (the “Miocene Property”) located in the Permian Basin, Andrews County, Texas. The Miocene Property consisted of 100% of
the working interest (75% to 77% net revenue interest) in three producing leases. The Miocene Property was acquired for cash totaling
$1,791,165.  The  Company  incurred  $98,984  of  acquisition-related  costs,  which  have  been  included  in  general  and  administrative
expense in the accompanying statement of income.
The acquisition was recognized as a business combination whereby Stanford recorded the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed
at their fair values as of August 17, 2011, which is the date the Company obtained control of the properties and was the acquisition date
for financial reporting purposes. The estimated fair value of Miocene Property approximated the consideration paid, which the Company
concluded approximated the fair value that would be paid by a typical market participant. The following table summarizes the fair values
of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed:
Assets Acquired
  Accounts receivable
  Proved developed and undeveloped oil and gas
properties
Liabilities Assumed
  Accounts payable
  Asset retirement obligation
Total Identifiable Net Assets
$
52,278
1,810,662
(32,181)
(39,594)
$1,791,165
Oil and natural gas sales and income from operations before general and administrative expense from the Miocene Property, included
in the accompanying statement of operations for the eight months ended December 31, 2011, were $217,959 and $60,313, respectively.
F-37
Fisher II Property – On December 1, 2011, the Company purchased proved developed and undeveloped oil and natural gas reserves
(the “Fisher II Property”) located in the Permian Basin, Andrews County, Texas. The Fisher II Property acquired consisted of 100% of
the working interest (75% net revenue interest) in one lease.  The Fisher II Property was acquired for $1,747,760 of total consideration
consisting of cash of $1,150,000, the transfer of 80,000 shares of Ring common stock, valued at $4.00 per share or $320,000, and the
issuance of a put option relating to the Ring shares valued at $277,760, whereby the holder can put the Ring shares back to Stanford at
$5.00 per share through December 1, 2012.
Due to the lack of an active market for the Ring shares, the fair value of the Ring shares transferred was determined based on the price
at which Ring shares were being sold in a private placement active during the time period that this acquisition occurred. The value of
the put option was determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model based on the following assumptions: risk-free interest rate
of 0.11%; expected life of 1.0 years; dividend yield of 0% and volatility of 198%. The Company incurred $6,898 of acquisition-related
costs, which have been included in general and administrative expense in the accompanying statement of income.
The acquisition of the Fisher II Property was recognized as a business combination. Stanford recorded the assets acquired and the
liabilities assumed at their fair values. The estimated fair value of the Fisher II Property approximated the consideration paid, which the
Company concluded approximated the fair value that would be paid by a typical market participant. The following table summarizes the
fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed:
Proved developed and undeveloped oil and
gas properties
Asset retirement obligation
Total Identifiable Net Assets
$ 1,915,152
(167,392)
$ 1,747,760
Oil and natural gas sales and loss from operations before general and administrative expense from the Fisher II Property, included in
the accompanying statement of operations for the eight months ended December 31, 2011, were $4,465 and $(7,416), respectively.
Ring Energy, Inc. – On June 28, 2012, Ring Energy, Inc. (“Ring”) completed the acquisition of Stanford Energy, Inc. through the closing
of a stock-for-stock exchange agreement dated May 3, 2012.  As a result, Stanford became a wholly-owned subsidiary of Ring. As
further described in Note 1, Stanford was determined to be the accounting acquirer. The acquisition of Ring was recognized as the
issuance  by  Stanford  of  the  6,579,808  common  shares  of  Ring  that  remained  outstanding.  The  Company  incurred  $87,181  of
acquisition-related  costs,  which  have  been  included  in  general  and  administrative  expense  in  the  accompanying  statement  of
operations. The fair value of Ring’s net assets was more clearly determinable than the fair value of the common shares deemed issued;
therefore, the common shares were valued at the fair value of the net assets acquired as follows:
Cash
  Note payable to Ring
cancelled
  Prepaid expenses
  Property and equipment
  Tax benefit
  Accounts payable
Fair Value of Net Assets
$10,887,561
2,003,122
26,942
187,637
436,391
(9,893)
$13,531,760
There were no oil and natural gas sales or costs of operations before general and administrative expense from the properties acquired
in the Ring Energy, Inc. transaction included in our operations for the year ended December 31, 2012.
Kansas Property – On September 1, 2012, Ring signed a letter of intent regarding the acquisition of two companies who collectively
owned  the  mineral  leases  referred  to  as  the  Kansas  Property.    On  November  19,  2012,  Ring  completed  the  acquisition  of  CRH
Mississippi  South  Fund,  an  Oklahoma  corporation  (“CRH”)  and  Pontious  Mississippi  South  Fund,  an  Oklahoma  corporation
(“Pontious”), through the closing of the Agreement and Plan of Merger dated November 7, 2012, with CRH, and its sole shareholder,
and Pontious, and its sole shareholder (the “Merger Agreement”). As a result, CRH and Pontious were merged with and into Ring. Ring
issued 312,500 common shares to each of those shareholders and paid an aggregate of $2,277,112 to them.  The cash amount paid at
closing was reduced by $42,888 from the amount set forth in the Merger Agreement because one of the target companies was not able
to deliver a full 100% working interest in one of the leases held by it.  Due to the lack of an active market for the Ring shares, the fair
value of the Ring shares issued were valued at $4.50 per share based on the price at which Ring shares were being sold in a private
placement offering during the time period that this acquisition occurred. To the extent of the common shares issued, the transaction was
intended  to  be  a  nontaxable  reorganization  to  the  selling  shareholders  of  CRH  and  Pontious.  The  Company  incurred  $22,225  of
acquisition-related  costs,  which  have  been  included  in  general  and  administrative  expense  in  the  accompanying  statement  of
operations.
F-38
The  acquisition  of  the  Kansas  Property  was  recognized  as  a  business  combination.  Ring  recorded  the  assets  acquired  and  the
liabilities assumed at their fair values. The estimated fair value of the Kansas Property approximated the consideration paid, which the
Company concluded approximated the fair value that would be paid by a typical market participant. The following table summarizes the
fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed:
Proved developed and undeveloped oil and
gas properties
Deferred tax liability assumed
Asset retirement obligation
Total Identifiable Net Assets
$ 6,703,508
(1,362,665)
(96,167)
$ 5,244,676
Oil and natural gas sales and loss from operations before general and administrative expense from the Kansas Property, included in the
accompanying statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2012, were $3,766 and $(4,934), respectively.
Ogden Property – On September 28, 2012, the Company purchased proved developed and undeveloped oil and natural gas reserves
(the  “Ogden  Property”)  located  in  the  Permian  Basin,  Andrews  County,  Texas.  The  Ogden  Property  consists  of  a  91.67%  working
interest, 68.75% net revenue interest in one lease covering 80 acres which included one existing well with production.  The Ogden
Property was acquired for $687,501 through the issuance of 152,778 shares of Ring common stock, valued at $4.50 per share.  Due to
the lack of an active market for the Ring shares, the fair value of the Ring shares transferred was determined based on the price at
which Ring shares were being sold in a private placement active during the time period that this acquisition occurred.
The acquisition of the Ogden Property was recognized as a business combination. Ring recorded the assets acquired and the liabilities
assumed at their fair values. The estimated fair value of the Ogden Property approximated the consideration paid, which the Company
concluded approximated the fair value that would be paid by a typical market participant. The following table summarizes the fair values
of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed:
Proved developed and undeveloped oil and gas
properties
Asset retirement obligation
Total Identifiable Net Assets
$695,575
(8,074)
$687,501
An  analysis  of  significance  was  performed  regarding  this  acquisition,  based  on  the  pro  forma  financial  information  published  in
connection  with  the  Kansas  Property  acquisition  referenced  above.  The  operations  of  this  acquisition  are  insignificant  and  it  was
determined that this acquisition was not material and therefore no pro forma information has been provided in relation to this acquisition.
Sunray Property – On October 30, 2012, the Company purchased proved developed and undeveloped oil and natural gas reserves
(the “Sunray Property”) located in the Permian Basin, Andrews County, Texas. The Sunray Property consists of a total of 1,360 gross
acres with working interest ownership ranging from 37.5% to 100%, net revenue interests ranging from 28.15% to 75%, including six
existing wells with production and two additional wells that have the possibility of being put back into production.  The Sunray Property
was acquired for $1,994,943 of total consideration, consisting of a cash payment of $1,000,000 and the issuance of 220,000 shares of
Ring common stock, valued at $4.50 per share.  Due to the lack of an active market for the Ring shares, the fair value of the Ring shares
transferred was determined based on the price at which Ring shares were being sold in a private placement offering during the time
period that this acquisition occurred.
The acquisition of the Sunray Property was recognized as a business combination. Ring recorded the assets acquired and the liabilities
assumed at their fair values. The estimated fair value of the Sunray Property approximated the consideration paid, which the Company
concluded approximated the fair value that would be paid by a typical market participant. The following table summarizes the fair values
of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed:
Proved developed and undeveloped oil and gas
properties
Asset retirement obligation
Total Identifiable Net Assets
$2,042,850
(47,907)
$1,994,943
An  analysis  of  significance  was  performed  regarding  this  acquisition,  based  on  the  pro  forma  financial  information  published  in
connection  with  the  Kansas  Property  acquisition  referenced  above.  The  operations  of  this  acquisition  are  insignificant  and  it  was
determined that this acquisition was not material and therefore no pro forma information has been provided in relation to this acquisition.
F-39
Subsequent to the initial acquisition, we have leased additional interest in the acquired acreage.  As of December 31, 2012 our working
interest ownership ranges from 33% to 100% and our net revenue interest ownership ranges from 21% to 75%.
Results  from  Operations –  The  amount  of  the  acquired  properties’  revenue  and  losses  included  in  the  Company’s  consolidated
statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2012, and the revenue and losses of the combined entity had the acquisition
dates been January 1, 2011 are as follows.
Supplemental pro forma for the year ended
December 31, 2012
Supplemental pro forma for the year ended
December 31, 2011
Revenue
Net Loss
$
1,838,470  $ (1,772,371)
$
1,433,654  $
(116,420)
The  supplemental  pro  forma  net  loss  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2011  includes  a  nonrecurring  $250,000  nonrefundable
transaction fee from Ring Energy, Inc.
NOTE 4 – OIL AND GAS PRODUCING ACTIVITIES
Set forth below is certain information regarding the aggregate  capitalized  costs  of  oil  and  gas  properties  and  costs  incurred  by  the
Company for its oil and gas property acquisitions, development and exploration activities:
Capitalized Costs Relating to Oil and Natural Gas Producing Activities
Proved oil and natural gas properties
Office equipment
Total capitalized costs
Accumulated depletion, depreciation and
amortization
 
Net Capitalized Costs
$
$
As of
December 31,
2012
23,051,904 $
175,106 
23,227,010
(596,162)
22,630,848 $
As of
December 31,
2011
6,597,433
11,133
6,608,566
(89,376)
6,519,190
Net Costs Incurred in Oil and Gas Producing Activities
Acquisition of proved properties
Development costs
 
Total Net Costs Incurred
NOTE 5 – NOTES PAYABLE
For the Year
For the Year
Ended
December 31,   December 31,
Ended
2012
9,873,128 $
6,581,343
2011
6,280,391
317,042
$
$
16,454,471 $
6,597,433
Notes Payable – In May 2011, the Company entered into a credit agreement with a bank that provides for a revolving line of credit of up
to $10 million for borrowings and letters of credit. As of December 31, 2012, $9,950,000 was available to be drawn on the line of credit
with the remainder being reserved by letters of credit to State regulatory agencies.  The agreement includes a non-usage commitment
fee  of  0.20%  per  annum  and  covenants  limiting  other  indebtedness,  liens,  transfer  or  sale  of  assets,  distributions  or  dividends  and
merger or consolidation activity.  The facility has an interest rate of the bank’s prime rate plus 0.75% with the total interest rate to be
charged being no less than 4.00%.  As of December 31, 2012 the interest rate being charged was 4.00%. The note matured on May 10,
2012  and  was  extended  to  May  10,  2013.  Two  of  the  Company’s  stockholders  are  jointly  and  severally  obligated  for  outstanding
borrowings under the credit facility.
As of December 31, 2011, the Company had received unsecured advances from Ring Energy, Inc. totaling $850,000 and had accrued
interest payable thereon of $3,122.  The advances were pursuant to an agreement allowing for unsecured advances totaling $1,000,000
with an interest rate of 5.00% per annum.  Borrowings outstanding are payable on January 31, 2013.  As noted in Note 9, the advances
were documented in a January 2012 promissory note.  These advances were settled as part of the merger transaction between Ring
and Stanford.
F-40
NOTE 6 – ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATION
A reconciliation of the asset retirement obligation for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2012 is as follows:
Balance, December 31, 2010
Liabilities incurred
Accretion expense
Balance, December 31, 2011
Liabilities incurred
Accretion expense
Balance, December 31, 2012
$
$
$
-
269,241
5,547
274,788
200,593
20,906
496,286
NOTE 7 – STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
The Company is authorized to issue 75,000,000 common shares, with a par value of $0.001 per share. Subsequent to December 31,
2012, via shareholder consent, a majority of the shareholders increased the number of authorized Common Stock from 75,000,000 to
150,000,000 and also authorized 50,000,000 shares of Preferred Stock.
Reorganization  into  Ring  Energy,  Inc. –  On  June  28,  2012  Ring  completed  the  acquisition  of  Stanford  Energy,  Inc.  through  the
closing of a stock-for-stock exchange agreement dated May 3, 2012.  As a result, Stanford’s shareholders obtained control of Ring
under current accounting guidance. Since the Stanford shareholders obtained a controlling interest in Ring’s common stock and stock
options Stanford was determined to be the accounting acquirer and its historical financial statements have been adjusted to reflect its
reorganization  in  a  manner  equivalent  to  a  2,500-for-1  stock  split.    This  treatment  results  in  3,440,000  shares  held  by  Stanford
shareholders.  As a result of the Stanford being determined to be the accounting acquirer, the transaction was accounted for as the
issuance by Stanford of the 6,579,808 common shares of Ring that remained outstanding.
Common  Stock  Issued  in  Offerings – From July through October 2012, the Company issued 3,148,425 shares of common stock,
valued at $14,167,913, or $4.50 per share, in a private placement.  Proceeds from the offering totaled $13,009,062, net of offering costs
and expenses paid of $1,158,851.
Common Stock Issued in Acquisitions – In October and December 2012, the Company issued a total of 997,778 shares of common
stock, valued at $4,490,001 or $4.50 per share, in three separate oil and gas property acquisitions, as described in Note 3 above.
NOTE 8 – EMPLOYEE STOCK OPTIONS AND RESTRICTED STOCK AWARD PLAN
In 2011, the Company’s Board of Directors approved and adopted a long term incentive plan, which was subsequently approved and
amended by the shareholders.  There are 1,375,000 shares eligible for grant, either as options or as restricted stock, at December 31,
2012.
Employee Stock Options – Following is a table reflecting the issuances during 2011 and 2012 and their related exercise prices:
Grant date
July 1, 2012
December 1, 2011  
 
 
September 1, 2012
October 1, 2012
# of
options  
 960,000  $
75,000 
50,000 
40,000 
 
1,125,000
Exercise
price
2.00
4.50
4.50
4.50
F-41
All granted options vest at the rate of 20% each year over five years beginning one year from the date granted and expire ten years from
the grant date.  A summary of the status of the stock options as of December 31, 2012 and changes during the years ended December
31, 2012 and 2011 is as follows:
2012
2011
Weighted-
Average
Exercise
Options
Price
Options
Weighted-
Average
Exercise
Price
Outstanding at beginning of the
year
Issued
Forfeited
Exercised
 
Outstanding at end of year
 
Exercisable at end of  year
 
 
Weighted average fair value of  
  options granted during the
year
1,125,000 $
165,000
(165,000) 
-
1,125,000 $
200,000 $
$
2.00 
4.50  1,125,000
- $
2.00 
-
- 
-
-
2.00
-
-
2.37  1,125,000 $
2.00
2.00
4.26
- $
$
-
2.32
The Company uses the Black-Scholes option pricing model to calculate the fair-value of each option grant. The expected volatility for
the 2012 option grants is based on the historical price volatility of the Company’s common stock. The expected volatility for the 2011
option grants is based on the historical price volatility of a stock index comprised of similar sized companies in the same industry.  We
elected  to  use  the  simplified  method  for  estimating  the  expected  term  as  allowed  by  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  for
options  granted  through  December  31,  2012  and  2011.  Under  the  simplified  method,  the  expected  term  is  equal  to  the  midpoint
between the vesting period and the contractual term of the stock option. The risk-free interest rate represents the U.S. Treasury bill rate
for  the  expected  life  of  the  related  stock  options.  The  dividend  yield  represents  the  Company’s  anticipated  cash  dividend  over  the
expected life of the stock options.  The following are the Black-Scholes weighted-average assumptions used for options granted during
the periods ended December 31, 2012 and 2011:
September
October 1,
2012
1,
2012
July 1,
2012
December
1,
2011
Risk free interest rate  
 
Expected life (years)
Dividend yield
 
 
Volatility
2012
0.25%  
 
5.75
 
147%
-
2012
0.80%  
 
 
153%
6.5
-
2012
0.67%  
 
 
158%
6.5
-
2011
0.97%
6.5
-
32%
As of December 31, 2012, there was approximately $1,424,531 of unrecognized compensation cost related to stock options that will be
recognized  over  a  weighted  average  period  of  2.6  years.    The  aggregate  intrinsic  value  of  options  vested  and  expected  to  vest  at
December 31, 2012 was $3,397,940.  The aggregate intrinsic value of options exercisable at December 31, 2012 was $772,000.  The
year end intrinsic values are based on a December 31, 2012 closing price of $5.86.
There were no options exercised during 2011 or 2012.
F-42
The following table summarizes information related to the Company’s stock options outstanding at December 31, 2012:
Exercise price
2.00
4.50
Options Outstanding
Weighted-
Average
Remaining
Contractual
Life
(in years)
8.92
9.49
9.00
Number
Exercisable
200,000
-
200,000
Number
Outstanding  
960,000 
165,000 
 
1,125,000
Any excess tax benefits from the exercise of stock options will not be recognized in paid-in capital until the Company is in a current tax
paying  position.  Presently,  the  company  has  a  net  loss  and  therefore  not  yet  subject  to  income  taxes.    Accordingly,  no  excess  tax
benefits have been recognized for the years ended December 31, 2012 or 2011.
NOTE 9 – RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
In May 2011, the Company entered into a credit agreement with a bank that provides for a revolving line of credit of up to $10 million for
borrowings and letters of credit.  Two of the Company’s stockholders are jointly and severally obligated for outstanding borrowings
under the credit facility.
The company is leasing office space from a company that is owned by two of stockholders’ of the company.
During 2011, the Company received a $250,000 nonrefundable transaction fee from Ring Energy, Inc. pursuant to a pending stock
exchange transaction between the two companies.
During 2011, the Company received advances totaling $850,000 from Ring Energy, Inc. pursuant to the same pending stock exchange
transaction between the two companies.  As noted in Note 4, the Company entered into a promissory note for $1,000,000 in January
2012 to cover this amount and amounts drawn subsequent to December 31, 2011.
NOTE 10 – COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENT LIABILITIES
Standby Letters of Credit – A commercial bank has issued standby letters of credit on behalf of the Company to the states of Texas
and Kansas totaling $145,000 to allow the Company to do business in those states.  The Company intends to renew the standby letters
of credit for as long as the Company does business in those states. No amounts have been drawn under the standby letters of credit.
Operating  leases – The following table summarizes our future estimated lease payments for periods subsequent to December 31,
2012.  The leases pertain to approximately 3,000 square feet of space for our corporate headquarters in Midland, Texas, approximately
3,700 square feet of office space that we may relocate to in Midland, Texas, approximately 3,700 square feet of office space for our
accounting offices in Tulsa, Oklahoma and approximately 2,000 square feet of office space for our field office in Andrews, Texas.  The
Company incurred lease expense of $208,091 and $0 for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively.  The following
table reflects the future minimum lease payments under the operating leases as of December 31, 2012.
Year
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Lease
Obligation
138,897
117,465
71,325
73,185
55,935
456,807
$
F-43
NOTE 11 – INCOME TAXES
Through December 31, 2011, Stanford Energy, Inc. and the predecessor were not taxable entities for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
Under  Stanford  Energy,  Inc.’s  S-corporation  election  and  the  predecessor’s  tax  status,  income  taxes  were  generally  borne  by  the
shareholders/owners and losses were generally deductible at the shareholder/owner level. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2011, no
recognition has been given to federal income tax or benefit in the accompanying financial statements.
For  the  year  ended  December  31,  2012,  the  Company  calculated  a  net  tax  benefit  of  $300,324.    The  benefit  from  income  taxes
consisted of the following:
Benefit From Income Taxes
Deferred
Effect of offset from Kansas property
acquisition
2012
$ (707,270)  $
406,946
$ (300,324)  $
2011
-
-
The following is a reconciliation of income taxes computed using the U.S. federal statutory rate to the provision for income taxes:
Rate Reconciliation
Tax at federal statutory rate (34%)
$ (669,666)  $
2012
2011
24,306
Tax at federal statutory rate (34%)
Non-deductible expenses
Effect of offset from Kansas property
 
acquisition
 
States taxes, net of Federal benefit
Effect of tax rates lower than statutory rate
$ (669,666)  $
1,098
406,946 
(93,950) 
55,248
$ (300,324)  $
24,306
(24,306)
-
-
-
-
As  of  December  31,  2012,  the  Company  had  net  operating  loss  carry  forwards  for  federal  income  tax  reporting  purposes  of
approximately $5.6 million which, if unused, will expire in 2032.
The net deferred tax liability consisted of the following at December 31, 2012 and 2011:
Deferred Taxes:
Deferred tax liabilities
  Property and equipment
 
Deferred tax assets
  Stock-based compensation
Operating loss and IDC
carryforwards
Deferred tax assets
Net deferred income tax liability
$
$
2012
3,094,811  $
386,541
2,082,319 
2,468,860
625,951  $
2011
-
-
-
-
-
Accounting  for  Uncertainty  in  Income  Taxes –  In  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles,  the  Company  has
analyzed its filing positions in all jurisdictions where it is required to file income tax returns for the open tax years in such jurisdictions.
The Company has identified its federal income tax return and its state income tax returns in Texas and Kansas in which it operates as
“major”  tax  jurisdictions.  The  Company’s  federal  income  tax  returns  for  the  years  ended  December  31,  2010  through  2012  remain
subject to examination. The Company’s income tax returns in Kansas remain subject to examination for years ended December 31,
2010 through 2012.  The Company’s income tax returns in Texas remain subject to examination for years ended 2009 through 2012.
The  Company  currently  believes  that  all  significant  filing  positions  are  highly  certain  and  that  all  of  its  significant  income  tax  filing
positions and deductions would be sustained upon audit. Therefore, the Company has no significant reserves for uncertain tax positions
and no adjustments to such reserves were required by generally accepted accounting principles. No interest or penalties have been
levied against the Company and none are anticipated; therefore, no interest or penalty has been included in our provision for income
taxes in the consolidated statements of operations.
F-44
NOTE 12 – AVAILABLE-FOR-SALE SECURITIES
Stockholders of the Company purchased 100,000 shares of Ring common stock in May 2011 at $2.00 per share and contributed the
shares  to  the  Company.  The  stockholders  purchased  the  Ring  shares  on  behalf  of  the  Company  and  the  capital  contribution  was
recognized at $200,000 based on the $2.00 price per share paid by the stockholders. The Company used 20,000 of the Ring shares as
part of the consideration paid to purchase the Fisher I Property in May 2011. The remaining 80,000 Ring shares appreciated to $4.00
per share at December 1, 2011 when they were used as part of the consideration paid to purchase the Fisher II property. As a result, the
Company realized a $160,000 gain on the available-for-sale securities.
NOTE 13 – PUT OPTIONS
The Company granted put options on the Ring shares transferred in connection with the acquisitions of oil and natural gas properties in
May and December 2011.  In May 2011, the Company granted 20,000 options with terms allowing the property seller to require the
Company to repurchase the Ring shares at $5.00 per share through November 24, 2011.  At the date of issuance, the fair value of this
liability was $72,922 and was capitalized as part of the acquisition cost.  In December 2011, the Company granted 80,000 options with
terms allowing the property seller to require the Company to repurchase the Ring shares at $5.00 per share through December 1, 2012.
 At the date of issuance, the fair value of this liability was $277,760 and was capitalized as part of the acquisition cost.  The put options
are contingent consideration classified as liabilities under FASB ASC 305-30 and are recognized at the acquisition date fair value as
part of the consideration transferred.  They are remeasured to fair value at each reporting date until the contingency is resolved with the
change in fair value being recognized in earnings.  The put option issued in May 2011 expired unexercised prior to December 31, 2011
and therefore the full liability related to these options was recognized as a gain on change in fair value of put options.  As of December
31, 2011, the fair value of the remaining liability was $276,736.  These remaining put options expired unexercised prior to December 31,
2012  and  therefore  the  full  liability  related  to  these  options  was  recognized  as  a  gain  on  change  in  fair  value  of  put  options.    The
following table illustrates the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model at the measurement dates:
December 1,
December 31,
Risk free interest
rate
Expected life
(years)
Dividend yield
Volatility
May 23, 2011
0.11%
0.5
0%
207%
2011
0.11%
1.0
0%
198%
2011
0.11%
0.9
0%
198%
NOTE 14 – FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
Generally accepted accounting principles establish a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs used to measure fair value. The
hierarchy gives the highest priority to quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurement) and the
lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurement). The Company’s fair value measurements are based on the observability
of those inputs. The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are as follows:
•
•
•
Level  1  —  Quoted  prices  in  active  markets  for  identical  assets  or  liabilities  that  the  Company  has  the  ability  to  access.    The
Company does not have any fair value balances classified as Level 1.
   
  Level 2 — Inputs other than quoted prices in active markets included in Level 1 that are either directly or indirectly observable.
 The Company’s put options are measured on a recurring basis using Level 2 inputs.
   
  Level 3 — Includes inputs that are not observable for which there is little, if any, market activity for the asset or liability being
measured.  The Company does not have any fair value balances classified as Level 3.
In valuing certain contracts, the inputs used to measure fair value may fall into different levels of the fair value hierarchy. For disclosure
purposes, assets and liabilities are classified in their entirety in the fair value hierarchy level based on the lowest level of input that is
significant to the overall fair value measurement. Our assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair value measurement
requires judgment and may affect the placement within the fair value hierarchy levels.
The Company’s derivative put option liabilities are remeasured to fair value at each reporting date until the contingency is resolved.
  The  fair  value  of  the  non-financial  liabilities  as  of  December  31,  2011  and  2012,  was  $276,736  and  $0,  respectively,  and  was
calculated using Level 2 inputs. See Note 13 above for more information about this liability and the inputs used for calculating fair value.
F-45
NOTE 15 – SIGNIFICANT FOURTH QUARTER ADJUSTMENTS
There were no material fourth quarter adjustments or accounting changes.
NOTE 16 – SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
Subsequent to December 31, 2012, the Company issued 100,000 shares per a subscription agreement allowing for the purchase of the
restricted common stock at $4.50 per share.
Subsequent to December 31, 2012, the Company issued 6,722 shares of restricted common stock as the result of the cashless exercise
of 10,000 options with an exercise price of $2.00 per share.
Subsequent to December 31, 2012, the Company accepted the resignations of certain management and Board of Director members
and  appointed  new  members  to  the  Board  of  Directors  and  new  management.    Outgoing  directors  includes  Denny  W.  Nestripke,
Michael Harland and Robert Morley.  New appointees to the Board include Kelly Hoffman, David A Fowler, Anthony B. Petrelli and
Clayton E. Woodrum.  Mr. Lloyd T. Rochford was appointed as the new Chairman of the Board.  Outgoing management consisted of
Denny  W.  Nestripke  and  incoming  management  included  Kelly  Hoffman  as  Chief  Executive  Officer,  David  A.  Fowler  as  President,
William  R.  Broaddrick  as  Chief  Financial  Officer,  Corporate  Secretary  and  Treasurer  and  Daniel  D.  Wilson  as  Vice  President  of
Operations.
Subsequent to December 31, 2012, via shareholder consent, a majority of the shareholders increased the number of authorized shares
of Common Stock from 75,000,000 to 150,000,000 and also authorized 50,000,000 shares of Preferred Stock, $0.001 par value.
Subsequent to December 31, 2012, via shareholder consent, a majority of the shareholders approved an increase in the number of
authorized shares in the Company’s Long Term Incentive Plan from 2,500,000 to 5,000,000.
Subsequent  to  December  31,  2012,  the  Company  granted  1,400,000  options  with  exercise  prices  of  $4.50  per  share  and  150,000
options with exercise prices of $5.50 per share to contractors, employees and directors.
We have evaluated subsequent events after the balance sheet date of December 31, 2012 through the time of filing with the SEC on
April 1, 2013, which is the date the financial statements were issued.
F-46
RING ENERGY, INC.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION ON OIL AND GAS PRODUCING ACTIVITIES
(Unaudited)
Results of Operations from Oil and Gas Producing Activities – The Company’s results of operations from oil and gas producing
activities exclude interest expense, gain from change in fair value of put options, and other financing expense.  Income taxes are based
on statutory tax rates, reflecting allowable deductions.
Predecessor
Successor
For the Eight
Predecessor
Carve-Out
 
  For the Four
For the
Year Ended
Months
Ended
Months
Ended
December
December
Oil and gas sales
Production costs
Production taxes
Depreciation, depletion, amortization and
accretion
General and administrative (exclusive of
corporate overhead)
 
Results of Oil and Gas Producing Operations   $
$
31,
2012
1,757,444  $
(785,959) 
 
 
(82,995)
31,
2011
388,674 
(173,310) 
(18,428)
$
April 30,
2011
96,956
(71,656)
(4,468)
(527,692)
(94,923)
(6,510)
(322,821)
37,977  $
(138,960) 
(36,947)
$
-
14,322
Reserve  Quantities  Information –  The  following  estimates  of  proved  and  proved  developed  reserve  quantities  and  related
standardized measure of discounted net cash flow are estimates only, and do not purport to reflect realizable values or fair market
values of the Company’s reserves.  The Company emphasizes that reserve estimates are inherently imprecise and that estimates of
new  discoveries  are  more  imprecise  than  those  of  producing  oil  and  gas  properties.    Accordingly,  these  estimates  are  expected  to
change as future information becomes available.  All of the Company’s reserves are located in the United States of America.
Proved reserves are estimated reserves of crude oil (including condensate and natural gas liquids) and natural gas that geological and
engineering  data  demonstrate  with  reasonable  certainty  to  be  recoverable  in  future  years  from  known  reservoirs  under  existing
economic and operating conditions.  Proved developed reserves are those expected to be recovered through existing wells, equipment
and methods.
The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows is computed by applying the price according to the SEC guidelines for oil
and gas to the estimated future production of proved oil and gas reserves, less estimated future expenditures (based on year-end costs)
to  be  incurred  in  developing  and  producing  the  proved  reserves,  less  estimated  future  income  tax  expenses  (based  on  year-end
statutory  tax  rates)  to  be  incurred  on  pretax  net  cash  flows  less  tax  basis  of  the  properties  and  available  credits,  and  assuming
continuation of existing economic conditions.  The estimated future net cash flows are then discounted using a rate of 10 percent per
year to reflect the estimated timing of the future cash flows.
For the Year Ended
December 31,
2,493,560 
780,669
Proved Developed and Undeveloped
Reserves
Beginning of year
 
Purchases of minerals in place  
Improved recovery and
 
extensions
Production
 
Revision of previous estimate  
 
 
 
End of year
 
 
Proved Developed at end of
year
149,149 
(20,531) 
243,896 
 
3,646,743
2012
Natural Gas
(1)
Oil (1)
2011
Oil (1)
68,036 
910,839
1,143,998 
(5,297) 
375,984 
 
2,493,560
Natural Gas
(1)
-
448,681
360,453
(2,369)
942,335
1,749,100
1,749,100 
430,800
30,250 
(6,480) 
(469,890) 
 
1,733,780
364,110
63,840
414,350
75,330
1 Oil reserves are stated in barrels; gas reserves are stated in thousand cubic feet.
F-47
Changes in Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net Cash Flows
December 31,
Future cash flows
Future production costs
Future development costs
Future income taxes
Future net cash flows
10% annual discount for estimated timing of
cash flows
 
Standardized Measure of Discounted
Cash Flows
2012
2011
$ 331,489,046 
(73,667,753) 
(66,835,270) 
(62,412,666) 
128,573,357
(57,215,111)
$ 237,949,800
(43,060,810)
(48,146,550)
(49,835,277)
96,907,163
(36,151,588)
$
71,358,246
$
60,755,575
Standardized Measure of Discounted Cash Flows
Beginning of the year
Purchase of minerals in place
Extensions, discoveries and improved recovery,
less related costs
Development costs incurred during the year
Sales of oil and gas produced, net of production
 
costs
 
Accretion of discount
 
Net changes in price and production costs
Net change in estimated future development costs  
 
Revision of previous quantity estimates
 
Revision of estimated timing of cash flows
 
Net change in income taxes
 
 
End of the Year
2012
$
60,755,575 
19,027,746
6,279,507 
6,532,898
(972,881) 
6,524,980 
(8,004,160) 
(2,968,626) 
6,364,907 
(19,303,858) 
(2,877,642) 
 
71,358,446
$
$
2011
939,994
32,785,800
38,981,734
317,042
(219,617)
68,517
18,810,992
(1,832,496)
7,376,116
(5,720,962)
(30,751,545)
60,755,575
$
F-48
RING ENERGY, INC.
PROSPECTUS
_________________, 2014
PART II
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN THE PROSPECTUS
Item 13. Other Expenses of Issuance and Distribution.
The following is a list of estimated expenses in connection with the issuance and distribution of the securities being registered, with the
exception of underwriting discounts and commissions:
SEC Registration Fee
Printing costs
Legal fees and expenses
Accounting fees and expenses
Transfer agent fees
Miscellaneous
 
 Total
$
$
4,696
0
50,000
10,000
0
0
64,696
All of the above expenses are estimates (except for the SEC registration fee). All of the above expenses will be borne by the Company.
Item 14. Indemnification of Directors and Officers.
Under the provisions of Section 78.7502 of the Nevada Revised Statutes (the “Nevada Act”), the Registrant is required to indemnify any
present or former officer or director against expenses arising out of legal proceedings in which the director or officer becomes involved
by reason of being a director or officer, if the director or officer is successful in the defense of such proceedings. Section 78.7502 also
provides  that  the  Registrant  may  indemnify  a  director  or  officer  in  connection  with  a  proceeding  in  which  he  is  not  successful  in
defending if it is determined that he acted in good faith and in a manner reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests
of the Registrant or, in the case of a criminal action, if it is determined that he had no reasonable cause to believe his conduct was
unlawful, and in either event, provided the director is not liable for a breach of the duties set out in Section 78.138 of the Nevada Act.
Liabilities for which a director or officer may be indemnified include amounts paid in satisfaction of settlements, judgments, fines and
other  expenses  (including  attorneys’  fees  incurred  in  connection  with  such  proceedings).  In  a  stockholder  derivative  action,  no
indemnification may be paid in respect of any claim, issue or matter as to which the director or officer has been adjudged to be liable to
the Registrant (except for expenses allowed by a court).
The Registrant’s Articles of Incorporation and By-Laws provide for indemnification of directors and officers of the Registrant to the full
extent permitted by applicable law. Under the provisions of the Registrant’s By-laws, the Registrant is required to indemnify officers or
directors  (while  the  current  provisions  of  Section  78.7502  of  the  Nevada  Act  provide  for  “permissive”  indemnification.  Except  with
respect to stockholder derivative actions, the By-law provisions generally state that the director or officer will be indemnified against
expenses, amounts paid in settlement and judgments, fines, penalties and/or other amounts incurred with respect to any threatened,
pending or completed proceeding, provided that (i) such person acted in good faith and in a manner such person reasonably believed to
be in or not opposed to the best interests of the Registrant, and (ii) with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, such person had no
reasonable cause to believe his or her conduct was unlawful.
The foregoing standards also apply with respect to the indemnification of expenses incurred in a stockholder derivative suit. However, a
director or officer may only be indemnified for settlement amounts or judgments incurred in a derivative suit to the extent that the court in
which such action or suit was brought shall determine upon application that, despite the adjudication of liability but in view of all the
circumstances of the case, such person is fairly and reasonably entitled to indemnity for such expenses which the court shall deem
proper.
In accordance with the Nevada Act, the Registrant’s Articles of Incorporation contain a provision to limit the personal liability of the
directors of the Registrant for violations of their fiduciary duty. This provision eliminates each director’s liability to the Registrant or its
stockholders, for monetary damages except (i) for acts or omissions not in good faith or which involve intentional or reckless misconduct
or a knowing violation of law, and (ii) under Section 78.300 of the Nevada Act providing for liability of directors for unlawful payment of
dividends or unlawful stock purchases or redemptions. The effect of this provision is to eliminate the personal liability of directors for
monetary damages for actions involving a breach of their fiduciary duty including any such actions involving gross negligence.
II-1
Item 15. Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities and Use of Proceeds from Registered Securities.
Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
In December 2011, the Company sold 1,167,504 shares at $4.00 per share for gross proceeds of $4,670,016. Each of the investors was
an  accredited  investor  at  the  time  of  the  sale.  The  shares  were  sold  without  registration  under  the  Securities  Act  by  reason  of  the
exemption  from  registration  afforded  by  the  provisions  of  Section  4(6)  of  the  Securities  Act  of  1933,  as  amended,  and  Rule  506
promulgated  thereunder  for  sales  of  unregistered  securities.  No  selling  commissions  were  paid  in  connection  with  the  sale  of  the
shares.
In  January  2012,  the  Company  sold  1,083,180  shares  at  $4.00  per  share  for  gross  proceeds  of  $4,334,720.  The  shares  were  sold
without registration under the Securities Act by reason of the exemption from registration afforded by the provisions of Section 4(2)
and/or  Section  4(5)  of  the  Securities  Act  of  1933,  as  amended,  and  Rule  506  promulgated  thereunder  for  sales  of  unregistered
securities. No selling commissions were paid in connection with the sale of the shares.
In April 2012, the Company sold 823,524 shares at $4.25 per share for gross proceeds of $3,499,977. The shares were sold without
registration  under  the  Securities  Act  by  reason  of  the  exemption  from  registration  afforded  by  the  provisions  of  Section  4(2)  and/or
Section 4(5) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Rule 506 promulgated thereunder for sales of unregistered securities. No
selling commissions were paid in connection with the sale of the shares.
On June 28, 2012, the Company issued 3,440,000 shares of its common stock pursuant to Stock-for-Stock Exchange Agreement dated
May 3, 2012, between the Company and Stanford. In addition, the Company assumed and adopted Stanford’s equity compensation
plan and its outstanding options to purchase 450 shares of Stanford common stock, which now represents the right to purchase up to
1,125,000 shares of our common stock at $2.00 per share. The options vest at the rate of 20% each year over five years beginning one
year from December 1, 2011, the date they were originally granted, and expire ten years beginning from that date. The investors were
accredited  investors  at  the  time  of  the  sale.  The  shares  were  sold  without  registration  under  the  Securities  Act  by  reason  of  the
exemption  from  registration  afforded  by  the  provisions  of  Section  4(2)  and/or  Section  4(5)  thereof,  and  Rule  506  promulgated
thereunder, as a transaction by an issuer not involving any public offering. No selling commissions were paid in connection with the
sale of the shares.
During the quarter ended June 30, 2012, the Company sold 32,920 common shares at $4.25 per share to two accredited investors for
gross proceeds of $139,910. Each of the investors was an accredited investor at the time of the sale. The shares were sold without
registration under the Securities Act by reason of the exemption from registration afforded by the provisions of Section 4(6) thereof, and
Rule 506 promulgated thereunder, as a transaction by an issuer not involving any public offering. No selling commissions were paid in
connection with the sale of the shares.
On July 1, 2012, the Company granted 75,000 options to Raymond H. Estep, also known as Hoyt Estep, under the 2011 Long-Term
Incentive Plan for services. The options vest 20% each year for five years from the grant date and expire 10 years from the grant date.
The exercise price of the options is $4.50. Mr. Estep was accredited investors at the time of the issuances. The options were issued
without registration under the Securities Act by reason of the exemption from registration afforded by the provisions of Section 4(a)(2)
and/or Section 4(a)(5) thereof, and Rule 506 promulgated thereunder, as a transaction by an issuer not involving any public offering. No
selling commissions were paid in connection with the sale of the shares.
In August 2012, the Company sold 1,695,000 shares at $4.50 per share for gross proceeds of $7,627,500. The shares were sold without
registration  under  the  Securities  Act  by  reason  of  the  exemption  from  registration  afforded  by  the  provisions  of  Section  4(2)  and/or
Section 4(5) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Rule 506 promulgated thereunder for sales of unregistered securities. No
selling commissions were paid in connection with the sale of the shares.
On September 1, 2012, the Company issued 50,000 options to its Chief Financial Officer, William R. Broaddrick, under the 2011 Long-
Term Incentive Plan. The options vest 20% each year five years from the grant date and expire 20 years from the grant date.  The
exercise price of the options is $4.50. Mr. Broaddrick was an accredited investor at the time of the sale. The shares were sold without
registration under the Securities Act by reason of the exemption from registration afforded by the provisions of Section 4(a)(5) and/or
Section 4(a)(2) thereof, and Rule 506 promulgated thereunder, as a transaction by an issuer not involving any public offering. No selling
commissions were paid in connection with the sale of the shares.
In October 2012, the Company sold 1,384,905 shares at $4.50 per share for gross proceeds of $6,232,072.50. The shares were sold
without registration under the Securities Act by reason of the exemption from registration afforded by the provisions of Section 4(2)
and/or  Section  4(5)  of  the  Securities  Act  of  1933,  as  amended,  and  Rule  506  promulgated  thereunder  for  sales  of  unregistered
securities. No selling commissions were paid in connection with the sale of the shares.
II-2
On September 28, 2012, the Company issued 152,778 shares of its common stock to four investors in connection with the purchase of
certain oil and gas leases. The investors were accredited investors at the time of the sale. The shares were sold without registration
under the Securities Act by reason of the exemption from registration afforded by the provisions of Section 4(2) and/or Section 4(5)
thereof, and Rule 506 promulgated thereunder, as a transaction by an issuer not involving any public offering. No selling commissions
were paid in connection with the sale of the shares.
On October 1, 2012, the Company granted 40,000 options to Michael Arguijo under the 2011 Long-Term Incentive Plan for services.
The options vest 12.5% each quarter for two years from the grant date and expire 10 years from the grant date. The exercise price of the
options is $4.50. Mr. Arguijo was accredited investors at the time of the issuances. The options were issued without registration under
the Securities Act by reason of the exemption from registration afforded by the provisions of Section 4(a)( 2) and/or Section 4(a)(5 )
thereof, and Rule 506 promulgated thereunder, as a transaction by an issuer not involving any public offering. No selling commissions
were paid in connection with the sale of the shares.
On November 19, 2012, the Company issued 625,000 shares of its common stock in connection with the acquisition of certain oil and
gas leases pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Merger dated November 7, 2012. The investors were accredited investors at the time
of the sale. The shares were sold without registration under the Securities Act by reason of the exemption from registration afforded by
the provisions of Section 4(2) and/or Section 4(5) thereof, and Rule 506 promulgated thereunder, as a transaction by an issuer not
involving any public offering. No selling commissions were paid in connection with the sale of the shares.
On January 1, 2013, the Company granted (i) 500,000 options to its Chief Executive Officer, Kelly Hoffman, (ii) 500,000 options to its
President,  David  Fowler,  (iii)  300,000  options  to  its  Vice  President  of  Operations,  Daniel  Wilson,  and  (iv)  100,000  options  to  two
employees, under the 2011 Long-Term Incentive Plan. The exercise price of the options is $4.50. The options were issued without
registration under the Securities Act by reason of the exemption from registration afforded by the provisions of Section 4(a)(2), as a
transaction by an issuer not involving any public offering.
On  January  2,  2013,  the  Company  sold  100,000  common  shares  at  $4.50  per  share  to  Mr.  Daniel  Wilson  for  gross  proceeds  of
$450,000. Mr. Wilson was an accredited investor at the time of the sale. Mr. Wilson is the Vice President of Operations of the Company.
The  shares  were  sold  without  registration  under  the  Securities  Act  by  reason  of  the  exemption  from  registration  afforded  by  the
provisions of Section 4(a)(2) and/or Section 4(a)(5) thereof, and Rule 506 promulgated thereunder, as a transaction by an issuer not
involving any public offering. No selling commissions were paid in connection with the sale of the shares.
On March 15, 2013, the Company granted (i) 100,000 options to its Vice President of Land, Ryan Roberts, and (ii) a total of 50,000
options to an employee and a contract employee of the Company, under the 2011 Long-Term Incentive Plan. The exercise price of the
options is $5.50. The options were issued without registration under the Securities Act by reason of the exemption from registration
afforded by the provisions of Section 4(a)(2), as a transaction by an issuer not involving any public offering.
On June 25, 2013, the Company granted a total of 35,000 options to four of its employees under the 2011 Long-Term Incentive Plan.
The  exercise  price  of  the  options  is  $7.50.  The  options  were  issued  without  registration  under  the  Securities  Act  by  reason  of  the
exemption from registration afforded by the provisions of Section 4(a)(2), as a transaction by an issuer not involving any public offering.
On June 28, 2013, the Company completed an offering of 3,528,580 shares of common stock at $5.50 in the Private Placement. The
shares  were  sold  without  registration  under  the  Securities  Act  by  reason  of  the  exemption  from  the  registration  afforded  by  the
provisions of Section 4(a)(2) and/or Section 4(a)(5) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Rule 506 promulgated thereunder for
sales of unregistered securities. Commissions in the amount of $866,366 were paid to registered sales agents for shares placed by the
agents. The Company has filed a registration statement with the SEC with respect to the Resale Shares.
On November 20, 2013, the Company issued 10,000 shares of common stock to IWR Partners, LLC, as a finder’s fee in connection with
the Development Agreement with Torchlight Energy Resources, Inc., to develop its Kansas leasehold. The issuance of common stock
described above was (i) made in reliance of the exemption from the registration requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended,
provided by Section 4(a)(2) thereof and (ii) conducted without general solicitation or general advertising. IWR Partners, LLC, was an
accredited investor at the time of the issuance and prior to this issuance owned shares of common stock.
On December 16, 2013, the Company granted a total of 100,000 options to five of its employees under the 2011 Long-Term Incentive
Plan. The exercise price of the options is $10.00. The options were issued without registration under the Securities Act by reason of the
exemption from registration afforded by the provisions of Section 4(a)(2), as a transaction by an issuer not involving any public offering.
II-3
On June 18, 2014, the Company closed an offering of 2,000,001 shares of Common Stock, for gross proceeds of $30,000,015 in the
Private  Placement. Offering  costs,  including  sales  commissions,  for  the  Private  Placement  totaled  $1,334,884. These  shares  were
issued  without  registration  under  the  Securities  Act  by  reason  of  the  exemption  from  registration  afforded  by  the  provisions  of
Section 4(a)(5) and/or Section 4(a)(2) thereof, and Rule 506 promulgated thereunder, as a transaction by an issuer not involving any
public offering. Each of the investors in this offering was an accredited investor as defined in Regulation D. Each investor delivered
appropriate investment representations with respect to their  investment,  including  their  status  as  “accredited  investors”.  The  Resale
Shares are being registered with the SEC to fulfill Ring’s commitment to register such shares in connection with the Private Placement.
Use of Proceeds from Registered Securities.
On December 11, 2013, the Company closed an underwritten public offering of 5,000,000 shares of its common stock, as well as the
exercise  of  the  full  over-allotment  option  by  the  underwriters  of  an  additional  750,000  shares  of  its  common  stock,  pursuant  to  a
prospectus filed as part of an effective registration statement on Form S-1 (Registration No. 333-191482), as amended (effective as of
December 5, 2013). The shares were sold at the public offering price of $10.00 per share.
The gross proceeds from the offering were $57.5 million, and the Company net proceeds from the offering were $54.2 million, after
deducting underwriting commissions and offering expenses payable by the Company of $3.3 million. The $3.3 million in offering costs
included $2.9 million in underwriting discounts with the remainder of the offering expenses being various legal, accounting, travel and
other costs. No amounts were paid, directly or indirectly, to any director, officer or 10% owner. As of March 31, 2014, $3.5 million of the
net proceeds was used to pay down the outstanding amount on our credit facility, approximately $9.6 million was used for acquisitions
and leasing and approximately $13.9 million was used for development of existing properties.
Securities Repurchases
We did not make any repurchases of our equity securities during the quarter ending June 30, 2014.
II-4
Item 16. Exhibits.
The exhibits listed in the accompanying Exhibit Index are filed (except where otherwise indicated) as part of this Registration Statement.
Incorporated by Reference
Form File No. Exhibit
8-K
2.1
Filed
Here-
with
Filing
Date
7/5/12
Exhibit
Number Exhibit Description
2.1
Stock for Stock Exchange Agreement dated
May 3, 2012
2.2 Merger Agreement dated November 7, 2012
8-K
3.1
3.2
Articles of Incorporation (as amended February
6, 2013)
Current Bylaws
10-K
8-K
4.1
Form of Subscription Agreement
4.2
Form of Subscription Agreement
10-Q
8-K
000-
53920
000-
53920
000-
53920
000-
53920
001-
36057
001-
36057
2.1
11/26/12
3.1
3.2
4.1
4.1
4/1/13
1/24/13
11/7/13
6/20/14
5.1* Opinion of Burleson LLP
10.1
Letter Agreement with Patriot Royalty & Land,
LLC entered into on March 1, 2012
10-K
10.2 Ring Energy Inc. Long Term Incentive Plan, as
8-K
Amended
10.3 Form of Option Grant for Long-Term Incentive
10-Q
Plan
10.1
3/20/12
99.3
1/24/13
10.2
8/14/12
000-
53920
000-
53920
000-
53920
10.4 Stanford Energy Promissory Note dated March 8-K
000-
99.1
4/3/12
10.4 Stanford Energy Promissory Note dated March
8-K
28, 2012
10.5 Stanford Energy Promissory Note dated May
8-K
15, 2012
10.6 Revolver Loan Agreement with the F&M Bank
10-Q
&Trust Company Dated May 12, 2011
10.7 First Amendment dated May 12, 2012, to
10-Q
Revolver Loan Agreement with F&M Bank &
Trust Company
10.8 Second Amendment to Loan Agreement with
8-K
F&M Bank & Trust Company
10.9 Executive Committee Charter
10.10 Audit Committee Charter
10.11 Compensation Committee Charter
10.12 Nominating and Corporate Governance
Committee Charter
10.13 Development Agreement
10-K
10-K
10-K
10-K
8-K
10.14 Third Amendment to Revolver Loan Agreement
10-Q
with F&M Bank & Trust Company
10.15 Fourth Amendment to Revolver Loan
10-Q
Agreement with F&M Bank & Trust Company
10.16 Purchase and Sale Agreement, dated February
8-K
4, 2014, between Ring Energy, Inc. and Raw
Oil & Gas, Inc., JDH Raw LC, and Smith
Energy Company.
10.17 First Amendment to First Amended and
10-Q
000-
53920
000-
53920
000-
53920
000-
53920
000-
53920
000-
53920
000-
53920
000-
53920
000-
53920
001-
36057
001-
36057
001-
36057
001-
36057
001-
36057
99.1
4/3/12
99.1
5/17/12
10.3
8/14/12
10.4
8/14/12
99.1
1/24/13
3.1
3.1
3.1
3.1
4/1/13
4/1/13
4/1/13
4/1/13
10.1
10/18/13
10.2
11/7/13
10.2
11/7/13
10.1
2/7/14
10.17
5/8/14
Restated Revolver Loan Agreement dated May
1, 2014, with Prosperity Bank, successor by
merger to The F&M Bank & Trust Company
10.18 Credit Agreement, dated as of July 1, 2014, by
and  among  Ring  Energy,  Inc.,  the  several
banks  and  other  financial  institutions  and
lenders  from  time  to  time  party  thereto,  and
SunTrust Bank, as administrative agent for the
lenders and as issuing bank.
Letter dated 9/4/13, from Hansen, Barnett &
Maxwell, P.C.
16.1
23.1 Consent of Eide Bailly LLP
23.2 Consent of Hansen, Barnett & Maxwell, P.C.
23.3* Consent of Cawley, Gillespie & Associates,
Inc.
23.4* Consent of Burleson (included in Exhibit 5.1)
99.1 Reserve Report of Cawley, Gillespie &
Associates, Inc.
101.INS XBRL Instance Document
 
101.SCHXBRL Taxonomy Schema Linkbase Document  
101.CAL XBRL Taxonomy Calculation Linkbase
Document
101.DEF XBRL Taxonomy Definition Linkbase
Document
101.LAB XBRL Taxonomy Labels Linkbase Document
101.PREXBRL Taxonomy Presentation Linkbase
Document
* Previously filed.
8-K
001-
36057
10.1
7/3/14
8-K
000-
53920
99.1
9/5/13
10-K
99.1 3/20/2014
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
001-
36057
II-5
Item 17. Undertakings.
(a)
The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes:
(1)
For the purpose of determining liability under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser, if the registrant is subject to Rule 430C
(§230.430C of this chapter), each prospectus filed pursuant to Rule 424(b) as part of a registration statement relating to an offering,
other than registration statements relying on Rule 430B or other than prospectuses filed in reliance on Rule 430A (§230.430A of this
chapter),  shall  be  deemed  to  be  part  of  and  included  in  the  registration  statement  as  of  the  date  it  is  first  used  after  effectiveness.
Provided, however, that no statement made in a registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement or made in
a document incorporated or deemed incorporated by reference into the registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration
statement will, as to a purchaser with a time of contract of sale prior to such first use, supersede or modify any statement that was made
in the registration statement or prospectus that was part of the registration statement or made in any such document immediately prior to
such date of first use.
(2)
For the purpose of determining liability of the registrant under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser in the initial distribution of the
securities: The undersigned registrant undertakes that in a primary offering of securities of the undersigned registrant pursuant to this
registration statement, regardless of the underwriting method used to sell the securities to the purchaser, if the securities are offered or
sold to such purchaser by means of any of the following communications, the undersigned registrant will be a seller to the purchaser
and will be considered to offer or sell such securities to such purchaser: (i) Any preliminary prospectus or prospectus of the undersigned
registrant relating to the offering required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424 (§230.424 of this chapter); (ii) Any free writing prospectus
relating to the offering prepared by or on behalf of the undersigned registrant or used or referred to by the undersigned registrant; (iii)
The portion of any other free writing prospectus relating to the offering containing material information about the undersigned registrant
or its securities provided by or on behalf of the undersigned registrant; and (iv) Any other communication that is an offer in the offering
made by the undersigned registrant to the purchaser.
(3)
To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post–effective amendment to this registration statement:
(i)
To include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933;
(ii)
To reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of the registration statement (or the most recent post–
effective amendment thereof) which, individually or in the aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information set forth in the
registration statement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or decrease in volume of securities offered (if the total dollar value of
securities offered would not exceed that which was registered) and any deviation from the low or high end of the estimated maximum
offering range may be reflected in the form of prospectus filed with the Commission pursuant to Rule 424(b) if, in the aggregate, the
changes in volume and price represent no more than 20% change in the maximum aggregate offering price set forth in the “Calculation
of Registration Fee” table in the effective registration statement; and
(iii)
To include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously disclosed in the registration statement or any
material change to such information in the registration statement.
(4)
That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each post–effective amendment shall be deemed to
be a new registration statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed
to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(5)
To remove from registration by means of a post–effective amendment any of the securities being registered that remain unsold at the
termination of the offering.
(6)
That, for the purpose of determining liability under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser:
(i)
Each prospectus filed by the registrant pursuant to Rule 424(b)(3) shall be deemed to be part of the registration statement as of the date
the filed prospectus was deemed part of and included in the registration statement; and
II-6
(ii)
Each  prospectus  required  to  be  filed  pursuant  to  Rule  424(b)(2),  (b)(5),  or  (b)(7)  as  part  of  a  registration  statement  in  reliance  on
Rule 430B relating to an offering made pursuant to Rule 415(a)(1)(i), (vii), or (x) for the purpose of providing the information required by
section 10(a) of the Securities Act of 1933 shall be deemed to be part of and included in the registration statement as of the earlier of the
date such form of prospectus is first used after effectiveness or the date of the first contract of sale of securities in the offering described
in the prospectus. As provided in Rule 430B, for liability purposes of the issuer and any person that is at that date an underwriter, such
date shall be deemed to be a new effective date of the registration statement relating to the securities in the registration statement to
which that prospectus relates, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
Provided, however, that no statement made in a registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement or made in
a document incorporated or deemed incorporated by reference into the registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration
statement will, as to a purchaser with a time of contract of sale prior to such effective date, supersede or modify any statement that was
made in the registration statement or prospectus that was part of the registration statement or made in any such document immediately
prior to such effective date.
(7)
That, for the purpose of determining liability of the registrant under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser in the initial distribution of
the securities: The undersigned registrant undertakes that in a primary offering of securities of the undersigned registrant pursuant to
this registration statement, regardless of the underwriting method used to sell the securities to the purchaser, if the securities are offered
or sold to such purchaser by means of any of the following communications, the undersigned registrant will be a seller to the purchaser
and will be considered to offer or sell such securities to such purchaser:
(i)
Any preliminary prospectus or prospectus of the undersigned registrant relating to the offering required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424;
(ii)
Any free writing prospectus relating to the offering prepared by or on behalf of the undersigned registrant or used or referred to by the
undersigned registrant;
(iii)
The portion of any other free writing prospectus relating to the offering containing material information about the undersigned registrant
or its securities provided by or on behalf of the undersigned registrant; and
(iv)
Any other communication that is an offer in the offering made by the undersigned registrant to the purchaser.
(h)(3)
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 may be permitted to directors, officers and controlling
persons of the registrant pursuant to the foregoing provisions, or otherwise, the registrant has been advised that in the opinion of the
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  such  indemnification  is  against  public  policy  as  expressed  in  the  Act  and  is,  therefore,
unenforceable. In the event that a claim for indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by the registrant of expenses
incurred or paid by a director, officer or controlling person of the registrant in the successful defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is
asserted by such director, officer or controlling person in connection with the securities being registered, the registrant will, unless in the
opinion of its counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of appropriate jurisdiction the question
whether such indemnification by it is against public policy as expressed in the Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of such
issue.
II-7
Glossary of Oil and Natural Gas Terms
The terms defined in this section are used throughout this prospectus:
“Bbl” —One stock tank barrel, of 42 U.S. gallons liquid volume, used herein in reference to crude oil, condensate or NGLs.
“Boe” —Barrels of oil equivalent, with 6,000 cubic feet of natural gas being equivalent to one barrel of oil.
“Boe/d” —Barrels of oil equivalent per day.
“Completion” —The process of treating a drilled well followed by the installation of permanent equipment for the production of oil or
natural gas, or in the case of a dry hole, the reporting of abandonment to the appropriate agency.
“Condensate” —Liquid hydrocarbons associated with the production of a primarily natural gas reserve.
“Developed acreage” —The number of acres that are allocated or assignable to productive wells or wells capable of production.
“Developed  reserves” —Reserves  of  any  category  that  can  be  expected  to  be  recovered  (i)  through  existing  wells  with  existing
equipment and operating methods or in which the cost of the required equipment is relatively minor when compared to the cost of a new
well; and (ii) through installed extraction equipment and infrastructure operational at the time of the reserves estimate if the extraction is
by means not involving a well.
“Development well” —A well drilled within the proved area of a natural gas or oil reservoir to the depth of a stratigraphic horizon known
to be productive.
“Dry hole” —A well found to be incapable of producing hydrocarbons in sufficient quantities such that proceeds from the sale of such
production do not exceed production expenses and taxes.
“Economically producible” —A resource which generates revenue that exceeds, or is reasonably expected to exceed, the costs of the
operation.
“Exploratory well” —A well drilled to find and produce oil or natural gas reserves not classified as proved, to find a new reservoir in a
field previously found to be productive of oil or natural gas in another reservoir or to extend a known reservoir.
“Field” —An area consisting of a single reservoir or multiple reservoirs all grouped on, or related to, the same individual geological
structural feature or stratigraphic condition.
“Formation” —A layer of rock which has distinct characteristics that differ from nearby rock.
“Gross acres or gross wells” —The total acres or well, as the case may be, in which a working interest is owned.
“Horizontal drilling” —A drilling technique used in certain formations where a well is drilled vertically to a certain depth and then drilled
at a right angle within a specified interval.
“Mcf” —One thousand cubic feet of natural gas.
“Net  acres  or  net  wells” —The sum of the fractional working interest owned in gross acres or gross wells. An owner who has 50%
interest in 100 acres owns 50 net acres.
“Net  revenue  interest” —An  owner's  interest  in  the  revenues  of  a  well  after  deducting  proceeds  allocated  to  royalty  and  overriding
interests.
“Productive well” —A well that is found to be capable of producing hydrocarbons in sufficient quantities such that proceeds from the sale
of the production exceed production expenses and taxes.
A-1
“Prospect” —A  specific  geographic  area  which,  based  on  supporting  geological,  geophysical  or  other  data  and  also  preliminary
economic  analysis  using  reasonably  anticipated  prices  and  costs,  is  considered  to  have  potential  for  the  discovery  of  commercial
hydrocarbons.
“Proved developed non-producing” or “PDNP” —Proved oil and natural gas reserves that are developed behind pipe or shut-in or that
can be recovered through improved recovery only after the necessary equipment has been installed, or when the costs to do so are
relatively minor. Shut-in reserves are expected to be recovered from (1) completion intervals which are open at the time of the estimate
but which have not started producing, (2) wells that were shut-in for market conditions or pipeline connections, or (3) wells not capable
of production for mechanical reasons. Behind-pipe reserves are expected to be recovered from zones in existing wells that will require
additional completion work or future re-completion prior to the start of production. The hydrocarbons are classified as proved but non-
producing reserves.
“Proved  developed  reserves”—Proved  reserves  that  can  be  expected  to  be  recovered  through  existing  wells  and  facilities  and  by
existing operating methods.
“Proved reserves” —Reserves of oil and natural gas that have been proved to a high degree of certainty by analysis of the producing
history of a reservoir and/or by volumetric analysis of adequate geological and engineering data.
“Proved undeveloped reserves (PUD)” —Proved reserves that are expected to be recovered from new wells on undrilled acreage or
from existing wells where a relatively major expenditure is required for recompletion.
“PV-10” When used with respect to natural gas and oil reserves, PV-10 means the estimated future gross revenue to be generated from
the production of proved reserves, net of estimated production, future development and abandonment costs, using prices and costs in
effect  at  the  determination  date,  before  income  taxes,  and  without  giving  effect  to  non-property-related  expenses,  discounted  to  a
present value using an annual discount rate of 10% in accordance with the guidelines of the SEC. PV-10 is not a financial measure
calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, and generally differs from standardized measure, the
most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, because it does not include the effects of income taxes on future net revenues.
Neither PV-10 nor standardized measure represents an estimate of the fair market value of our natural gas and oil properties. We and
others in the industry use PV-10 as a measure to compare the relative size and value of proved reserves held by companies without
regard to the specific tax characteristics of such entities.
“Reserves” —Estimated remaining quantities of oil and natural gas and related substances anticipated to be economically producible
as of a given date by application of development projects to known accumulations.
“Reservoir” —A porous and permeable underground formation containing a natural accumulation of producible oil and/or natural gas
that is confined by impermeable rock or water barriers and is individual and separate from other reservoirs.
“Spacing” —The distance between wells producing from the same reservoir. Spacing is often expressed in terms of acres, e.g., 40-acre
spacing, and is often established by regulatory agencies.
“Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows” —The present value of estimated future net revenues to be generated from
the production of proved reserves, determined in accordance with the regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission, without
giving effect to non-property related expenses such as general and administrative expenses, debt service, future income tax expenses
or depreciation, depletion and amortization; discounted using an annual discount rate of 10%.
“Undeveloped acreage” —Lease acreage on which wells have not been drilled or completed to a point that would permit the production
of commercial quantities of oil and natural gas, regardless of whether such acreage contains proved reserves.
“Working interest” —The right granted to the lessee of a property to explore for and to produce and own oil, gas, or other minerals and
receive a share of the production. The working interest owners bear the exploration, development, and operating costs of the property.
A-2
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant has duly caused this Amendment No. 1 to the Registration
Statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the city of Midland, state of Texas, on August 19,
2014.
Ring Energy, Inc.
By: /s/ Kelly Hoffman
Mr. Kelly Hoffman
Chief Executive Officer and Director
Date: August 19, 2014
By: /s/ William R. Broaddrick
Mr. William R. Broaddrick
Chief Financial Officer
Date: August 19, 2014
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this Amendment No, 1 to the Registration Statement has been signed by the
following persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
By: /s/ Kelly Hoffman
Mr. Kelly Hoffman
By: /s/ William R. Broaddrick
  Mr. William R. Broaddrick
Chief Executive Officer and
Director
(Principal Executive Officer)
 
Date: August 19, 2014
 
/s/ Lloyd T. Rochford
Mr. Lloyd T. Rochford
Chairman of the Board and
Director
 
Date: August 19, 2014
 
 
/s/ Stanley McCabe
Mr. Stanley McCabe
Director
 
Date: August 19, 2014
 
 
/s/ Clayton E. Woodrum
Mr. Clayton E. Woodrum
Director
 
Date: August 19, 2014
Chief Financial Officer (Principal
Financial and Accounting Officer)
Date: August 19, 2014
 
 
/s/ Anthony B. Petrelli
 
  Mr. Anthony B. Petrelli
Director
 
  Date: August 19, 2014
 
 
 
 
/s/ David A. Fowler
 
  Mr. David A. Fowler
  President and Director
 
  Date: August 19, 2014
Signature Page