
Form 51-102F1
Interim Management Discussion and Analysis1
For
Stornoway Diamond Corporation  
(“Stornoway” or the “Company”)
For the Three and Nine Months Ended January 31, 2014, containing information up to
and including March 3, 2014
OVERALL PERFORMANCE  
Stornoway  is  a  leading  Canadian  diamond  exploration  and  development  company  listed  on  the  Toronto  Stock 
Exchange.    Stornoway’s  principal  focus  is  its  100%  owned  Renard  Diamond  Project  located  in  north-central 
Québec, a feasibility-stage project with the potential to become Québec’s first diamond mine. Stornoway’s strategy 
is  to  build  a  growth  oriented  company  that  succeeds  in  the  business  of  mining  and  selling  rough  diamonds. 
Stornoway’s  long  term  view  of  the rough diamond  market  is  positive,  with tightening  mine  supply  and growing 
demand, particularly in developing markets, resulting in real, long term price growth. In this context, Stornoway is 
well  positioned,  subject  to  financing,  to  move  Renard  towards  commercial  production,  and  to  add  diamond 
resources from existing internal growth projects or acquisitions as new opportunities are identified.  In addition, the 
Company has a management team with experience at each stage of the diamond pipeline, from exploration through 
development, mining and marketing.   
 
Forward-Looking Statements 
 
This  interim  MD&A  may  contain  “forward-looking  statements”  within  the  meaning  of  Canadian  securities 
legislation  and  the  United  States  Private  Securities  Litigation  Reform  Act  of  1995.  These  forward-looking 
statements are made as of the date of this interim MD&A and, the Company does not intend, and does not assume 
any obligation, to update these forward-looking statements, except as required by law. 
 
These forward-looking statements include, among others, statements with respect to Stornoway’s objectives for the 
ensuing  year,  our  medium  and  long-term  goals,  and  strategies  to  achieve  those  objectives  and  goals,  as  well  as 
statements  with  respect  to  our  beliefs,  plans,  objectives,  expectations,  anticipations,  estimates  and  intentions.  All 
forward-looking statements and information are based on Stornoway’s current beliefs as well as assumptions made 
by  and  information  currently  available  to  Stornoway  concerning  anticipated  financial  performance,  business 
prospects, strategies, regulatory developments, development plans, exploration, development and mining activities 
and  commitments.  Although  management  considers  these  assumptions  to  be  reasonable  based  on  information 
currently available to it, they may prove to be incorrect.
Forward-looking statements relate to future events or future performance and reflect current expectations or beliefs 
regarding future events and include, but are not limited to, statements  with respect to: (i) the amount of mineral 
resources and exploration targets; (ii) the amount of future production over any period; (iii) net present value and 
internal rates of return of the mining operation; (iv) assumptions relating to recovered grade, average ore recovery, 
internal  dilution,  mining  dilution   and  other  mining  parameters  set  out  in  the  feasibility  study  undertaken  in 
November  2011  (the  “2011  Feasibility  Study”)  or  the  Optimization  Study  announced  in  January  2013  (the 
“Optimization Study”); (v) assumptions relating to gross revenues, operating cash flow and other revenue metrics 
set out in the 2011 Feasibility Study or the Optimization Study; (vi) mine expansion potential and expected mine 
life;  (vii)  expected  time  frames  for  completion  of  permitting  and  regulatory  approvals  and  making  a  production 
decision;  (viii) the expected time frames for the completion of the extension of Route 167 from Témiscamie to the 
Renard  mine  site  (the  “Route  167  Extension”)  and  the  financial  obligations  or  costs  incurred  by  Stornoway  in 
connection with such road extension; (ix) future exploration plans; (x) future market prices for rough diamonds; (xi) 
                                                           
1 Note to Reader 
 
The following management discussion and analysis (“MD&A”) of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in 
conjunction  with  the  audited  consolidated  financial  statements  for  the  years  ended  April  30,  2013  and  2012  and  the  condensed  interim 
consolidated financial statements for the three- and nine-months periods ended January 31, 2014 and January 31, 2013 together with the notes 
thereto.  These  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  in  Canadian  funds  in  accordance  with  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards 
(“IFRS”), as issued by the International Accounting Standards board.
1
the economic benefits of using liquefied natural gas rather than diesel for power generation; and (xii) sources of and 
anticipated financing requirements.  Any statements that express or involve discussions with respect to predictions, 
expectations,  beliefs,  plans,  projections,  objectives,  assumptions  or  future  events  or  performance  (often,  but  not 
always,  using  words  or  phrases  such  as  “expects”,  “anticipates”,  “plans”,  “projects”,  “estimates”,  “assumes”, 
“intends”, “strategy”, “goals”, “objectives”, “schedule” or variations thereof or stating that certain actions, events or 
results “may”, “could”, “would”, “might” or “will” be taken, occur or be achieved, or the negative of any of these 
terms and similar expressions) are not statements of historical fact and may be forward-looking statements.
Forward-looking statements  are  made  based  upon  certain  assumptions by  Stornoway  or  its  consultants  and other 
important factors that, if untrue, could cause the actual results, performances or achievements of Stornoway to be 
materially  different  from  future  results,  performances  or  achievements  expressed  or 
implied  by  such 
statements.   Such  statements  and  information  are  based  on  numerous  assumptions  regarding  present  and  future 
business  strategies  and  the  environment  in  which  Stornoway  will  operate  in  the  future,  including  the  price  of 
diamonds, anticipated costs and the ability to achieve goals. Certain important factors that could cause actual results, 
performances or achievements to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements include, but are not 
limited to: (i) required capital investment and estimated workforce requirements; (ii) estimates of net present value 
and internal rates of return; (iii) receipt of regulatory approvals on acceptable terms within commonly experienced 
time  frames;  (iv)  the  assumption  that  a production decision  will  be  made,  and  that decision will  be  positive;  (v) 
anticipated timelines for the commencement of mine production; (vi) anticipated timelines related to the completion 
of the Route 167 Extension and the impact on the development schedule at Renard; (vii) market prices for rough 
diamonds and the potential impact on the Renard Project’s value; (viii) the Company’s ability to raise the required 
capital to construct a mine at the Renard Diamond Project; and (ix) future exploration plans and objectives.
By their very nature, forward-looking statements involve inherent risks and uncertainties, both general and specific, 
and risks exist that estimates, forecasts, projections and other forward-looking statements will not be achieved or 
that assumptions do not reflect future experience. We caution readers not to place undue reliance on these forward-
looking statements as a number of important risk factors could cause the actual outcomes to differ materially from 
the beliefs, plans, objectives, expectations, anticipations, estimates, assumptions and intentions expressed in such 
forward-looking  statements.    These  risk  factors  may  be  generally  stated  as  the  risk  that  the  assumptions  and 
estimates expressed above do not occur, including the assumption in many forward-looking statements that other 
forward-looking statements will be correct, but specifically include, without limitation, (i) risks relating to variations 
in the grade, kimberlite lithologies and country rock content within the material identified as mineral resources from 
that predicted; (ii) variations in rates of recovery and breakage; (iii) the greater uncertainty of exploration targets; 
(iv) developments in world diamond markets; (v) slower increases in diamond valuations than assumed; (vi) risks 
relating to fluctuations in the Canadian dollar and other currencies relative to the US dollar; (vii) increases in the 
costs of proposed capital and operating expenditures; (viii) increases in financing costs or adverse changes to the 
terms of available financing, if any; (ix) tax rates or royalties being greater than assumed; (x) results of exploration 
in areas of potential expansion of resources; (xi) changes in development or mining plans due to changes in other 
factors or exploration results of Stornoway; (xii) changes in project parameters as plans continue to be refined; (xiii) 
risks  relating  to  receipt  of  regulatory  approvals  or  the  implementation  of  the  existing  Impact  and  Benefits 
Agreement  with  aboriginal  communities;  (xiv)  the  effects  of  competition  in  the  markets  in  which  Stornoway 
operates;  (xv)  operational  and  infrastructure  risks;  (xvi)  technical,  environmental,  permitting  and  execution  risk 
relating to the construction by Stornoway of a mining grade road forming part of the Route 167 Extension; and, 
(xvii) the additional risks described herein and in Stornoway’s annual MD&As, its other disclosure documents and 
Stornoway’s anticipation of and success in managing the foregoing risks. Stornoway cautions that the foregoing list 
of factors that may affect future results is not exhaustive.
2
Highlights for the three and nine months ended January 31, 2014:


 





In  June  2013, received  a  positive Environmental  Assessment  Decision  for  the  Renard  Diamond  Project 
from  the  Canadian  Environmental  Assessment  Agency;  the  project  has  now  received  all  of  the  major 
Québec and federal government authorizations required to commence construction; 
In  July  2013,  announced  an  updated  Mineral  Resource  Estimate  for  the  Renard  Diamond  Project, 
following the successful completion of the R65 bulk sample early in 2013 and incorporating refinements to 
the geological models and diamond content estimates of certain other kimberlites made since the project’s 
previous Mineral Resource statement was published in January 2011; 
In August 2013, announced the appointment of Mr. Hume Kyle to the Company’s Board of Directors. 
In September 2013, all four construction segments of the Route 167 extension and the Renard Mine Road 
were  connected,  permitting  the  full  transit  of  construction  vehicles  from  Temiscamie,  at  the  end  of  the 
existing public highway, to the Renard Diamond Project site 240 km to the north; 
In October 2013, an agreement was reached with the Government of Québec to allow the residual amount 
of the financing facility established for the construction of the Renard Mine Road to be utilized for the 
immediate construction of the Renard Mine Airstrip; 
In October 2013, the results of a recent feasibility study on the viability of a Liquefied Natural Gas fuelled 
power plant for the Renard Diamond Project were announced. The study demonstrates substantial benefits 
to the project in terms of annual operating cost and environmental emissions compared to the currently 
planned diesel gen-set option.  The incremental capital cost increase of $2.6 million as compared to the 
cost of diesel gen-sets represents a net payback of four months, while annual operating cost reductions 
between $8 million and $10 million are anticipated; 
In  October  2013,  the  Company  entered  into  an  unsecured,  non-revolving  bridge  facility  for  up  to  $20 
million  with  Diaquem,  and  received  $10  million  in  October  to  be  used  for  general  working  capital, 
including financing activities; 
In December 2013, the Company closed a private placement financing of “flow-through” common shares 
for gross proceeds of $10.05 million.  Proceeds from this financing will be used for a resource expansion 
and conversion program at the Renard Diamond Project in 2014 targeted principally on Renard 2.
ACTIVITIES UPDATE - RENARD DIAMOND PROJECT, QUÉBEC 
Stornoway's principal mineral property and primary focus is the Renard Diamond Project, part of the larger Foxtrot 
Property  in  the  Otish  Mountains  located  in  Québec,  Canada.   Stornoway’s  wholly-owned  subsidiary  Stornoway 
Diamonds (Canada) Inc. (“SDCI”) has a 100% interest in the Foxtrot Property, which contains the Renard cluster of 
kimberlite bodies.  DIAQUEM Inc. (“Diaquem”), an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of Investissement Québec 
(“IQ”)  (see  “Significant  Shareholder”  below),  has  a  2%  gross  revenue  royalty  on  life  of  mine  production  from 
Renard.  The Renard Diamond Project is located approximately 250 km north of the Cree community of Mistissini 
and 350 km north of Chibougamau in the James Bay region of North-Central Québec.  
 
Technical disclosure for the Renard Diamond Project included in this Interim MD&A, with the exception of the 
technical disclosure related to mineral resources, has been reviewed by Patrick Godin, Ing. (Québec).  Mr. Godin is 
Stornoway’s Chief Operating Officer (“COO”) and a Qualified Person (“QP”) under National Instrument 43-101 – 
Standards of Disclosure for Mineral Projects (“NI 43-101”).  Technical disclosure related to the Renard Diamond 
Project’s mineral resources has been reviewed by Robin Hopkins, P.Geol. (NT/NU), Stornoway’s Vice-President, 
Exploration and a Qualified Person (“QP”) under NI 43-101.     
 
In November 2011, Stornoway released the results of a Feasibility Study at Renard, followed by an Optimization 
Study in January 2013, which highlighted the potential of the project to become a significant producer of high value 
rough diamonds over a long mine life. Probable Mineral Reserves as defined under NI 43-101 stand at 17.9 million 
carats.  Total  Indicated  Mineral  Resources,  inclusive  of  the  Mineral  Reserve,  stand  at  27.1  million  carats,  with  a 
further 16.9 million carats classified as Inferred Mineral Resources, and 25.7 to 47.8 million carats classified as non-
resource exploration upside. All kimberlites remain open at depth. Readers are referred to the technical report dated 
December 29th, 2011 in respect of the November 2011 Feasibility Study for the Renard Diamond Project, and the
3
technical report dated February 28th, 2013 in respect of the January 2013 Optimization Study, for further details and 
assumptions relating to the project. 
 
Significant milestones have been achieved during 2013, several of which are described below.  Financing efforts are 
presently ongoing, and construction of the Renard Mine Road and airstrip is progressing well. A formal production 
decision  is  expected  to  be  made  following,  among  other  things,  the  arrangement  of  financing  for  project 
development.
Readers  are  referred  to  the  “Risks”  section  of  the  Company’s  most  recently  filed  AIF  dated  July  25,  2013  and 
available  under  the  Company’s  profile  on  Sedar  (www.sedar.com)  for  more  details  about  how  these  risks  could 
affect the development schedule for the Renard Diamond Project.  See also the “Risks and Uncertainties” section 
below for additional information.
Project Permitting and Social Acceptance 
The  Renard  Diamond  Project  falls  under  the  environmental  protection  regimes  of  the  James  Bay  and  Northern 
Québec Agreement (“JBNQA”) and the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act  (“CEAA”).  On December 28, 
2011, the Company filed an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (“ESIA”) report with the regulators.  The 
submission of the ESIA, which was authored by Roche, was an important milestone in the permitting of the project.  
In March 2012, the Company entered into an impacts and benefits agreement (the “Mecheshoo Agreement”) for the 
Renard Diamond Project with the Cree Nation of Mistissini and the Grand Council of the Crees (Eeyou Istchee) / 
Cree Regional Authority. The Mecheshoo Agreement is a binding agreement that will govern the long-term working 
relationship between the Company and the Cree parties during all phases of the Renard Diamond Project. It provides 
for training, employment and business opportunities for the Cree during project construction, operation and closure, 
and sets out the principles of social, cultural and environmental respect under which the project will be managed. 
The  Mecheshoo  Agreement  includes  a  mechanism  by  which  the  Cree  parties  will  benefit  financially  from  the 
success of the project on a long term basis, consistent with the mining industry’s best practices for engagement with 
First Nations communities.  
 
In  July  2012,  the  Company  executed  a  Declaration  of  Partnership  with  the  communities  of  Chibougamau  and 
Chapais in the James Bay Region of Québec. The Declaration is a statement of cooperation between the partners for 
the responsible development of the Company’s 100% owned Renard Diamond Project based on the principles of 
environmental protection, social responsibility and economic efficiency. 
The Mining Lease for the project was received from the Québec Ministère des Ressources naturelles (“MRN”) in 
October 2012, the Québec Certificate of Authorization was received from the Québec Ministère du Développement 
Durable, de l’Environnement, de la Faune et des Parcs (“MDDEFP”) in December 2012 and the rehabilitation plan 
was approved by the MRN, also in December 2012. In July 2013, a positive Environmental Assessment Decision for 
the  Renard  Diamond  Project  was  received  from  the  Canadian  Environmental  Assessment  Agency.  The  Renard 
Diamond  Project  has  now  received  all  of  the  major  Québec  and  federal  government  authorizations  required  to 
commence construction.  Operating permits can now be sought for site specific activities under the authority of the 
overall global authorizations. 
With the Renard Mine Road substantially complete, the Renard Diamond Project is the first fully permitted diamond 
mining project in Canada with a permanent road.   
The Renard ESIA, as well as the project’s Environmental Baseline Study and Restoration Plan, are available in their 
entirety on Stornoway’s website (www.stornowaydiamonds.com/renard/esia).
Updated Mineral Resource Estimate Announced  
In July 2013, the Company announced an updated Mineral Resource estimate for the Renard Diamond Project (the 
“2013 Mineral Resource Estimate”). The Optimization Study, as described in the current technical report for the 
Renard Diamond Project dated February 28, 2013, utilized the 2010 Mineral Resource Estimate. The 2013 Mineral 
Resource  Estimate  follows  the  successful  completion  of  the  Renard  65  bulk  sample  earlier  in  the  year  and, 
additionally,  incorporates  refinements  to  the  geological  models  and  diamond  content  estimates  of  certain  other 
kimberlites made since the 2010 Mineral Resource Estimate was published in January 2011.
4
Stornoway's diamond exploration programs are conducted under the direction of Robin Hopkins, P.Geol. (NT/NU), 
Vice  President,  Exploration,  a  Qualified  Person  under  NI  43-101.  Mr.  Hopkins  has  reviewed  and  approved  the 
following technical disclosure.  
Highlights of the 2013 Mineral Resource Estimate are as follows:
  A  total  Indicated  Mineral  Resource  of  27.1  million  carats  representing  an  increase  of  14.0%  over  the
previous estimate;
  The successful conversion of 2.3 million carats (7.86 million tonnes at 29.3 carats per hundred tonnes) of 
near-surface Renard 65 Inferred Mineral Resources to Indicated Mineral Resources, representing kimberlite 
amenable to open-pit mining to 150m depth;
  A  total  Inferred  Mineral  Resource  of  16.9  million  carats,  a  3.5%  decrease  compared  to  the  previous 
estimate,  as  increased  estimates  of  Inferred  Mineral  Resources  at  Renard  2,  4  and  9  partially  offset  the 
conversion of material from the Inferred to the Indicated category at Renard 65.
  An additional 25.7 to 47.8 million carats (54.6 to 74.9 million tonnes) have been designated as a Target for 
Further Exploration (“TFFE”), (previously known as Potential Mineral Deposit), to 775 m depth, below 
which each kimberlite remains open.
The reader is cautioned that  mineral resources that are not  mineral reserves do not have demonstrated economic 
viability.  In  addition,  the potential  quantity  and  grade  of any  exploration  target  is  conceptual  in nature,  and  it  is 
uncertain if further exploration will result in it being delineated as a mineral resource. 
 
More  information  regarding  the  2013  Mineral  Resource  Estimate  can  be  found  in  the  Company’s  first  quarter 
MD&A and in a press release dated July 23, 2013, both of which are available under the Company’s profile on 
Sedar (www.sedar.com). 
Management’s Assessment of the 2013 Mineral Resource Estimate 
The successful conversion of a large part of the Renard 65 kimberlite to the Indicated Resource category is expected 
to  be  included  in  the  Renard  mine  plan.  This  open  pit  material  will  allow  Stornoway  to  utilize  the  designed 
expansion  capacity  of  the  plant  from  6,000  to  7,000  tonnes  per  day,  and  is  expected  to  provide for  an  extended 
reserve tail for the project. At the same time, we have been able to convert into new Inferred Resources the large 
quantity of diamonds contained within the brecciated country rock that is entrained within and around the Renard 2 
kimberlite. These diamonds are derived primarily from the abundant hypabyssal kimberlite which has been drilled 
and  sampled  repeatedly  within  the  Renard  2  eruptive  envelope,  but  which  was  not  incorporated  into  previous 
resource  estimates.  A  large  part  of  this  material  is  expected  to  be  mined  as  waste  or  mining  dilution,  and  has 
previously been designated a zero grade in our production schedule. Both of these resource additions offer near term 
production gains for the project.  The updated Mineral Resource estimate has re-confirmed the very large resource 
upside of 25.7 to 47.8 million carats outside the formal Indicated and Inferred categories at the Renard Diamond 
Project. Taken together, the Renard Diamond Project represents one of the world’s most important new sources of 
high value diamonds. 
Resource Expansion Drill Program Planned for 2014  
Proceeds  from  the  $10.05  million  flow-through  financing  which  closed  in  December  2013  will  be  used  for  a 
resource expansion drill program at the Renard Diamond Project during 2014. The main objective of this program is 
to test the resource potential of the Renard 2 kimberlite below the base of the currently defined Indicated Mineral 
Resource  at  600  meters  below  surface,  at  which  level  Renard  2  is  at  its  maximum  size.  Drilling  is  expected  to 
commence early in the second quarter and continue into the summer. 
 
The 2014 drill program is expected to comprise tightly constrained, deep directional drilling from within the Renard 
2  kimberlite  body.  This  work  should  provide  information  on  diamond  content,  geology,  dilution,  density  and 
kimberlite geometry necessary for resource conversion. The objectives of the program are:
  The conversion of the estimated 6.2 million carats of Inferred Mineral Resources between 600m and 700m 
below surface at Renard 2 (5.2 million tonnes at 119 carats per hundred tonnes, or “cpht”) to an Indicated 
Mineral Resource;
5
  The addition of additional Inferred Mineral Resources at Renard 2 from 700m to at least 800m depth, an 
interval  within  which  Stornoway  has  previously  estimated  resource  upside  in  the  form  of  a  “Target  for 
Further Exploration” of between 4.2 and 7.3 million carats; and
  The aggressive exploration of Renard 2 below 800m to a depth of 1000m or greater through deep drilling. 
In addition, Stornoway will review, and drill if warranted, four additional kimberlites at Renard, which are 
not  contained  within  the  current  Mineral  Resource  at  Renard  and  which  have  had  limited  previous 
assessment.
The reader is cautioned that  mineral resources that are not  mineral reserves do not have demonstrated economic 
viability.  In  addition,  the potential  quantity  and  grade  of any  exploration  target  is  conceptual  in nature,  and  it  is 
uncertain if further exploration will result in it being delineated as a mineral resource. 
 
Stornoway’s  principal  focus  at  present  is  on  securing  the  necessary  financing  to  support  the  construction  of  the 
project,  for  which  discussions  are  active  and  ongoing.  Project  construction  is  expected  to  commence  upon  the 
completion of this financing process. As a separate and on-going priority, the 2014 drill program allows Stornoway 
to  continue  the  process  of  resource  growth  at  Renard.  The  Renard  Diamond  Project  represents  one  of  the  most 
important new sources of large, high value diamonds in the world, with extensive resource upside outside of the 
current  Mineral  Reserve.  Between  25.7  to  47.8  million  carats  have  been  designated  a  “Target  for  Further 
Exploration” at Renard on top of the existing 27.1 million carats of Indicated Resource and 16.5 million carats of 
Inferred Resource. The January 2013 Optimization Study describes an 11 year mining project based on an earlier, 
17.9  million  carat  Mineral  Reserve  drawn  solely  from  the  Indicated  Resource  in  Renards  2,  3  and  4.  In  2013, 
Stornoway was successful in converting a large portion of the Renard 65 kimberlite into an Indicated Resource for 
its inclusion in the mine plan, following a bulk sample program in 2012. Now, the opening of the Renard Mine Road 
allows us to transport to site the larger drill rigs required to test the resource potential of the Renard 2 kimberlite at 
depth, which at the current drill depth appears twice as large than at surface, with a higher diamond content, and 
open to depth.  Results from this resource expansion drill program will be reported when available. 
 
LNG Feasibility Study 
In October 2013, the Company announced the results of a feasibility study undertaken during 2013 on the viability 
of a Liquefied Natural Gas (“LNG”) fuelled power plant for the Renard Diamond Project. The study was authored 
by  SNC-Lavalin  Inc.  and  AMEC  America  Ltd.  under  the  Renard  Project  EPCM  joint  venture,  and  demonstrates 
substantial benefits to the project in terms of annual operating cost and environmental emissions compared to the 
currently planned diesel gen-set option.  
Highlights of the study are as follows:
  Annual operating cost reductions of between $8 million and $10 million over the initial 11 year mine life,
representing a life of mine operating cost saving of $89 million, or 6.6%.  
Incremental capital cost of only $2.6 million over the cost of diesel gen-sets, representing a net payback of 
4 months.

  An estimated reduction in greenhouse gas emissions of 43%, with significant reductions in NO2 and SO2.  
  Stable LNG local supply market based on existing commercial distribution network within Québec.
The Renard LNG power plant will comprise seven 2.1MW rated gas gen-sets, providing sufficient power generation 
capacity for the project’s normal operating specification of 9.5MW, which represents five gen-sets operating at a 
planned 92% efficiency. Onsite gas storage will be sufficient for 10 days operation, with new supplies delivered 
daily by cryogenic tanker truck from the existing Gaz Metro Liquefaction plant and distribution center in Montréal. 
In addition to power generation, the LNG will be used for heating of buildings and the underground mine, removing 
the requirement for onsite propane. A smaller quantity of diesel will continue to be used at site for construction 
activities and mobile mining equipment.
6
Based on the operating parameters contained within the Optimization Study, the incremental benefits of the LNG 
option 
follows: 
 
Table 1: LNG Feasibility Study Results and Project Impact1
existing
gen-set
diesel
over
the
plan
are
as
Operating Cost 
Parameters2
Capital Cost 
Parameters2
Commodity 
Consumption
Unit Power Cost (C$/kWh)
Unit Operating Cost (C$/tonne)3
Life of Mine Operating Cost (C$M)3
Initial Capital Cost (C$M)
Escalation Allowance on Initial Capital (C$M)
Life of Mine Capital Cost (C$M)4
Annual Diesel Consumption (million liters)
Annual LNG Consumption (m3/annum) 
Annual Propane Consumption (m3/annum)
January 2013
Optimization Study,
Diesel
$0.299 
$57.63 
$1,352 
$752.1 
$45.1 
$1,013 
27.5 
n/a 
3,500
January 2013
Optimization with
LNG Power Option
(-37%)
$0.188 
(-7%)
$53.84 
(-7%)
$1,263 
(+0.3%)
$754.0 
(+1.6%)
$45.8 
(-0.3%)
$1,010 
(-79%)
5.9
41,700
n/a
Notes
1)  Based on the 11 year reserve-based mine life (17.9 mcarats) contained within the January 2013 Optimization Study, with a normal operating load of
9.49MW and an oil price assumption of US$95/barrel.
2)  The January 2013 Optimization Study costs, under either the diesel or LNG power options, are expressed in October 2012 terms.  
3)  Excludes capitalized preproduction costs.  
4)
Includes all initial capital, escalation on initial capital, sustaining and deferred capital and contingencies.
Management’s Assessment of the Benefits of Using LNG for Power Generation
Following the release of the 2011 Feasibility Study  and the Optimization Study in January 2013, the Company’s 
management  has  been  investigating  more  efficient  alternatives  for  power  supply  at  the  project  compared  to  the 
traditional diesel option contained within the current execution plan. A July 2012 Hydro-Québec feasibility study 
into a powerline for the project demonstrated only a marginal economic benefit of using grid power owing to the 
high cost for powerline construction. The LNG option now provides a much more attractive way forward, with off-
the-shelf technology, a positive long-term supply outlook, a much smaller environmental footprint and immediate 
economic benefits for the project through substantially reduced operating costs. This is now an option for the Renard 
Diamond Project because, with an all-season road, it is possible to receive regular shipments of liquefied gas from 
the  existing  commercial  distribution  network  in  Québec,  without  the  need  for  expensive  high-capacity  on-site 
storage facilities. The LNG study has been completed in time to have it incorporated into the final project execution 
plan prior to the planned commencement of project construction in 2014, subject to financing. 
Route 167 Extension / Renard Mine Road / Renard Mine Airstrip 
Construction  of  the  road  that  will  provide  all-season  vehicle  access  to  the  Renard  Diamond  Project  began  in 
February  2012  as  the  “Route  167  Extension”.  Under  the  terms  of  the  November  2012  Framework  Agreement 
between  SDCI  and  the  Government  of  Québec,  Québec  is  responsible  for  completing  the  first  143km  of  road 
(segments  “A”  and  “B”)  as  a  70km/hr  two-lane  gravel  highway  and  SDCI  is  undertaking  the  construction  of  a 
50km/hr single lane mining road over the remaining 97km (segments “C” and “D”) as the “Renard Mine Road”. The 
cost of the Renard Mine Road was initially estimated at $77 million, including a 15% contingency, but is presently 
forecast to cost approximately $70 million. A description of the terms of the December 2012 Financing Agreement 
between SDCI and Québec can be found below in the section “Completed Financings”.   
In September 2013, the Company announced the connection of all four segments of the Route 167 Extension and the 
Renard Mine Road, initially for construction traffic only.  As of January 31, 2014, work on the Renard Mine Road is 
substantially complete and construction activities have ceased for the winter months.  The finishing surface layer is 
expected to be applied to the road in 2014, following the winter thaw.
7
In October 2013, the Company announced that the forecasted cost to complete the Renard Mine Road was about $70 
million, approximately 10% below the initial budget estimate of $77 million. Following discussion, SDCI and the 
government of Québec reached an agreement whereby the balance of funds within the base credit facility of $77 
million loaned by the government to SDCI could be utilized for the immediate construction of the Renard Mine 
Airstrip. The airstrip’s capital cost estimate contained within the Optimization Study was $15.5 million, including 
all site infrastructure and operating facilities. Given the competitive cost environment currently existing in Québec 
for  major  capital  projects,  and  the  on-site  presence  of  the  Company’s  contractors,  fuel  and  equipment  already 
mobilized for road construction, SDCI has estimated that sufficient funds will be available within the road credit 
facility  for  the  completion  of  all  major  civil  works  at  the  airstrip,  well  within  budget  and  schedule.  The  early 
construction of permanent airstrip facilities close to the Renard Diamond Project will better assist the Company in 
mitigating construction risk at the Renard Diamond Project during 2014 and 2015, and will create a new regional 
aerodrome enhancing air transport in the Monts Otish region of Québec. 
The terms of the December 2012 Loan Agreement were modified to incorporate the construction of the Renard Mine 
Airstrip within the overall budget of $77 million. As of March 3, 2014, SDCI has drawn $69.9 million from the 
credit facility for the road and airstrip construction, and is forecasting a final cost to complete for the Renard Mine 
Road and civil work related to the Renard Mine Airstrip to be below the initial $77 million budget. 
Throughout  the  construction  of  both  the  Renard  Mine  Road  and  more  recently,  in  relation  to  the  Renard  Mine 
Airstrip, SDCI has prioritized the granting of contracts to businesses located in the James Bay Region of Québec, in 
particular those associated with the Crees of Eeyou Istchee. Contractor productivity throughout has been excellent, 
and the greatest factor in SDCI’s ability to advance the road so efficiently. SDCI’s contractors include:
  The  Eskan  Company,  the  Development  Corporation  of  the  Cree  Nation  of  Mistissini,  and  Swallow-
Fournier inc. for road construction;
  Nordic  Structures  Bois,  a  wholly-owned  subsidiary  of  Chantiers  Chibougamau  Ltée,  for  bridge
construction; 
Jos Ste-Croix & Fils Ltée of Chibougamau for construction management;
 
  The Eenatuk Forestry Corporation for tree clearing; 
  The Kiskinchiish Corporation for camp services and catering; and 
  Petronor, a wholly owned Cree enterprise, for fuel supply.
Financing Strategy – Renard Diamond Project 
The Company continues to pursue a financing strategy for the Renard Diamond Project based on a combination of 
project debt, equity and the forward sale of diamonds. The Company is actively exploring a broad range of financing 
options  for  the  project  within  the  debt,  bond  and  equity  markets,  in  addition  to  financing  options  tied  to  future 
diamond  supply.  The  Company  may  pursue  corporate  development  opportunities  in  the  context  of  the  Renard 
financing strategy, and may incur professional fees as a result.  Management’s objective in financing Renard is to 
raise  sufficient  capital  to  support  construction  of  the  project,  and  through  a  combination  of  debt,  equity  and  the 
forward sale of diamond achieve an optimal overall cost for this capital.  The Company is engaged in discussions 
with  potential  investors  and  off-takers  to  arrange  financing  for  further  project  development  during  2014.  These 
discussions are ongoing. 
Next Steps 
Stornoway’s  principal  focus  is  the  completion  of  financing for  the  construction  of  a  mine  at  Renard.    Financing 
discussions with potential investors are ongoing and progressing well.  With the opening of the Renard Mine Road 
for year-round construction traffic earlier than anticipated and the advancement of civil works at the Renard Mine 
Airstrip, the timely completion of financing is the now the principal driver on project schedule.  The development 
schedule for Renard contained within the Optimization Study calls for first construction mobilization prior to the 
end  of  2013,  with  principal  capital  expenditures  in  2014  and  2015  and  commercial  production  achieved  in  mid-
2016. As financing for  mine  construction  at  Renard has  not  yet  been entered  into,  there  has  been a  delay  in  the 
construction schedule contemplated under the Optimization Study, and the extent of such delay will be reassessed 
once  financing  for  the  project  has  been  completed.    Stornoway’s  development  team  is  presently  engaged  in 
preliminary  engineering  work,  ongoing  design  optimization  and  permitting  for  site  specific  activities  under  the 
project’s Québec and federal government certificates of authorization. Management considers all prerequisites for 
commencing project construction have now been met, subject to the completion of principal financing.
8
Proceeds from the flow-through financing which closed on December 3, 2013 will be used for a resource expansion 
and  conversion  program  in  2014  targeted  principally  on  the  depth  extent  of  Renard  2.  This  program  will  run 
separately  from,  and  complementary  to,  the  project  construction  capital  program  scheduled  for  2014  and  2015 
following the completion of principal financing (please see “Resource Expansion Drill Program Planned for 2014” 
above for more details on this planned activity).
Other Property Interests - Exploration
Stornoway's diamond exploration programs are conducted under the direction of Mr. Hopkins, P.Geol. (NT/NU), 
who has reviewed the disclosure for the Company’s other exploration property interests contained in this Interim 
MD&A. 
The  Company  maintains  interests  in  three  advanced  exploration  stage  properties,  being  the  Aviat  and  Qilalugaq 
properties  in  Nunavut,  and  the  Timiskaming  Property  in  Ontario.  The  advanced  projects  have  demonstrated  the 
potential  for  significant  tonnages  and  high  diamond  contents  on  a  non-resource  basis  (with  the  exception  of  the 
Qilalugaq Property, where a Mineral Resource estimate was announced in June 2012 and the 95-2 kimberlite pipe 
located on the Timiskaming property in Ontario where a Mineral Resource estimate was announced in November 
2012),  and  now  merit  either  additional  delineation  drilling  or  bulk  sampling.  The  Company  considers  the  Aviat, 
Qilalugaq  and  Timiskaming  projects  to  be  credible  "pipeline"  projects,  providing  the  Company  with  significant 
exposure to long term diamond price growth.  
Exploration Option Agreements 
In March 2013, the Company entered into three project-specific exploration option agreements with North Arrow 
Minerals Inc. (“North Arrow” or the “Optionee”) whereby the Optionee has the right to earn an 80% interest in each 
of  the  Pikoo,  Qilalugaq  and  Timiskaming  properties  (individually,  the  “Project”)  upon  completion  of  a  Project 
specific work program (the “Work Program”) and subject to a back-in right.  The Timiskaming option agreement 
excludes  the  previously  identified  95-2  kimberlite.    Each  Work  Program  will  be  funded  and  operated  by  the 
Optionee.  The Company retains a one-time right to buy-back from the Optionee a 20% interest in each Project, 
thereby increasing its interest to 40%, by paying to the Optionee three times the costs incurred in connection with 
the applicable Work Program. 
Qilalugaq 
The Qilalugaq Diamond Project is located on the Rae Isthmus of Nunavut, close to the hamlet of Repulse Bay and 
includes the Qilalugaq kimberlite pipes and the Naujaat system of kimberlite dykes. The project includes the 12.5 
hectare  Q1-4  kimberlite,  the  largest  kimberlite  pipe  in  the  eastern  Canadian  Arctic.  In  June  2012,  Stornoway 
announced an Inferred Mineral Resource at Q1-4 of 26.1 million carats from 48.8 million tonnes of kimberlite with 
an average +1 DTC total diamond content of 53.6 carats per hundred tonnes (cpht) extending from surface to a depth 
of 205m.  
To fulfil the terms of the Qilalugaq option agreement, North Arrow has informed Stornoway that it intends complete 
a  1,000  tonne  bulk  sampling  program  at  the  Q1-4  kimberlite  to  recover  a  diamond  parcel  of  approximately  500 
carats of commercial sized diamonds larger than the 0.85 mm sieve size. This diamond parcel will be used to better 
determine diamond grade, size distribution, and value. The Qilalugaq work program is expected to commence in 
July 2014, with an estimated budget of $3.7 million, to be fully funded by North Arrow.  
Timiskaming 
The Timiskaming Work Program consisted of five drill holes (547 m) testing four targets located up ice from an 
unsourced kimberlite indicator mineral train. Kimberlite was not intersected in any of the drill holes.  In June 2013, 
the Optionee provided the Company with notice of its intent to vest at an 80% interest in the project, subject to a one 
time back-in right held by the Company which was required to have been exercised within sixty days following the 
notice of vesting. The Company chose not to exercise the back-in right.  Accordingly, North Arrow holds an 80% 
interest in the Timiskaming property (excluding the 95-2 kimberlite) and the Company holds a 20% interest.  Future 
exploration programs will be funded 80% by North Arrow and 20% by Stornoway.  Should Stornoway choose not to 
contribute to the proposed exploration program, its interest in the Timiskaming Project will be reduced accordingly.
9
Pikoo 
The Pikoo Work Program was designed to evaluate the potential for bedrock kimberlite occurrences at the project.  
During  June  and  July  2013,  North  Arrow  completed  ten  drill  holes  (2,002  meters)  at  the  Pikoo  project.  Drilling 
targeted  two  separate  areas  with  previously  un-sourced  kimberlite  indicator  trains.  Hypabyssal  kimberlite  was 
intersected in nine of ten drill holes.   
North  Arrow  has  advised  the  Company  of  its  intention  to  undertake  a  study  of  the  mineral  chemistry  of  the 
kimberlites discovered in 2013, including PK150. This work will allow for a comparison to the chemistry of the 
kimberlite  indicator  mineral  trains  identified  within  the  33,374  ha  Pikoo  property.  This  large  project  area  hosts 
additional  kimberlite  targets  and  numerous  anomalous  KIM  samples  that  require  further  follow  up  and  target 
definition. Exploration plans for 2014 are being developed; work may include drilling, geophysical surveys and till 
sampling. 
In November 2013, North Arrow provided the Company with notice of its intent to vest at an 80% interest in the 
Pikoo project; the Company chose not to exercise its back-in right.  Accordingly, North Arrow holds an 80% interest 
in the Pikoo project and the Company holds a 20% interest.  Future exploration programs will be funded 80% by 
North Arrow and 20% by the Company.  Should the Company choose not to contribute to the proposed exploration 
program, its interest in the Pikoo Project will be reduced accordingly. 
 
Other Exploration Properties 
In  addition  to  the  advanced  exploration  projects,  the  Company  maintains  an  interest  in  a  number  of  property 
interests in other parts of Canada, either as 100% ownership or as part of property option agreements.  However, 
given the Company’s current focus on the Renard Diamond Project, little to no active exploration is anticipated for 
at least the next twelve months. 
 
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS AND FINANCIAL ACTIVITES 
The  Company  reports  its  financial  statements  in  accordance  with  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards 
(“IFRS”).  The  Company’s  significant  accounting  policies  are  set  out  in  Note  2  of  the  consolidated  financial 
statements for the years ended April 30, 2013 and 2012.  
Statement of Loss 
The Company’s loss for the three month period ended January 31, 2014 (the “Current Quarter”) was $1.4 million;  
the Company’s loss for the nine month period ended January 31, 2014 (the “Current Period”) was $4.4 million (a 
loss per share of $0.01 and $0.03 respectively) as compared to a loss of $5.2 million for the three months ended 
January 31, 2013 (the “Comparative Quarter”) and a loss of $24.7 million for the nine months ended January 31, 
2013 (the “Comparative Period”) (a loss per share of $0.03 and $0.15 respectively).  
The significant decrease in the Current Period loss is attributable mainly to management’s determination as of April 
30, 2013 that the technical feasibility and commercial viability of the Renard Diamond Project had been established.  
Accordingly, beginning in the Current Period, costs related to the Renard Diamond Project have been capitalized to 
“Mineral Properties” within “Property, Plant and Equipment” on the Statement of Financial Position, rather than 
being expensed, as was the practise in the Comparative Period.  In the Comparative Period, the Company expensed 
$11.8 million for exploration, as compared to $115,000 in the Current Period. 
During the Current Period, office and sundry (Current Period - $747,000; Comparative Period - $533,000) and rent 
and facility fees (Current Period - $516,000; Comparative Period - $466,000) increased, while salaries, benefits and 
director’s fees (Current Period - $1.8 million; Comparative Period - $1.8 million) and regulatory and shareholder 
communications expenses (Current Period - $405,000; Comparative Period - $447,000) decreased slightly.  Included 
in office and sundry during the Current Period are certain expenses associated with relocating lab equipment and 
exploration drill core from the Company’s North Vancouver office to Québec.  Rent and facility fees have increased 
approximately 11% from the Comparative Period as the Company reorganized its office facilities and as higher lease 
rates came into effect.      
Several  other  expense  items,  in  addition  to  exploration  expenses,  decreased  significantly  in  the  Current  Period.  
Accretion and amortization expense (Current Period - $141,000; Comparative Period - $602,000), professional fees 
(Current  Period  -  $717,000;  Comparative  Period  -  $1.7  million),  share-based  payment  expense (Current  Period - 
$21,000; Comparative Period - $1.6 million) and the write-off of exploration and evaluation assets (Current Period -
10
$Nil; Comparative Period - $2.7 million) all decreased during the nine months ended January 31, 2014 as compared 
to the same period in 2013, resulting in an operating loss of $4.4 million in the Current Period as compared to an 
operating  loss  of  $21.7  million  in  the  Comparative  Period,  a  decrease  of  over  80%.    Professional  fees  in  the 
Comparative  Period  included  certain  legal  fees  and  professional  fees  related  to  corporate  development  activities 
which were not repeated in the Current Period.  In the Comparative Period, a large stock option grant to directors, 
officers and employees occurred in September 2012, resulting in share-based payment expense of $1.6 million; no 
such grant happened in the Current Period, however, the Company recorded stock-based compensation expense  in 
the Current Period of $21,000 due to stock options with graded vesting.  Also during the Comparative Period, the 
Company wrote-off capitalized exploration and evaluation costs of $2.7 million associated with the Timiskaming 
property interest where, following an evaluation of five out of nine kimberlites identified on the property, it was 
determined that no further work was warranted for those kimberlites. 
In the Current Period, finance expense decreased to $nil from $3.4 million in the Comparative Period as these costs, 
associated with the Renard Diamond Project, are being capitalized rather than expensed.  Interest income (Current 
Period - $Nil; Comparative Period - $380,000) decreased from the Comparative Period as funds available for short-
term  investment  were  less  in  the  Current  Period  than  in  the  Comparative  Period.    Interest  income  earned  on 
borrowed funds temporarily invested has been off-set against capitalized interest expense during the Current Period. 
Cash and cash equivalents as at January 31, 2014 totalled $20.7 million as compared to $35.1 million as at January 
31, 2013. 
Overall, the Company’s loss (Current Period - $4.4 million; Comparative Period - $24.7 million) and comprehensive 
loss (Current Period - $4.4 million; Comparative Period - $24.7 million) decreased materially for the reasons noted 
above. 
Additional  information  about  the  Company’s  activities  can  be  found  above  in  the  “Activities  Update  –  Renard 
Diamond Project, Québec” section as well as the “Other Property Interests – Exploration” section of this Interim 
MD&A as well as previously filed MD&As, and also in the Company’s Annual Information Form (“AIF”) dated 
July 25, 2013 which is available under the Company’s profile on SEDAR (www.sedar.com).  
Statement of Cash Flows 
The  Company’s  cash,  cash  equivalents  and  short-term  deposit  amounts  decreased  by  $12.2  million  during  the 
Current Period, from $32.9 million as of April 30, 2013 to $20.7 million as of January 31, 2014.  The decrease in the 
Company’s cash balance as at January 31, 2014 is the result of the amount of spending on the Company’s property, 
plant  and  equipment,  more  specifically  the  Renard  Mine  Road,  net  of  the  financing  received  during  the  period.  
During the Current Period, the Company spent $59.4 million on the acquisition of property, plant and equipment as 
compared to $207,000 in the same nine-month period in 2013.  Total investing activities in the Current Period were 
$59.3 million, as compared to $691,000 for the nine months ended January 31, 2013.
During the Current Period, the Company received $55.7 million (net) from financing activities (Comparative Period 
-  $27.4  million),  including  $43.6  million  from  the  Québec  Government  which  is  committed  for  use  in  the 
development  of  the  Renard  Mine  Road  and  $9.7  million  from  Investissement  Québec  through  its  subsidiary 
Diaquem in the form of an unsecured, non-revolving bridge facility for general working capital, including financing 
expenses (see “Completed Financings” section below).  The Company also raised $10.1 million from issuing flow-
through shares net of $0.7 million of financing costs.  Funds from this financing will be used to incur qualifying 
exploration expenses at the Renard Diamond Project (see “Resource Expansion Drill Program Planned for 2014” 
above for a description of the planned exploration program). During the Current Period, the Company made a $1.2 
million interest payment (Comparative Period - $nil), paid 50% in cash and 50% in interest payment shares and paid 
$6.1 million for deferred financing fees related to project financing (Comparative Period - $2.9 million).  
Adjustments to non-cash working capital include a net increase in other receivables and prepaid expenses of $0.2 
million  in  the  Current  Period.  This  increase  is  due  to  additional  sales  tax  credits  receivable  related  to  the  road 
construction activities. As at January 31, 2014 the Company had fuel inventory of $1.1 million (April 30, 2013 - 
$Nil) to be used for the road construction activities.  Payables and accrued liabilities decreased by $3.0 million in the 
Current Period, as compared to a decrease of $521,000 during the Comparative Period.  After adjustments to non-
cash working capital, the Company used $8.6 million for operating activities in the Current Period (Comparative 
Period - $19.2 million).
11
Statement of Financial Position 
During the Current Period, total assets increased to $291.1 million from $265.4 million as at April 30, 2013.  Most 
of this increase relates to property, plant and equipment, which includes “mineral properties” and “road construction 
in progress”.    Property, plant and equipment totaled $254.5 million as of Janaury 31, 2014 (April 30, 2013 - $224.2 
million).  The next largest increase for the nine-month period was in deferred financing fees, which increased to 
$10.4 million as at Janaury 31, 2014 from $4.3 million as at April 30, 2013, a reflection of management’s efforts to 
arrange financing for the Renard Diamond Project.
The Company’s current liabilities total $16.0 million as at Janaury 31, 2014 compared to $20.3 million as at April 
30, 2013 and consist primarily of payables and accrued liabilities and current debt. The current debt is related to an 
unsecured,  non-revolving  bridge  facility  from  Diaquem  which  matures  on  March  28,  2014.    The  Company  is  in 
discussions  with  Diaquem  regarding  a  draw  of  up  to  $10  million  from  the  second  tranche  of  bridge  financing 
arranged in October 2013, which may be advanced solely at Diaquem’s discretion.  If approved by Diaquem, the 
additional funds will be used  to start detailed engineering of the plant, for general working capital and will provide 
the Company with additional time to arrange financing for the Renard Diamond Project.  Also included in current 
liabilities  are  other  liabilities  of  $1.6  million  (Comparative  Period  -  $nil)  which  represent  the  premium  paid  by 
investors  to  acquire  the  rights  to  the  tax  benefits  attached  to  the  flow-through  shares  issued  in  December  2013. 
Long-term  debt  increased  significantly  during  the  nine  months  ended  January  31,  2014,  increasing  from  $31.2 
million to $56.2 million as at January 31, 2014 as additional draws to finance the Renard Mine Road construction 
were received.  The balance of the Company’s long-term liabilities is an asset retirement obligation of $1.6 million 
(April 30, 2013 - $1.6 million). Total liabilities increased from $53.0 million as at April 30, 2013 to $73.8 million as 
at January 31, 2014.  
Shareholders’ equity increased to $217.3 million as at January 31, 2014 from $212.4 million as at April 30, 2013 
and consists of share capital, convertible shares, contributed surplus, accumulated other comprehensive loss and a 
deficit of $222.3 million (April 30, 2013 - $217.9 million).  Share capital increased from $353.4 million to $362.7 
million from the issuance of flow-through shares for $10.1 million, from the issuance of interest payment shares 
with a value of $0.6 million and from the exercise of stock options.  As at January 31, 2014, the Company had 
152,680,583 common shares and 22,543,918 non-voting convertible shares issued and outstanding.
SIGNIFICANT SHAREHOLDER – DIAQUEM 
On  April  1,  2011  the  Company  and  Diaquem  closed  an  agreement,  previously  announced  December  14,  2010, 
whereby the Company acquired Diaquem’s 50% interest in the Renard Diamond Project (the “Acquisition”). Under 
the terms of the Acquisition, Diaquem became a significant shareholder of the Company, and retained a direct 2% 
gross revenue royalty on future diamond production. Diaquem is a wholly-owned subsidiary of SOQUEM INC., 
itself  a  wholly-owned  subsidiary  of  IQ  (formerly  Société  générale  de  financement  du  Québec),  the  Québec 
government’s main industrial and financial holding company. In conjunction with the Acquisition, IQ entered into a 
credit support agreement with the Company with respect to future project debt financing of a minimum of $100 
million. The Company’s shareholders approved the Acquisition at a special meeting held on February 10, 2011.  The 
Investor  Agreement  was  amended  on  October  2,  2013  to  adjust  the  definition  of  “Qualifiable  Securities”.    This 
change is of an administrative nature and does not materially affect the terms of the Investor Agreement, nor does it 
significantly change the Company’s obligations thereunder.
12
SUMMARY OF QUARTERLY RESULTS 
 
The following table sets out selected unaudited consolidated quarterly financial information of Stornoway and is 
derived  from  the  unaudited  quarterly  consolidated  financial  statements  prepared  by  management.  Stornoway’s 
condensed  interim  consolidated  financial  statements  are  prepared  in  accordance  with  International  Accounting 
Standards  34,  Interim  Financing  Reporting  (“IAS  34”),  using  the  same  accounting  policies  and  methods  of 
application as the audited, consolidated financial statements of the Company are expressed in thousands of Canadian 
dollars (except for per share amounts).
Period
Net Loss
Basic Loss per
share
Exploration and
Evaluation 
Expenses
ended
ended
Three  months 
January 31, 2014 
Three  months 
October 31, 2013 
Three months ended July 
31, 2013 
Three  months 
April 30, 2013 
Three  months 
January 31, 2013 
Three  months 
October 31, 2012 
Three months ended July 
31, 2012 
Three  months 
April 30, 2012
ended
ended
ended
ended
$1,347
1,648
1,418
12,085
5,187
12,123
7,400
4,977
$0.01
0.01
0.01
0.07
0.03
0.08
0.05
0.03
$23
158
(66)
3,009
2,311
5,460
4,042
2,348
Quarterly  results  will  vary  in  accordance  with  the  Company’s  exploration,  development  and  financing  activities.  
Currently, exploration and evaluation expenses, share-based payment expenses and, to a lesser extent exploration 
and  evaluation  asset  write-offs  typically  have  the  most  significant  impact  on  the  Company’s  quarterly  results, 
followed by general and administrative expenses (which include exploration and evaluation expenses).  During the 
year  ended  April  30,  2013,  exploration  and  evaluation  expenses,  share-based  payment  expense,  the  write-off  of 
exploration and evaluation assets and finance expense had the most significant impact on the Company’s loss each 
quarter.
As at April 30, 2013, management determined that the technical feasibility and commercial viability of the Renard 
Diamond Project had been established and accordingly, the Company reclassified capitalized costs associated with 
the Renard Diamond Project from Exploration and Evaluation Assets to Mineral Properties within Property, Plant 
and Equipment.  Consequently, the Company’s exploration and evaluation expenses and its quarterly results for the 
Current Period are much less than in the Comparative Period.
During the Current Quarter, the Company’s loss was $1.3 million as compared to a loss of $5.2 million for the three 
months ended January 31, 2013.  For the three months ended January 31, 2013, the net loss was significantly higher 
as  compared  to  the  Current  Quarter  because  the  Company  spent  more  on  exploration  and  evaluation  expenses 
(Current  Quarter  -  $23,000;  Comparative  Quarter  -  $2.3  million).    After  adjusting  for  exploration  expenses, 
operating expenses in the Current Quarter totaled $1.3 million as compared to operating expenses of $1.8 million in 
the Comparative Quarter, a decrease of about 28%.
The  Company’s  cash  flow  is  affected  by  the  seasonality  of  the  exploration  business,  while  general  and 
administrative expenses are typically incurred more evenly throughout the year.
Share-based  payments  expense  varies,  and  is  dependent  upon  the  amount,  timing,  vesting  schedules  and  the 
estimated fair value of the stock options granted (see “Critical Accounting Estimates” below for details on the key 
assumptions  used).    The  Company  typically  grants  stock  options  at  least  annually  and  typically  following  the 
Company’s  Annual  General  Meeting  (“AGM”),  which  is  usually  held  in  the  fall.  The  Company  granted  stock
13
options to directors, officers and employees following the AGM held on September 11, 2012. These options vested 
immediately on the grant date. Consequently, share-based payment expense was higher in the second quarter ending 
October 31, 2012.  The Company did not grant any stock options following the AGM held on October 23, 2013.
The Company’s activities in the Current Period were focused on engineering and permitting activities for the Renard 
Diamond  Project  and  the  Renard  Mine  Road  construction.  In  addition,  the  Company  continued  to  work  with  an 
independent financial advisor and legal counsel with specific expertise in project finance structuring with respect to 
financing the Renard Diamond Project.  The Company may also pursue corporate development opportunities in the 
context of the Renard financing strategy, and may incur professional fees as a result.
RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES 
The  Company’s  securities  should  be  considered  a  highly  speculative  investment  and  investors  should  carefully 
consider all of the information disclosed in the Company’s regulatory filings prior to making an investment in the 
Company, including the risk factors discussed in the Company’s AIF dated July 25, 2013 and in the Company’s 
Annual  MD&A  dated  July  25,  2013,  both  of  which  are  available  under  the  Company’s  profile  on  SEDAR  at 
www.sedar.com.    The  risks  described  in  the  AIF,  Annual  MD&A  and  in  other  documents  forming  part  of  the 
Company’s  disclosure  record  are  not  the  only  risks  facing  the  Company.  Additional  risks  and  uncertainties  not 
currently  known  to  the  Company,  or  that  the  Company  currently  deems  immaterial,  may  also  materially  and 
adversely  affect  its  business.  A  brief  analysis  of  the  most  significant  risks  faced  by  the  Company  can  be  found 
below.
Going Concern and Insolvency Risk 
The Company’s condensed interim consolidated financial statements for the periods ended January 31, 2014 and 
2013 and the consolidated financial statements for the years ended April 30, 2013 and 2012 have been prepared on a 
going concern basis, which assumes that the Company will be able to realize its assets and discharge its liabilities in 
the normal course of business as they come due into the foreseeable future. The Company does not generate any 
regular cash inflows from its operating activities. The Company manages its liquidity risk by forecasting cash flow 
requirements for its planned exploration and corporate activities and anticipating investing and financing activities. 
Failure  to  realize  additional  funding,  as  required,  could  result  in  the  delay  or  indefinite  postponement  of  further 
exploration and development of the Company’s Renard Diamond Project.
A substantial amount of additional financing is required to further develop the Renard Diamond Project, which has 
an estimated initial capital cost of $754.0 million.  This sum does not include additional amounts which may be 
required pursuant to the contemplated terms of financing. The Company's financial resources are insufficient to meet 
the anticipated development expenditures required to advance the Renard Diamond Project to the commencement of 
commercial production and the Company will require access to additional sources of funding to further develop the 
project.
Although the Company has working capital of $9.1 million as at January 31, 2014, the Company may be required to 
delay discretionary expenditures if additional financing cannot be obtained on reasonable terms. As the Company 
does not presently have a secure source of funding to repay either the bridge facility from Diaquem which matures 
on March 28, 2014 ($10 million outstanding balance, plus interest) or the long-term debt (as at January 31, 2014 
principal owing is $89.9 million, with $69.9 million of this total borrowed for construction of the Renard Mine Road 
and  airstrip  and  $20.0  million  borrowed  for  pre-development  work  at  the  Renard  Diamond  Project  and  general 
working capital), the resulting shortfall in cash flows indicates the existence of a material uncertainty which may 
cast significant doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company has requested a 
draw of up to $10 million from the second tranche of bridge financing arranged in October 2013, which may be 
advanced solely at Diaquem’s discretion.  If approved by Diaquem, the additional funds will be used to start detailed 
engineering of the plant, for general working capital and will provide the Company with additional time to arrange 
financing for the Renard Diamond Project.  The Company’s condensed interim consolidated financial statements as 
at January 31, 2014 and 2013 do not include the adjustments that would result if the Company is unable to continue 
as a going concern.  Such adjustments could be material.  Please refer to the “Completed Financings” section below 
for details on the Company’s borrowings.  Additional information can also be found in Note 8 of the Condensed 
Interim Consolidated Financial Statements for the three and nine months ended January 31, 2014.
14
Financing for the Development of the Renard Diamond Project 
One of the Company's most significant risks is that a substantial amount of additional financing is required to further 
develop the Renard Diamond Project, which has an estimated initial capital cost of $754.0 million.  This sum does 
not include additional amounts which may be required pursuant to the contemplated terms of financing, which may 
include, but are not limited to: interest during construction, cost over-run facilities and equity commissions, fees and 
expenses.  The  Company's  financial  resources  are  insufficient  to  meet  the  anticipated  development  expenditures 
required to advance the Renard Diamond Project to the commencement of commercial production and the Company 
will  require  access  to  additional  sources  of  funding  during  2014.  The  Company's  management  is  currently 
considering  and  pursuing  various  alternatives  for  future  financing  requirements,  within  the  context  of  existing 
market  conditions.   These  alternatives  could  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  the  issuance  of  equity,  instruments 
convertible into equity, various forms of debt, the entering into off-take or forward sale agreements, the granting of 
royalties, and the execution of material transactions  (see "Activities Update - Financing Strategy - Renard Diamond 
Project” above).  Such financing would typically be sought from debt and equity capital markets.  However, there 
can  be  no  assurance  that  management  will  be  successful  in  its  efforts  to  finance  the  development  of  the  Renard 
Diamond  Project,  as  volatility  in  debt  and  equity  capital  markets  and  other  factors  may  adversely  affect  the 
Company's ability to implement a comprehensive financing plan.
Failure to obtain sufficient additional financing would likely have a materially adverse impact on the Company's 
ability  to  develop  the  Renard  Diamond  Project,  and  may  result  in  the  indefinite  postponement  of  further 
development of the project, and this could jeopardize the Company's ability to meet its contractual commitments to 
third parties.
Future Sales or Issuances of Securities and Dilution to Shareholders 
The  Company  presently  has  no  income  from  operations  and  finances  its  activities  mostly  from  the  issuance  of 
common shares, warrants and/or other securities convertible into common shares. The Company expects that it will 
issue additional securities to finance future activities, capital expenditures or the acquisition of additional assets or 
businesses,  including  the  financing  for  the  development  of  the  Renard  Diamond  Project.  The  Company  cannot 
predict the size of future issuances of securities or the effect, if any, that future issuances and sales of securities will 
have on the market price of the Company’s securities. Sales or issuances of substantial numbers of common shares 
or  warrants,  or  the  perception  that  such  sales  could  occur,  may  adversely  affect  prevailing  market  prices  of  the 
common shares or warrants and/or other securities convertible into common shares.
With any additional sale or issuance of common shares or warrants and/or other securities convertible into common 
shares, investors will suffer dilution to their voting power and the Company may experience dilution in its earnings 
per share.
Uncertainty of Mineral Resources  
The Mineral Resources for the Renard Diamond Project are prepared in accordance with NI 43-101. In this context, 
Mineral  Resources  are  estimates  and no  assurance  can  be  given  that  the  anticipated  tonnages  and grades  will be 
achieved or that the indicated level of recovery will be realized.  Mineral Reserves at the Renard Diamond Project 
have been determined to be economic ore in the context of the 2011 Feasibility Study and the Optimization Study, in 
accordance with NI 43-101.  Market fluctuations and diamond prices may render the Mineral Reserves or Mineral 
Resources uneconomic.  Moreover, short-term operating factors relating to the diamond deposits, such as the need 
for orderly development of the deposits or the processing of new or different grades of diamonds, may cause any 
mining operation to be unprofitable in any particular accounting period.  The Company’s ability to put the Renard 
Diamond  Project  into  production  will  be  dependent  upon  satisfaction  of  all  regulatory  requirements  and  the 
Company’s ability to raise the funds required to pay for the construction of the mine.
There is no certainty that expenditures made in the exploration of the Company’s mineral properties will result in 
identification  of  commercially  recoverable  quantities  of  ore  or  that  ore  reserves  will  be  mined  or  processed 
profitably. Such assurance will require completion of final comprehensive feasibility studies and, possibly, further 
associated  exploration  and  other  work  that  concludes  a  potential  mine  at  each  of  these  projects  is  likely  to  be 
economic. In addition, substantial expenditures are required to establish Mineral Reserves through drilling and to 
develop the mining and processing facilities and infrastructure at any site chosen for mining. Although substantial 
benefits may be derived from the discovery of a major diamond deposit, no assurance can be given that diamonds
15
will be discovered in sufficient quantities to justify commercial operations or that funds required for development 
can be obtained on a timely basis.
Renard Mine Road Construction 
In November and December 2012, the Company entered into two agreements (see “Activities Update – Route 167 
Extention/Renard  Mine  Road”  above  and  “Completed  Financings”  below)  whereby  the  Company  will  assume 
responsibility for the construction of the Renard Mine Road, financed by a loan from the government of Québec. In 
the context of the schedule for the development of the Renard Diamond Project the Company’s ability to use the 
Route  167  extension  for  construction  activities  is  a  risk.    As  at  January  31,  2014,  all  four  segments  had  been 
completed sufficient for construction vehicle access; a finishing layer of gravel will be required on segments “C” 
and “D” once the winter thaw is complete.
LIQUIDITY  
The Company’s working capital as at January 31, 2014 was $9.1 million (April 30, 2013 - $15.7 million). During 
the  Current  Period,  the  Company’s  cash  position  decreased  by  $12.2  million  to  $20.7  million  in  cash  and  cash 
equivalents.  Included  in  cash  and  cash  equivalents  is  $1.4  million  which  is  committed  for  use  to  construct  the 
Renard  Mine  Road  and  airstrip,  and  $10.0  million  which  must  be  spent  on  eligible  exploration  expenditures  in 
Quebec.  Although the Company has available working capital of $9.1 million as at January 31, 2014, the Company 
may be required to delay discretionary expenditures if additional financing cannot be obtained on reasonable terms. 
The Company may be able to borrow up to an additional $10 million from Diaquem, pursuant to the terms of an 
unsecured, non-revolving credit facility which was arranged on October 2, 2013 however, that facility’s maturity 
date is March 28, 2014 (see “Completed Financings” below for more details); included in current liabilities is the 
first tranche of $10 million from the Diaquem facility, which is payable, with interest, on March 28, 2014.  The 
Company has requested a three-month re-payment extension from Diaquem, to June 28, 2014, to allow additional 
time to arrange financing.  Funds from the government loan of $77 million must be used to build the Renard Mine 
Road and airstrip, and are not available for general corporate purposes.  As the Company does not presently have a 
secure source of funding to repay either the short-term or the long-term debt, the resulting shortfall in cash flows 
indicates the existence of a material uncertainty which may cast significant doubt about the Company’s ability to 
continue as a going concern. The Company’s condensed interim consolidated financial statements do not include the 
adjustments that would result if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern. 
 
A description of the Company’s most significant operating expenses during the Current Period (nine months ended 
January 31, 2014) can be found above under “Results of Operations”. During the Current Quarter, the Company’s 
investing activities used $18.6 million (Comparative Quarter - $0.1 million), due to an increase in the acquisition of 
property, plant and equipment (Comparative Period - $0.1 million) primarily related to the Renard Mine Road and 
the development of the Renard Diamond Project. In the Current Quarter, the Company received $15.0 million (net) 
from financing activities while in the Comparative Quarter the Company received $9.8 million (net) . A description 
of the Company’s financing activities can be found below.
Completed Financings 
Unsecured Debt Facility – May 3, 2012 
On May 3, 2012, the Company entered into a $20 million unsecured debt facility with the Fonds de solidarité FTQ, 
the  Fonds  régional  de  solidarité  FTQ  Nord-du-Québec,  S.E.C.  (collectively,  the  “Fonds”)  and  IQ,  through  its 
indirect wholly-owned subsidiary Diaquem (collectively with the Fonds, the “Lenders”). The proceeds of the debt 
facility must be used to finance pre-development work at the Renard Diamond Project. The loan has been provided 
75%  by  the  Fonds  and  25%  by  Diaquem.    In  connection  with  the  loan,  the  Company’s  subsidiary  granted  the 
Lenders a 1% contingent secured royalty interest in the Renard Diamond Project which is only triggered upon the 
occurrence of certain specified events, such as a payment default or a default following a change of control of the 
Company,  in  each  case  capped  at  an  amount  equal  to  the  aggregate  value  of  the  principal  and  interest  then 
outstanding  on  the  loan.  The  loan  agreement  contains  additional  representations,  covenants  and  commitments 
customary for a facility of this nature.
The loan has been recognized initially at $17.2 million, net of $2.9 million transaction costs incurred, including the 
fair value of fifteen (15) million share purchase warrants granted. The contractual interest rate on the loan is 12% 
per  annum,  payable  100%  in  cash  or  50%  in  cash  and  50%  in  the  Company’s  common  shares  (the  number  of 
common shares to be issued is calculated using the five-day volume weighted average share price preceeding the
16
interest payment date), at the Company’s option, prior to commencement of commercial production, and 100% in 
cash thereafter. The calculated effective interest rate of this loan is 15.1%. Principal is to be repaid in equal monthly 
instalments commencing approximately one month following the date of commercial production at Renard, but not 
before May 3, 2016 and not later than May 3, 2017. The final maturity date is May 3, 2021.   
A summary of the interest payments made to date is as follows:
Interest Payment Date 
November 1, 2012 
May 1, 2013 
November 1, 2013
Cash Paid 
$600,001 
$600,001 
$600,001
Interest Payment 
Shares Issued 
987,392 
1,005,934 
651,392
Share Price at 
time of Issuance
$0.61 
$0.60 
$0.92
Renard Mine Road Loan from the Ministère des Finances et de l’Économie- December 6, 2012 
On December 6, 2012 the Company’s subsidiary, SDCI, entered into the Financing Agreement with the Ministère 
des Finances et de l’Économie (“MFE”) whereby SDCI can borrow up to $84.7 million for the construction of the 
Renard Mine Road. The credit facility (“Renard Mine Road Loan”) consists of two tranches.  The first tranche, of up 
to $77 million (“Loan A”) is to complete the road construction work, has an annual interest rate of 3.35% percent, a 
term  of  15  years,  and  repayment  of  both  principal  and  interest  begins  48  months  following  first  drawdown.  
Repayment can be deferred for up to 2 years due to any delay in the attainment of commercial production at Renard 
past July 1, 2016.  The second tranche is an overrun facility of up to $7.7 million (“Loan B”), at an annual interest 
rate of 6.3% percent, with repayments concurrent with Loan A.  Both Loans A and B are unsecured, subordinated, 
and pre-payable without penalty.  SDCI is not required to use the full amount of the Loans in the event construction 
costs are less than the amount of the Loans, and interest will only be calculated on the basis of total drawdowns 
requested by SDCI.  SDCI undertakes to complete construction of the Renard Mine Road no later than June 30, 
2015, subject to certain terms, including terms of the Framework Agreement.
The terms of the Financing Agreement were amended in October 2013 to permit SDCI to use part of the $77 million 
Loan A to construct an airstrip for the Renard Diamond Project.  As consideration for this amendment, the $7.7 
million  over-run  facility  (Loan  B)  was  terminated.    In  December  2013,  SDCI  drew  $8.5  million  from  Loan  A, 
increasing the total outstanding principal to $69.9 million.
Credit Facility with Diaquem Inc. – October 2, 2013 
On October 2, 2013, the Company entered into an unsecured, non-revolving bridge facility of up to $20 million with 
Diaquem.  Pursuant to the terms of this credit facility, Diaquem agreed to loan up to an aggregate amount of $20 
million to the Company in two tranches, an initial tranche of $10 million (received) and a second tranche of up to 
$10 million.  Each tranche bears interest at 12% per annum and is repayable on March 28, 2014.  The Company has 
requested a three-month repayment extension from Diaquem for the $10 million borrowed pursuant to the bridge 
facility to allow the Company to arrange for additional financing to re-pay the amounts borrowed and for general 
working capital.  In addition, the Company is in discussions with Diaquem regarding a draw of up to $10 million 
from the second tranche of the bridge facility. Diaqeum has the discretion to determine whether to fund the second 
tranche and, if so, the specific amount. A commitment fee equal to 1% of the amount funded under each tranche is 
payable by the Company.  In addition to the 1% commitment fee paid upon receipt of the first tranche, the Company 
incurred an additional $185,000 in transaction costs. The aggregate transaction costs are recorded against the loan 
balance and are being amortised over the life of the loan.
The Company will have the right to satisfy up to 50% of the interest payable on the aggregate of the amounts loaned 
to  it  pursuant to  the facility  by  issuing  common  shares of  the  Company  at  an  issue  price of 95%  of  the volume 
weighted  average  price  of  such  shares  as  of  the  interest  payment  date,  while  the  remaining  portion  of  interest 
payable on such amounts will be paid in cash. The credit agreement contains additional representations, covenants, 
commitments and funding conditions customary for a facility of this nature. 
 
Flow-through Common Share Financing – December 3, 2013 
On December 3, 2013, the Company closed a bought deal private placement financing of flow-through common 
shares (“Flow-Through Shares”), for aggregate gross proceeds of $10,051,000 (the “Offering”).  Dundee Securities 
Ltd.,  on  behalf  of  a  syndicate  of  underwriters,  including  Scotia  Captial  Inc.  and  Desjardins  Securities  Inc. 
(collectively,  the  “Underwriters”),  sold  10,580,000  Flow-Through  Shares,  including  1,380,000  Flow-Through
17
Shares issued pursuant to the exercise in full of the over-allotment option by the Underwriters at an issue price of 
$0.95 per Flow-Through Share. The Flow-Through Shares issued pursuant to the Offering will be subject to a four-
month hold period expiring April 4, 2014.   
 
In  connection  with  the  Offering,  the  Underwriters  received  a  cash  fee  equal  to  5%  of  the  gross  proceeds  of  the 
Offering and 529,000 compensation warrants equal to 5% of the number of Flow-Through Shares sold pursuant to 
the Offering, each compensation warrant exercisable to purchase one common share of Stornoway at a price per 
share of $0.95 for a period of 24 months following closing. 
 
Stornoway  has  agreed  that  expenditures  incurred  with  proceeds  from  the  Offering  will  constitute  Canadian 
exploration expenses  (as defined in the Income Tax Act), will be incurred prior to December 31, 2014 and will be 
renounced to the subscribers.  Proceeds from this financing will be used for a resource expansion and conversion 
program targeted principally on Renard 2 at the Company’s material mineral project, the Renard Diamond Project. 
 
Commitments 
The Company is committed to minimum future operating lease payments for its office premises and minimum future 
principal and interest payments for debt, as follows:
Renard mine 
road debt 
facility - 
principal  and 
interest 
payments
Unsecured 
debt 
facility -  
principal  
and 
interest 
payments 
$   2,400* 
2,400* 
5,588 
5,709 
5,244 
10,754 
$    32,095
Diaquem 
credit 
facility 
principal and 
interest 
$     10,582 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
$     10,582
Operating 
lease 
payments 
$         462 
331 
229 
138 
98 
- 
$    1,258
Commitment 
fee 
$        1,750 
292 
- 
- 
- 
- 
$        2,042
Period ending 
Total 
January 31, 2015 
$               -  $         15,194 
3,022 
January 31, 2016 
11,264 
January 31, 2017 
11,293 
January 31, 2018 
10,788 
January 31, 2019 
82,878 
Thereafter 
$      134,441 
Total 
* The $2.4 million interest payment is payable 100% in cash or 50% in cash and 50% in the Company’s common shares, at the Company’s 
option, prior to commencement of commercial production. 
 
Commitment Fee 
The  Company  has  a $100  million  credit  support  agreement  with  IQ  to fund  a portion  of future  construction  and 
development  costs  at  the  Renard  Diamond  Project,  under  which  commitment  fee  payments  equal  to  1.75%  per 
annum are payable by the Company. The obligations of IQ will terminate on the earlier to occur of: (a) the date on 
which the Company notifies IQ in writing that the credit support agreement is terminated; (b) the date of the initial 
borrowing under the IQ commitment; and (c) April 1, 2015. It is presently contemplated that the IQ commitment 
will form part of the senior debt financing if arranged.
- 
5,447 
5,447 
5,447 
72,124 
$    88,465
Impact and Benefits Agreement 
In March 2012, the Company entered into the Mecheshoo Agreement  for the Renard Diamond Project with the Cree 
Nation of Mistissini and the Grand Council of the Crees (Eeyou Istchee) / Cree Regional Authority. The Mecheshoo 
Agreement is a binding agreement that will govern the long-term working relationship between the Company and 
the Cree parties during all phases of the Renard Diamond Project. It provides for training, employment and business 
opportunities for the Cree during project construction, operation and closure, and sets out the principles of social, 
cultural and environmental respect under which the project will be managed. The Mecheshoo Agreement includes a 
mechanism by which the Cree parties will benefit financially from the success of the project on a long term basis, 
consistent with the mining industry’s best practices for engagement with First Nations communities.
18
Royalty 
The Renard Diamond Project is subject to a 2% royalty interest on diamond production (calculated as 2% of the 
actual  gross  selling  price  in  Canadian  Dollars,  minus  the  lesser  of:  3%  marketing  costs  and  the  actual  diamond 
selling costs) and a 2% NSR on other mineral production.  
Financial Guarantee- Closure Plan 
The estimated financial guarantee required for closure of the Renard Diamond Project (once built and in operations) 
is $15 million.  In August 2013, an Order in Council passed by the Québec government came into effect which 
requires  companies  whose rehabilitation  plans  were  approved  before August  22, 2013  to  comply  with  new  rules 
regarding the financial guarantee.  These new rules will require the Company to provide the first instalment within 
one  year  of  the  Order  in  Council  taking  effect  and  the  remaining  instalments  within  three  years.    Based  on  this 
change in legislation, the Company expects that it will need to provide a financial guarantee through the posting of 
collateral or by payment in cash of $7.5 million in August 2014 and $3.25 million in each of August 2015 and 2016, 
although the Company has not yet received formal notification of this requirement.  The Company’s Closure Plan 
for the Renard Diamond Project was approved in December 2012. 
CAPITAL RESOURCES 
The  Company  has  no  history  of  profitable  operations  and  its  present  business  is  at  the  development  stage.  The 
Company has no source of operating cash flow and no assurance that additional funding will be available to it for 
further exploration and development of its projects when required. As such, the Company is subject to many risks 
common to such enterprises, including under-capitalization, cash shortages and limitations with respect to personnel, 
financial  and  other  resources  and  the  lack  of  revenues  (see  “Risks  and  Uncertainties”  above  for  more  details). 
Although the Company has been successful in the past in obtaining financing through the sale of equity securities, 
proceeds from debt facilities or joint venture arrangements, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able 
to  obtain  adequate  financing  in  the  future  or  that  the  terms  of  such  financing  will  be  favorable.  Such  means  of 
financing typically result in dilution of a shareholder's interest, either directly as a result of issuing equity securities 
or indirectly through dilution of an interest in one of the Company's projects. Failure to obtain additional financing 
or failure to meet the loan covenants in the outstanding debt facility with the Fonds and Diaquem or the Renard 
Mine Road debt facility could result in the delay or indefinite postponement of further exploration and development 
of its properties and ultimately in the loss of its properties, including the Renard Diamond Project.   
 
The  Company  incurs  finance  expense  from  the  following  financing  arrangements,  which  are  described  above  in 
“Completed Financings”:
a  $20  million  unsecured  debt  facility  to  be  used  for  pre-development  work  at  the  Renard 
Diamond Project; 
an  unsecured,  non-revolving  bridge  facility  of  up  to  $20  million  to  be  used  for  general 
corporate purposes, including financing expenses; 
a  credit  facility  to  pay  for  the  construction  cost  of  the  Renard  Mine  Road  and  airstrip, 
estimated to be approximately $77 million; 
a $100 million credit support agreement with IQ to fund a portion of future construction and 
development costs at the Renard Diamond Project.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
In addition, the Company incurs costs related to its TSX listing.  The Company also has leases for office space with 
minimum commitments for the five year period between 2014 and 2018 totalling $1.3 million. The Company may 
be able to reduce some of this liability through the sub-lease of excess space. 
 
While the Company has sufficient financial resources to keep its principal landholdings and the majority of its non-
material landholdings in good standing through 2014 and beyond, its current financial resources are insufficient to 
meet the anticipated working capital requirements of the Company in 2014 (see “Going Concern and Insolvency 
Risk” above) without reducing discretionary costs or arranging financing.  If additional funds can be draw from the 
second tranche of the bridge facility with Diaquem and an extension to the maturity date of that facility is granted, 
that will provide additional time for the Company to arrange financing during 2014. 
 
The Company’s management regularly reviews its cash position against future plans and makes decisions regarding 
these plans accordingly and within the context of existing market conditions. Funds from recent financings are being 
used to construct the Renard Mine Road and an airstrip at the Renard Diamond Project, for pre-development work 
related to the Renard Diamond Project (see “Activities Update– Renard Diamond Project, Québec” and “Completed
19
Financings” above) and for general working capital, including financing activities.  Funds from the flow-through 
financing completed in December 2013 will be used for a resource expansion drill program, primarily on the Renard 
2 kimberlite body. 
  
Several factors will influence the Company's cash requirements in the near future. At the present time, financing 
discussions  with  lenders  and  prospective  investors  are  ongoing.  The  timely  completion  of  these  financing 
discussions is the principal driver on the Renard Project’s development schedule. Any delay in the completion of 
financing will require a reassessment of the Company’s schedule of capital expenditures. 
Despite a positive economic result for the 2011 Feasibility Study and the Optimization Study, the Company’s share 
price  decreased  significantly  following  the  release  of  the  2011  Feasibility  Study  and  remains  under  pressure  on 
concerns around how the Company will finance a minimum capital expenditure of $754.0 million, which is much 
greater  than  the  Company’s  market  capitalization.  The  initial  capital  cost  of  $754.0  million  doesn’t  include 
additional amounts which may be required pursuant to the contemplated terms of financing, such as interest during 
construction,  a  cost  overrun  facility  and  equity  commissions  and  expenses.    The  Company’s  management  is 
currently  considering  and  pursuing  various  alternatives  for  future  financing  requirements,  within  the  context  of 
existing  market  conditions.  These  alternatives  could  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  the  issuance  of  equity, 
instruments convertible into equity, various forms of debt, the entering into of off-take or forward sale agreements, 
the granting of royalties, and the execution of material transactions, including potentially significant acquisitions or 
significant dispositions of assets.  There can be no assurance that the Company’s management will be successful in 
its efforts to finance the development of the Renard Diamond Project.   
Credit Facilities 
Diaquem Credit Facility – October 2013 
In October 2013, the Company entered into an unsecured, non-revolving bridge facility of up to $20 million ($10 
million  drawn)  which  may  be  used  for  ongoing  operations,  general  working  capital  and  financing  activities  (see 
“Completed Financings – Credit Facility with Diaquem, Inc.” above).  
Credit Support Agreement – April 2011 
During  the  year  ended  April  30,  2011,  as  part  of  the  Acquisition  agreement  described  under  “Significant 
Shareholder  –  Diaquem  Inc.”  above,  the  Company  and  IQ  entered  into  a  credit  support  agreement  (the  “Credit 
Support Agreement”), pursuant to which IQ committed to provide financing in favour of Stornoway in a minimum 
amount of $100 million to fund a portion of the construction and development costs of the Renard Diamond Project 
(the “IQ Commitment”). 
The  full  text  of  the  Credit  Support  Agreement,  which  was  filed  on  SEDAR  in  April  2011,  is  available  at 
www.sedar.com.
As consideration for the IQ Commitment, Stornoway has agreed to pay IQ, for the period from and including the 
date of the Credit Support Agreement up to the date the Credit Support Agreement is terminated, a non-refundable 
commitment fee equal to 1.75% per annum computed daily on the amount of $100 million, payable quarterly in 
arrears on the first business day of the following quarter.
ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURE  
Additional  disclosure  concerning  Stornoway’s  general  and  administrative  expenses,  exploration  expenses  and 
property, plant and equipment additions is provided in the Company’s consolidated statements of loss and deficit 
and  the  notes  to  the  audited  consolidated  financial  statements  for  April  30,  2013  and  April  30,  2012  and  the 
condensed  interim  consolidated  financial  statements  for  the  three  and  nine  months  ended  January  31,  2014  and 
2013.  The Company’s most recent AIF, dated July 25, 2013, also provides detailed information about the Company.  
These documents  are available  on Stornoway’s  website  at www.stornowaydiamonds.com  or  on  its SEDAR  Page 
Site accessed through www.sedar.com. 
  
OUTSTANDING SHARE CAPITAL   
Stornoway’s authorized capital is an unlimited number of common shares and an unlimited number of non-voting 
convertible shares without par value.
20
$ 0.40
$ 0.40 - $ 19.44 
$ 2.24 - $ 5.36 
$ 1.04 - $ 2.50 
  $ 0.71 - $1.04 
  $ 0.51 - $0.77
out period imposed.
284,375 
545,275 
993,125 
1,040,000 
4,510,000 
500,000 
7,872,775
$ 0.40 
$ 1.17 
$ 2.39 
$ 1.15 
$ 0.81 
$0.62 
$1.05
2013 (1)
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018
Contractual Life 
0.24 years 
0.69 years 
1.52 years 
2.77 years 
3.40 years 
4.28 years 
2.84 years
(1)  The Company’s Plan permits the expiry date of stock options to be extended automatically for ten trading days following the end of a black-
As at March 3, 2014, the following warrants are outstanding:
Number of 
Warrants  
7,500,000 
2,548,975 
529,000 
15,000,000 
25,577,975
Exercise Price 
(per warrant)
$ 1.20 
$ 1.20 
$ 0.95 
$ 1.21 
$ 1.20
Expiry Date 
March 31, 2014 
April 21, 2014 
December 5, 2015 
May 3, 2017
As at March 3, 2014, there were 152,730,583 common shares and 22,543,918 non-voting convertible shares issued 
and  outstanding. The  non-voting  convertible  shares have no  expiry date  and no  restrictions  except  that  Diaquem 
cannot hold more than 25% of Stornoway’s voting, common shares.  
 
Stock Option Plan 
The  maximum  number  of  common  shares  issuable  pursuant  to  the  Company’s  Stock  Option  Plan  is  10%  of  the 
issued and outstanding common shares and non-voting convertible shares. 
As at March 3, 2014, the following stock options are outstanding: 
Weighted Average 
Exercise Price  
(per option)
Year of 
Expiry  Weighted Average Remaining
Range of Exercise 
Prices (per option)
Number of Options
Outstanding
The $149,176 fair value of warrants issued on December 3, 2013 was estimated at $0.282 per warrant on the date of 
grant using the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model using the following assumptions: a risk-free interest rate of 
1.07%, an expected stock price volatility of 73.62% and an expected warrant life of 2 years. 
 
TRANSACTIONS WITH RELATED PARTIES 
 
Key Management Personnel Remuneration (expressed in thousands of Canadian dollars)  
Key  management  includes  the  Company’s  directors  and  all  executive  officers.  Compensation  awarded  to  key 
management includes:
Salaries and other short-
term employee benefits(i)
Director’s fees 
Share-based payments
$ 
 
 
$
Three-month period
January 31, 
2014
January 31, 
2013
Nine-month period
January 31, 
2014
January 31, 
2013
407  $ 
43 
 
 
˗ 
450  $
416  $
 
28 
 
47 
491  $
111 
33
1,386  $ 
 
 
1,530  $
1,248 
93 
1,198 
2,539
(i)Certain salaries for key management personnel are allocated to exploration and evaluation expense.
21
Transactions with related parties  
 During the three and nine months ended January 31, 2014, the Company paid or accrued legal fees of $417,000 and 
$775,000  respectively,  to  Norton  Rose  Fulbright  Canada  LLP  (“NRC”)  (January  31,  2013  -  $400,000  and  $1.4 
million). On February 13, 2012, a partner at NRC was appointed as the Company’s Corporate Secretary. 
 
Amounts due to related parties are unsecured. All transactions with related parties have occurred in the normal course 
of the Company’s operations and are based on standard commercial terms. 
 
 
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES AND JUDGMENTS  
The  preparation  of  the  Company’s  condensed  interim  consolidated  financial  statements  under  IFRS  requires 
management to make estimates and assumptions about future events and apply judgements that affect the reported 
amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, the reported amounts of expenses during the 
reporting period  and  the  related  disclosures.  These  assumptions,  estimates  and  judgments  are based on historical 
experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant at the time the consolidated 
financial statements are prepared. On a regular basis, management reviews the Company’s accounting policies and 
the related assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that the financial statements are presented fairly and in 
accordance with IFRS and IFRIC Interpretations. Critical accounting estimates and judgments are those that have a 
significant risk of having material impact on the consolidated financial statements. The annual audited consolidated 
financial statements for the years ended April 30, 2013 and 2012 and the condensed, interim consolidated financial 
statements for the three and nine months ended January 31, 2014 and 2013 include estimates and judgments which, 
by  their  nature,  are  uncertain.  The  impacts  of  such  estimates  and  judgments  are  pervasive  throughout  the 
consolidated financial statements, and may require accounting adjustments based on future occurrences. Revisions 
to accounting estimates are recognized in the period in which the estimate is revised and the revision affects both 
current and future periods. 
Significant estimates and judgments about the future and other sources of estimation uncertainty that management 
has made at period-end that could result in a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities, in 
the event that actual results differ from assumptions made, relate to the following:

 
 
 
 

Assessment of the existence of impairment indicators with respect to exploration and evaluation 
assets and property, plant and equipment; 
Estimates used in determining asset retirement obligations; 
The going concern assumption; 
Mineral reserves and resources; 
Commitments and contingencies; 
Estimates of benefits from government assistance.
The  details  of  significant  assumptions  and  estimates  can  be  found  in  the  related  financial  statement  notes  where 
management had to exercise its judgment.  
A description of all significant accounting policies can be found in Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements of 
the Company for the years ended April 30, 2013 and 2012. These accounting policies are based on IFRS issued and 
outstanding as at April 30, 2013. There are no new IFRSs or IFRS Interpretations Committee (“IFRIC”) standards 
that are effective for the interim period ended January 31, 2014 that would be expected to have a material impact on 
the Company.   
Impairment of long-lived assets 
The Company’s management reviews the carrying value of the Company’s long-lived assets when there are events 
or  circumstances  that  may  indicate  impairment.  IAS  36  Impairment  of  Assets  uses  a  one-step  approach  for  both 
identifying and measuring impairments, which is based on comparing the carrying value to the recoverable amount. 
The recoverable amount is the higher of value in use, which is based on discounted cash flows, and fair value less 
selling costs (the amount obtainable from the sale of an asset or a cash-generating unit (“CGU”) in an arm’s length 
transaction  between  knowledgeable,  willing  parties,  less  the  costs  of  disposal).    Where  there  is  no  binding  sale 
agreement  or  active  market,  fair  value  less  costs  to  sell  is  based  on  the  best  information  available  to  reflect  the
22
amount that the Company could receive for the CGU in an arm’s length transaction and based on the net present 
value (“NPV”) of expected cash flow from the CGU.  
 
Property, plant and equipment includes capitalized acquisition costs for the Renard Diamond Project, which is the 
Company’s most significant long-lived asset. The carrying value of the Renard Project CGU as at January 31, 2014 
is  calculated  to be $216.7  million, out of  total  assets of $291.1  million.  As  at  January  31, 2014,  the  Company’s 
market capitalization was $133.2 million. In respect of long-lived assets recorded in accordance with IAS 16, this 
significant difference requires management to make an assessment of impairment.      
 
In making an assessment of the potential impairment of the Company's long-lived assets, management has used the 
fair  value  less  costs  to  sell  (“FVLCS”)  model  to  estimate  fair  value  based  on  a  discounted  cash  flow  technique 
generated  from  a  detailed  life  of  mine  financial  model.    The  significant  assumptions  which  affect  the  financial 
analysis include: the diamond selling price, the crude oil price and diesel price, the price of electricity, the price of 
liquefied natural gas (“LNG”), the exchange rate and the escalation rate. The project returns are most sensitive to the 
diamond price assumption, followed by capital costs and operating costs. These estimates are subject to certain risks 
and  uncertainties  that  may  affect  the  determination  of  the  recoverability  of  the  Company’s  long-lived  assets. 
Although  management  has  made  its  best  estimates  of  potential  impairment,  the  interpretation  of  these  factors  is 
subjective and will not necessarily result in precise determinations.  Should an underlying assumption change, the 
resulting estimates could change by a material amount.   
 
As  part  of  the  impairment  testing  undertaken  as  of  January  31,  2014,  management  calculated  FVLCS  using  the 
optimization  study  results  announced  in  January  2013,  with  updates  to  incorporate  the  economic  impact  of  the 
Liquified Natural  Gas (“LNG”) feasibility  study  announced  in October  2013  and  using  the  estimated  cash  flows 
based  upon  the  Company’s  long-term  business  plan  (“LTBP”).    The  LTBP  includes  cash  flows  expected  to  be 
realized from the extraction, processing and sale of recovered diamonds from inferred mineral resources that do not 
qualify for  inclusion  in  mineral  reserves. For  the  impairment  testing  at  January 31, 2014, other key  assumptions 
from  the  impairment  testing  undertaken  at  the  April  30,  2013  year-end  remained  the  same.    These  assumptions 
included the following: US$435 million of the capital cost would be funded with senior secured loans, a base case 
diamond price of US$182/carat and a 3% per annum diamond price escalation until December 31, 2025.  
For the purposes of the impairment testing as at January 31, 2014, the weighted average cost of capital for market 
participants was estimated to be 10.5% using the capital asset pricing method.  This discount rate reflects several 
factors, including the beneficial impact from the project being situated in Quebec and year-round road access.  As 
part of  the  impairment  testing,  management  performed  a  sensitivity  analysis  using various discount  rates.    As  at 
January 31, 2014, discount rates above 15% resulted in an estimated FVLCS marginally below the carrying value of 
the Renard CGU.  Based on the estimated FVLCS and sensitivity analysis performed, management concluded that 
the Renard Diamond Project was not impaired as at January 31, 2014. 
Asset retirement obligations 
The Company has recorded an asset retirement obligation, which reflects the present value of the estimated amount 
of  undiscounted  cash  flow  required  to  satisfy  the  asset  retirement  obligation  in  respect  of  the  Renard  Diamond 
Project in Québec. The primary component of this obligation is the removal of equipment currently used at the site 
as  well  as  costs  associated  with  restoration  and  re-vegetation  of  the  property.  The  Company  reviews  the  asset 
retirement obligation at each balance sheet date for changes in the estimated amount of the obligation, timing of 
future cash flows and changes in the discount rate. The pre-tax market based discount rate at which the estimated 
cash flows have been discounted to arrive at the obligation is 1.10%. The undiscounted amount of inflation-adjusted 
estimated future cash flows is $1.57 million. During the period ended January 31, 2104, the Company recorded a 
change in estimate of ($15,000) to reflect updated cost estimates for reclamation. 
 
Going Concern 
Please refer to “Risks and Uncertainties / Going Concern and Insolvency Risk” above. 
 
Mineral Reserves and Resources  
The Company’s mineral reserves and resources are estimates.  Estimating mineral reserves is a complex process 
involving  many  variables  and  assumptions,  including  many  factors  beyond  the  Company’s  control.  Reserve 
estimation is a subjective process, and the accuracy of any reserve estimate is a function of the quality of available 
data  and  engineering  and  of  geological  interpretation  and  judgment.  This  process  involves  variables  such  as
23
geological data on the size, shape and internal geology of the kimberlite body, production cost estimates and the 
future price of diamonds. Mineral reserves and resources have been estimated by the Company’s Qualified Persons 
in  accordance  with  definitions  and  guidelines  adopted  by  the  Canadian  Institute  of  Mining,  Metallurgy  and 
Petroleum (CIM “Standards on Mineral Resources and Reserves).  Results from drilling, testing and production, as 
well as material changes in commodity prices subsequent to the date of an estimate, may justify revision of such 
estimate.  
 
Variations in anticipated tonnages, grades or recovery levels could have a significant effect on the discounted cash 
flows which are used to test for impairment (see “Impairment of long-lived assets” above). 
 
Commitments and Contingencies 
Due to nature of the Company’s operations, various legal and tax matters are outstanding from time to time. In the 
event that management’s estimate of the future resolution of these matters changes, the Company will recognize the 
effects of the changes in its consolidated financial statements on the date such changes occur. 
 
Estimates of Benefits from Government Assistance 
Loans are initially recognized at the amount expected to be received, less, when material, a discount to reduce the 
loans to fair value. Subsequently, they are measured at amortized cost using the effective interest rate method, less 
any provision for impairment. Management’s estimate of the fair value of loans related to the Renard Mine Road 
Debt Facility is calculated using a discount rate of 10% that is applied over the repayment period of the loan. The 
discount rate reflects several factors, including the WACC of the Company on recognition of the loan.  This estimate 
affects the amount of government assistance recorded as a deduction to the Renard Mine Road construction costs 
and related capitalized interest. 
 
 
NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS AND INTERPRETATIONS 
The  accounting  policies  followed  by  the  Company  in  preparing  the  condensed  interim  consolidated  financial 
statements as at January 31, 2013 and 2012 are consistent with the accounting policies used by the Company, as set 
out in the audited consolidated financial statements for the years ended April 30, 2013 and 2012.   
New Accounting Standards and Interpretations  
The International Accounting Standards Board has issued several new standards which have not yet been adopted by 
the Company. Each of the new standards is effective for annual periods beginning on or after January 1, 2014 with 
early  adoption  permitted,  except  for  IFRS  9.  In  July  2013,  the  IASB  tentatively  decided  to  defer  the  mandatory 
effective date of IFRS 9.  The IASB agreed that the mandatory effective date should no longer be annual periods 
beginning  on  or  after  January  1,  2015  but  rather  be  left  open  pending  the  finalization  of  the  impairment  and 
classification and measurement requirements.
The following is a brief summary of the new standards: 
IAS 32 – Financial instruments – presentation 
This standard has been amended to clarify requirements for offsetting of financial assets and financial liabilities. The 
extent of the impact of adoption of IAS 32 has not yet been determined by the Company. 
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments – classification and measurement  
This is the first part of a new standard on classification and measurement of financial assets that will replace IAS 39, 
“Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement”. IFRS 9 has two measurement categories: amortized cost 
and fair value. All equity instruments are measured at fair value. A debt instrument is recorded at amortized cost 
only if the entity is holding it to collect contractual cash flows and the cash flows represent principal and interest. 
Otherwise it is measured at fair value with changes in fair value through profit or loss. In addition, this new standard 
has  been  updated  to  include  guidance  on  financial  liabilities  and  derecognition  of  financial  instruments.  This 
standard is effective for years beginning on or after January 1, 2015. The extent of the impact of adoption of IFRS 9 
has not yet been determined.
24
IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement 
IFRS 13, Fair Value Measurement, is a comprehensive standard for fair value measurement and disclosure for use 
across all IFRS standards. The new standard clarifies that fair value is the price that would be received to sell an 
asset, or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants, at the measurement date. 
Under existing IFRS, guidance on measuring and disclosing fair value is dispersed among the specific standards 
requiring fair value measurements and does not always reflect a clear measurement basis or consistent disclosures.  
The  Company  does  not  anticipate  the  adoption  of  IFRS  13  will  have  a  significant  impact  on  its  consolidated 
financial statements. 
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT  
The Company’s financial instruments consist of cash and cash equivalents, short-term deposits, other receivables, 
investments,  payables,  accrued  liabilities  and  provisions,  amounts  due  to  related  parties  and  long-term  debt.  The 
carrying value of cash and cash equivalents, short-term deposits, other receivables, payables, accrued liabilities and 
provisions  and  amounts due to  related parties  approximate  their  fair values  due  to  their  immediate  or  short-term 
maturity. Investments are recorded at fair value based on the quoted market prices in active markets at the balance 
sheet date, which is consistent with Level 1 of the fair value hierarchy. Long-term debt is recorded initially at fair 
value net of any directly attributable transaction costs. Following initial recognition, long-term debt is measured at 
amortized cost using the effective interest method.
The Company is exposed to a variety of financial risks by virtue of its activities, including credit risk, interest rate 
risk, liquidity risk and insolvency risk. The Company’s financial risks are consistent with those set out in the audited 
consolidated financial statements for the years ended April 30, 2013 and 2012.  
 
DISCLOSURE CONTROLS 
The Company’s disclosure controls and procedures are designed to provide reasonable assurance that all relevant 
information is communicated to senior management, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. 
An evaluation of the effectiveness of the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures, as defined under the rules 
of  the  Canadian  Securities  Administration,  was  conducted  as  of  April  30,  2013  under  the  supervision  of  the 
Company’s Disclosure Committee and with the participation of management. Based on the results of that evaluation, 
the  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  Chief  Financial  Officer  concluded  that  the  Company’s  disclosure  controls  and 
procedures were effective as of the end of the period covered by this report in providing reasonable assurance that 
the information required to be disclosed in the Company’s annual filings, interim filings or other reports filed or 
submitted  by  it  under  securities  legislation  is  recorded,  processed,  summarized  and  reported  as  required  by 
applicable securities legislation.   
Since the April 30, 2013 evaluation, there have been no adverse changes to the Company’s disclosure controls and 
procedures and they continue to remain effective.     
 
INTERNAL CONTROLS OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING 
Internal controls over financial reporting are designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of the 
Company’s financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements in compliance with IFRS. The Company’s 
internal controls over financial reporting include policies and procedures that:
 



pertain to the maintenance of records that accurately and fairly reflect the transactions of the Company; 
provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial 
statements in accordance with IFRS; 
ensure  the  Company’s  receipts  and  expenditures  are  made  only  in  accordance  with  authorization  of 
management and the Company’s directors; and 
provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  prevention  or  timely  detection  of  unauthorized  transactions  that 
could have a material effect on the annual or interim financial statements.
An evaluation of the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting was conducted as of 
April 30, 2013 by the Company’s management, including the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer.  
Based on this evaluation, management has concluded that the Company’s internal controls over financial reporting 
were effective.
25
There were no changes in the Company’s business activities during the period ended January 31, 2014 that have 
materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, its internal controls over financial reporting. 
 
LIMITATIONS OF CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES 
The Company’s management, including the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, believe that any 
disclosure controls and procedures or internal control over financial reporting, no matter how well conceived and 
operated, can provide only reasonable and not absolute assurance that the objectives of the control system are met.  
Further,  the  design  of  a  control  system  reflects  the  fact  that  there  are  resource  constraints,  and  the  benefits  of 
controls must be considered relative to their costs. Because of the inherent limitations in all control systems, they 
cannot provide absolute assurance that all control issues and instances of fraud, if any, within the Company have 
been prevented or detected.  These inherent limitations include the realities that judgments in decision-making can 
be  faulty,  and  that  breakdowns  can  occur  because  of  simple  error  or  mistake.    Additionally,  controls  can  be 
circumvented  by  the  individual  acts  of  some  persons,  by  collusion  of  two  or  more  people,  or  by  unauthorized 
override of the control.  The design of any systems of controls is also based in part upon certain assumptions about 
the likelihood of future events, and there can be no assurance that any design will succeed in achieving its stated 
goals  under  all  potential  future  conditions.    Accordingly,  because  of  the  inherent  limitations  in  a  cost  effective 
control system, misstatements due to error or fraud may occur and not be detected. 
APPROVAL 
The Board of Directors of Stornoway has approved the disclosure contained in this Interim MD&A. A copy of this 
Interim MD&A will be provided to anyone who requests it. 
 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
Additional information relating to Stornoway is on SEDAR at www.sedar.com.
26