
EX-10.5 8 d236362dex105.htm EX-10.5 EX-10.5
Exhibit 10.5
SEVENTY SEVEN ENERGY LITIGATION TRUST AGREEMENT
This Seventy Seven Energy Litigation Trust Agreement (the “Agreement”) is made this 1st day of
August, 2016, by and among Seventy Seven Finance Inc., Seventy Seven Energy Inc.
(“HoldCo”), Seventy Seven Operating LLC (“OpCo”), Great Plains Oilfield Rental, L.L.C., Seventy
Seven Land Company LLC, Nomac Drilling, L.L.C., Performance Technologies, L.L.C., PTL Prop
Solutions, L.L.C., SSE Leasing LLC, Keystone Rock & Excavation, L.L.C. and Western
Wisconsin Sand Company, LLC (each, in its capacity as a Debtor (as defined in the Plan) and a
Reorganized Debtor, as applicable, a “Debtor” and, collectively, the “Debtors”), and Alan Carr, as
trustee (the “Trustee”).
RECITALS
WHEREAS, on June 7, 2016, each of the Debtors filed a voluntary Chapter 11 petition with the
United States Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware (the “Bankruptcy Court”) (Case No.
16-11409 (LSS)); and
WHEREAS, on July 14, 2016, the Bankruptcy Court entered an order (Docket No. 192) (the
“Confirmation Order”) confirming the Joint Prepackaged Chapter 11 Plan of Reorganization of
Seventy Seven Energy Inc. (Docket No. 17) (as amended on July 8, 2016, the “Plan”); and
WHEREAS, the Effective Date (as defined in the Plan) occurred on August 1, 2016; and
WHEREAS, the Plan contemplates, on the Effective Date, (a) the creation of a litigation trust (the
“Litigation Trust”) and the creation of the beneficial interests in the Litigation Trust for the benefit
of the Litigation Trust’s beneficiaries under the Plan (as defined in Schedule A, the
“Beneficiaries”), and (b) that Debtors shall assign to the Litigation Trust and the Litigation Trust
will be vested with, subject to the terms of the Plan, all of the Debtors’ Causes of Action held by
any of the Debtors related in any way to the Debtors, their predecessors or their respective
affiliates solely with respect to all claims and Causes of Action against any party based on or
arising out of the Spin-Off or the issuance of any Security of the Debtors in connection therewith,
including without limitation any claims or Causes of Action for unlawful dividend, fraudulent
conveyance or avoidance claims under state or federal law, including the Bankruptcy Code;
provided that any such claims and Causes of Action shall not include, (a) Causes of Action
against any of the Released Parties (b) Causes of Action that arise from or relate to the
operational relationship between the Debtors, on the one hand, and Chesapeake Energy
Corporation and its affiliates, on the other hand, and (c) Causes of Action for which the Debtors
would be required to indemnify the defendant for any liabilities or losses that such defendant
would incur in connection with such a Cause of Action (Causes of Action collectively, excluding
the Causes of Action listed in (a), (b) and (c), the “Contributed Claims”); and
WHEREAS, the Plan provides that the Litigation Trust will receive from the Debtors $50,000 in
cash for the purposes of funding the administrative and litigation expenses of the Litigation Trust
(the “Initial Funding,” and, together with the Contributed Claims, the “Trust Assets”); and
WHEREAS, the Litigation Trust is established hereunder for the purpose of prosecuting, settling
and finally resolving the Contributed Claims and distributing the Trust Property to or for the
benefit of the Beneficiaries, in accordance with Treasury Regulations 301.7701-4(d), with no
objective or authority to continue or engage in the conduct of a trade or business; and
WHEREAS, the Litigation Trust is intended to qualify as a “liquidating trust” within the meaning of
Treasury Regulations Section 301.7701-4(d) and in compliance with Revenue Procedure 94-45,
1994-2 C.B. 684, and, thus, as a “grantor trust” within the meaning of Section 671 through 679 of
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “IRC”) (other than to the extent Trust Assets
are allocable to Disputed Claims), with the Beneficiaries to be treated as the grantors of the
Litigation Trust and deemed to be the owners of the applicable Trust Assets (subject to the terms
of the Plan and the rights of creditors of the Litigation Trust), and, consequently, the transfer of the
Trust Assets to the Litigation Trust shall be treated as a deemed transfer of those assets from the
Debtors and the Estates to the Beneficiaries followed by a deemed transfer by such Beneficiaries
to the Litigation Trust for federal income tax purposes (other than to the extent Trust Assets are
allocable to Disputed Claims); and
WHEREAS, any portion of the Trust Assets allocable to Disputed Claims is intended to be
treated as a “disputed ownership fund” within the meaning of section 1.468B-1 et seq. of the
Treasury Regulations promulgated under section 468B of the Internal Revenue Code (the “DOF
Regulations”).
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the Plan and the Confirmation Order, in consideration of the
mutual agreements of the parties contained herein, and for other good and valuable
consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which are hereby acknowledged and affirmed, the
parties hereto hereby agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
ESTABLISHMENT AND DECLARATION OF TRUST
1.1 Defined Terms. Certain capitalized terms are defined on Schedule A hereto. Capitalized
terms used but not otherwise defined in this Agreement (including Schedule A hereto) and
defined in the Confirmation Order shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Confirmation
Order, and capitalized terms used but not otherwise defined in this Agreement (including
Schedule A hereto) or the Confirmation Order and defined in the Plan shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Plan.
1.2 Creation and Purpose of the Litigation Trust.
(a) This Trust shall be known as the “Seventy Seven Energy Litigation Trust,” in which name the
Trustee may conduct the affairs of the Litigation Trust.
(b) The office of the Litigation Trust shall be in care of the Trustee at its trust office or at any other
address that the Trustee may designate by written notice to the Beneficiaries.
(c) The Debtors and the Trustee hereby create, effective as of and subject to the occurrence of
the Effective Date, the Litigation Trust for the primary purpose of prosecuting,
2
settling and finally resolving the Contributed Claims and distributing the Trust Proceeds, if any, to
the Beneficiaries in accordance with their respective entitlements, if any, under the Plan and the
Confirmation Order, and in compliance with Revenue Procedure 94-45, 1994-2 C.B 684, in an
expeditious and orderly manner in accordance with the terms of this Agreement, and make timely
distributions and not unduly prolong the duration of the Litigation Trust.
1.3 The Litigation Trust is organized and established for the benefit of the Beneficiaries and is
intended to qualify as a “liquidating trust” within the meaning of Treasury Regulations Section
301.7701-4(d), and in compliance with Revenue Procedure 94-45, 1994-2 C.B. 684, with no
objective to continue or engage in the conduct of a trade or business.
1.4 Appointment of Trustee. The Trustee is hereby appointed as trustee of the Litigation Trust
effective as of the date hereof, to have all the rights, powers, and duties set forth herein.
1.5 Acceptance by Trustee. The Trustee hereby accepts the trust imposed on it by this
Agreement and agrees to observe and perform that trust on and subject to the terms and
conditions set forth in this Agreement, the Plan, and the Confirmation Order. In connection with
and in furtherance of the purposes of the Litigation Trust, the Trustee hereby accepts the transfer
of the Trust Assets.
1.6 Declaration of Trust and Transfer and Delivery of Trust Assets.
(a) In order to declare the terms and conditions hereof, and in consideration of the confirmation of
the Plan, the Debtors and the Trustee have executed this Agreement and, effective on the
Effective Date, the Debtors hereby:
(i) irrevocably transfer, assign and convey to the Litigation Trust as of the Effective Date, in trust,
to and for the benefit of the Beneficiaries, for the uses and purposes stated herein, all of their
rights, title, and interests (whether legal, beneficial, or otherwise) to the Contributed Claims, free
and clear of any lien, claim, encumbrance, or interest in such property of it or any other person or
entity, to have and to hold unto the Litigation Trust and its successors and assigns forever for the
benefit of the Beneficiaries (to the extent of their respective legal entitlements) as provided for in
this Agreement, the Plan and Confirmation Order, but subject to Section 9.3; and
(ii) irrevocably and absolutely transfer to the Litigation Trust the Initial Funding in trust to and for
the benefit of the Beneficiaries for the uses and purposes stated herein.
(b) Effective as of the Effective Date, the Trustee shall have all the rights, powers, and duties set
forth herein and pursuant to applicable law for accomplishing the purposes of the Litigation
Trust. The Trustee is hereby authorized to file with any governmental authority any documents
necessary to establish the Litigation Trust.
(c) (i) From and after the Effective Date, the Debtors shall make available to the Trustee copies of
books, records, and files of the Debtors and their Estates relating to the Contributed Claims and
shall use reasonable efforts to cooperate with the Trustee in responding to requests for
documents made by the Trustee to the Debtors;
3
(ii) the Debtors shall provide for the retention and storage of such books, records, and files until
such time as the Trustee determines, in accordance with this Agreement, that retention of same is
no longer necessary or required; and
(iii) all privileges with respect to the Contributed Claims or such books and record to which the
Debtors are entitled, including the attorney-client privilege, shall be automatically vested in, and
available for assertion by the Trustee on behalf of, the Litigation Trust.
To the extent any of the foregoing does not automatically occur on the Effective Date or is not
effectuated through the Confirmation Order or this Agreement, the Debtors shall, on the Effective
Date, execute such other and further documents as are reasonably necessary to effectuate all of
the foregoing.
1.7 Title to Trust Property.
(a) Upon the Effective Date, title to the Trust Property shall pass to and vest in the Litigation Trust
free and clear of all Claims and equity interests in accordance with section 1141 of the
Bankruptcy Code.
(b) Upon the transfer to the Litigation Trust of the Trust Assets, (i) the Trustee, on behalf of the
Beneficiaries, shall succeed to all of the Debtors’ rights, title, and interests in and to the Trust
Assets, and the Debtors will not have any further interests or rights in or with respect to the Trust
Property or the Litigation Trust, and (ii) no creditor of or holder of a claim against or interest in any
Debtor (other than the Beneficiaries in their capacities as such) will have any claim against or
recourse to the Litigation Trust or any of the Trust Property. The Trustee on behalf of the
Litigation Trust as successor-in-interest to the Debtors’ Estates (for the limited purpose of fulfilling
the Trustee’s duties under this Agreement) may execute and deliver any instruments, documents,
books, and records (including those maintained in electronic format and original documents as
may be needed), and take, or cause to be taken, all such further action in order to evidence, vest,
perfect or effectuate the transfer of the Trust Assets to the Litigation Trust and consummation of
the actions contemplated hereby and by the Plan and the Confirmation Order.
(c) With respect to all Trust Property, the Trustee will directly and indirectly be the representative
of each Debtor’s Estate, as provided for by section 1123(b)(3)(B) of the Bankruptcy Code, and
will have the rights and powers provided for in the Bankruptcy Code, including section 1107
thereof, in addition to any rights and powers granted in this Agreement, the Plan and the
Confirmation Order. The Litigation Trust will be the successor-in-interest to each of the Debtors
with respect to any action that was or could have been commenced by any of the Debtors prior to
the Effective Date that is a Contributed Claim and shall be deemed substituted for the Debtors as
the party in any Proceeding with respect to any Contributed Claims pending as of the Effective
Date. The Litigation Trust may enforce, sue on, settle or compromise (or decline to do any of the
foregoing) all claims, rights or causes of actions, suits and
4
proceedings, whether in law or in equity, whether known or unknown, that any Debtor or its
Estate may hold against any person or entity, that constitute Trust Property, subject to and in
accordance with the terms of this Agreement, including but not limited to Section 2.2, below. All
actions, claims, rights, or interests constituting Trust Property are preserved and retained and
may be enforced by the Trustee on behalf of the Litigation Trust as the representative of each
Debtor and its Estate pursuant to section 1123(b)(3)(B) of the Bankruptcy Code. The Trustee will
be a party in interest as to all matters over which the Bankruptcy Court has jurisdiction or retains
jurisdiction under the Plan insofar as such matters affect the Litigation Trust or the Trust Property.
1.8 Transfer and Delivery of Documents and Information.
(a) In furtherance of, and without limiting, Section 1.6(b)(i), (i) the Debtors shall, and shall direct
their counsel (solely in counsel’s capacity as counsel for the Debtors) to, make available and,
upon request of the Trustee, deliver to the Trustee documents or information related to the
Contributed Claims in the Debtor’s or their counsels’ possession (solely related to counsel’s
capacity as counsel for the Debtors) and (ii) the Debtors shall, and shall direct the Debtors’
counsel (solely in counsel’s capacity as counsel for the Debtors) to, timely respond to reasonable
requests for documents or information from the Trustee related to the Contributed Claims.
(b) To the extent documents or information related to the Contributed Claims or required to be
available as part of the Contributed Claims is not in the possession of Debtors or available from
the Debtors’ counsel, the Debtors shall promptly respond to reasonable requests by the Trustee
for such documents or information (including documents or information maintained in electronic
format and original documents), whether held by any of them or any of their respective agents,
advisors, attorneys, accountants or other professionals. In addition, the Debtors shall provide the
Trustee with access to the employees, agents, advisors, attorneys, accountants and
professionals employed, retained or consulted by the Debtors who have knowledge of matters
relevant to the Contributed Claims, including making such parties available to provide
deposition, trial or other testimony in connection with the Contributed Claims. Notwithstanding
the foregoing provisions of this paragraph, in the event the Debtors determine that any such
provision of information violates any law or legal proceeding or waives any applicable privilege,
protection or immunity, including without limitation the attorney-client privilege or the work-
product doctrine, the Debtors shall take all reasonable measures to provide such information in a
manner that avoids any such harm or consequence, including retention of the specific files.
1.9 Incidents of Ownership. The Beneficiaries shall be the sole beneficiaries of the Trust and
the Trust Property, and the Trustee shall retain only such incidents of ownership as are
necessary to undertake the actions and transactions authorized herein and in the Plan, including
but not limited to, those powers set forth in Section 2.2.
1.10 No Reversion to Debtors or Reorganized Debtors. Subject to Section 9.3, in no event
shall any part of the Trust Property revert to or be distributed to any Debtors.
1.11 Duties of Debtors; Reimbursement of Expenses. The Debtors shall have no
responsibility or obligation with respect to the Contributed Claims after the Effective Date, other
than (a) to comply with Section 1.6(b)(i) and Section 1.8 herein and (b) otherwise to use
reasonable efforts to cooperate with the Trustee.
5
ARTICLE II
THE LITIGATION TRUSTEE
2.1 Appointment. The Trustee has been selected pursuant to the Plan and has been appointed
as of the Effective Date. The Trustee’s appointment shall continue until the earlier of (a) the
termination of the Litigation Trust or (b) the Trustee’s resignation, death, dissolution, or
removal. To effectuate an orderly and efficient transition of the administration of the Trust Assets
from the Debtors to the Trustee, the Trustee may perform certain services in connection with its
duties and obligations under this Agreement prior to the Effective Date.
2.2 General Powers; Exclusive Authority To Pursue, Settle, or Abandon Contributed
Claims.
(a) In connection with the administration of the Litigation Trust, except as set forth in this
Agreement, including Section 2.3, and subject in all respects to the powers and rights of the
Oversight Committee set forth herein, the Trustee is authorized to perform any and all acts
necessary or desirable to accomplish the purposes of the Litigation Trust. Without limiting, but
subject to, the foregoing and to Section 2.3, the Trustee shall be expressly authorized, but shall
not be required, to:
(i) hold legal title to any and all rights of the holders of the Litigation Trust Interests in or arising
from the Trust Property, including, but not limited to, collecting any and all money and other
property belonging to the Litigation Trust;
(ii) perform the duties, exercise the powers, and assert the rights of a trustee under sections 704
and 1106 of the Bankruptcy Code;
(iii) compromise, adjust, mediate, arbitrate, sue on or defend, pursue, prosecute, abandon, or
otherwise protect and enforce the rights to the Trust Property by any method deemed appropriate
including, without limitation, by judicial proceedings or pursuant to any applicable bankruptcy,
insolvency, moratorium, or similar law and general principles of equity;
(iv) in accordance with section 1123(b)(3)(B) of the Bankruptcy Code, engage in, intervene in,
join, compromise, adjust, release, mediate, arbitrate, sue on or defend, counterclaim, setoff,
recoup, pursue, prosecute, abandon, or otherwise deal with and settle any actions, suits,
proceedings, disputes, claims, controversies, demands, causes of action, or other litigation in
favor of or against the Litigation Trust, to enter into agreements relating to the foregoing, whether
or not any suit is commenced or claim accrued or asserted and, in advance of any controversy, to
enter into agreements regarding arbitration, adjudication or settlement thereof, all in the name of
the Litigation Trust if necessary or appropriate, and institute or continue actions which were or
otherwise could have been brought by any Debtor that constitute Trust Property, and prosecute
or defend all litigation or appeals that are Trust Property and, when appropriate, settle such
actions and claims;
6
(v) determine and satisfy any and all liabilities created, incurred or assumed by the Litigation
Trust;
(vi) make distributions to holders of the Litigation Trust Interests in accordance with this
Agreement;
(vii) file, if necessary, with the appropriate taxing authority, any and all tax and information returns
with respect to the Litigation Trust, comply with any withholding obligations, and pay taxes
properly payable by the Litigation Trust, if any;
(viii) assert or waive any privilege or defense on behalf of the Litigation Trust;
(ix) pay all expenses and make all other payments relating to the Trust Property, including the
liquidation and distribution thereof;
(x) obtain insurance coverage with respect to the liabilities and obligations of the Trustee and the
Oversight Committee under this Agreement (in the form of, among other things, an errors and
omissions policy or otherwise) and indemnification for the Trustee and the members of the
Oversight Committee and others as provided for in this Agreement;
(xi) retain and pay third-party providers of professional services, including, but not limited to,
attorneys, accountants, and other professionals reasonably necessary to accomplish the
purposes of the Litigation Trust;
(xii) invest any moneys held as part of the Litigation Trust (including any earnings thereon or
proceeds therefrom) in accordance with the terms and limitations of Section 2.6 hereof;
(xiii) request any appropriate tax determination with respect to the Litigation Trust, including
without limitation a determination pursuant to section 505 of the Bankruptcy Code;
(xiv) open and maintain bank accounts and deposit funds, draw checks and make disbursements
in accordance with this Agreement;
(xv) enforce, waive, assign or release rights, privileges or immunities of any kind;
(xvi) appear and participate in any proceeding before the Bankruptcy Court with respect to any
matter regarding or relating to the Plan (insofar as it affects the Litigation Trust or the Trust
Property), the Litigation Trust or the Oversight Committee;
7
(xvii) establish and maintain a web site for the purpose of providing notice of the Litigation Trust
activities in addition to notice by other means or, to the extent specifically authorized by any
given holder of Litigation Trust Interests, in lieu of notice by other means;
(xviii) file any and all documents and take or refrain from taking any and all actions the Trustee
reasonably deems necessary for the continuation, protection, distribution, liquidation, and
maximization of the Trust Property consistent with the purposes hereof; and
(xix) do any and all things necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Agreement.
(b) Subject to the provisions of this Agreement and the Confirmation Order, the Litigation Trust
shall have exclusive rights, powers, and interests of the Debtors to Prosecute, settle, or abandon
all Contributed Claims as the sole representative of the Debtors pursuant to Bankruptcy Code
Section 1123(b)(3).
(c) Except as otherwise set forth in this Agreement or in the Confirmation Order, and subject to
the retained jurisdiction of the Bankruptcy Court as provided for in Section 10.9 and the Plan, but
without prior or further authorization, the Trustee may control and exercise authority over the
Trust Property and over the protection, conservation, and disposition thereof. No person dealing
with the Litigation Trust shall be obligated to inquire into the authority of the Trustee in
connection with the protection, conservation, liquidation, or disposition of the Trust Property.
2.3 Limitations on the Trustee’s Authority. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
in this Agreement, the Plan, or the Confirmation Order:
(a) The Trustee may not take any action that requires the approval of the Oversight Committee
under Section 3.3 without the prior written approval of the Oversight Committee.
(b) The Trustee shall not, and shall not be authorized to, engage the Litigation Trust in any trade
or business and shall take (i) such actions consistent with the orderly distribution of the Trust
Property as are required by applicable law and (ii) such actions permitted hereunder.
(c) The Litigation Trust shall not hold any operating assets of a going concern directly and shall
not hold 50% or more of the stock (in either vote or value) of any entity that is treated as a
corporation for federal income tax purposes, nor be the sole member of a limited liability
company, nor have any interest in an entity that is treated as a partnership for federal income tax
purposes, unless such stock, membership interests or partnership interest was obtained
involuntarily or as a matter of practical economic necessity in order to preserve the value of the
Trust Property, or, in any case, such corporation, company or partnership does not hold operating
assets of a going business.
(d) Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, the Trustee shall not take any
action which will cause the Litigation Trust to fail to qualify as a “liquidating trust” for United
States federal income tax purposes.
8
2.4 Compensation of Trustee and Its Professionals.
(a) The initial Trustee shall be entitled to compensation in connection with the performance of its
duties as set forth in Schedule B hereto, plus the reimbursement from the Trust Proceeds of
reasonable out-of-pocket costs and expenses. Any successor to the Trustee shall also be entitled
to reasonable compensation in connection with the performance of its duties as approved by the
Oversight Committee, which compensation may be different from the terms provided in
Schedule B, plus the reimbursement of reasonable out-of-pocket expenses.
(b) Subject to Section 3.3(d), the Trustee may retain the services of employees, professionals,
and consultants to advise and assist in the administration, prosecution and distribution of the
Trust Assets. The Trust Property shall be subject to the claims of the Trustee, and the costs and
expenses of the Litigation Trust, including but not limited to the reasonable fees and expenses of
the Trustee and its retained professionals, representatives, agents, and employees. The Trustee
shall be entitled to reimburse itself out of any available cash in the Litigation Trust for its actual
reasonable out-of-pocket expenses and for any and all losses, liabilities, expenses, or damages
that the Trustee may, in good faith and without willful misconduct, gross negligence, or fraud,
sustain in the exercise and performance of any of the powers and duties of the Trustee under this
Agreement. The Trustee shall also be entitled to pay from the Trust Property reasonable
compensation, plus the reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenses, to each of its professionals.
(c) The Trustee and any employees, professionals or consultants employed or retained by the
Trustee that seek compensation or reimbursement of reasonable out-of-pocket expenses shall
provide to the Oversight Committee monthly billing statements (the “Fee Statement”), by printed
copy delivered by first-class mail or by portable document format (“PDF”) file delivered by
electronic mail, at the option of each respective professional, which Fee Statement shall include
the names and titles of each professional, the hourly rates for each such professional, the amount
of hours spent by each professional and a statement of the fees and expenses for which each
such professional seeks reimbursement; provided, however, that solely for any ordinary course
professionals employed by the Litigation Trust, the Oversight Committee may, at its sole
discretion, determine not to require copies of Fee Statements to be provided other than to the
Trustee. Payment of the amounts requested in a Fee Statement shall be paid no later than
thirty (30) days from the date of the Fee Statement; provided, however, that the Oversight
Committee may object to the compensation or reimbursement of expenses contained in the Fee
Statement by sending the Trustee or professional, as applicable, a written objection within
fifteen (15) days of the date of delivery to the Oversight Committee of the Fee Statement. If an
objection to a portion of the compensation or reimbursement of expenses is received, the Trustee
shall promptly pay the undisputed portion of such compensation or expenses and reserve cash,
in the amount of the disputed compensation or out-of-pocket expenses.
9
(d) In the event that the parties are unable to reach an agreement to resolve the Oversight
Committee’s objection to a Fee Statement within five (5) days from the date on which such
objection to the Fee Statement is received, the Trustee shall schedule a hearing with the
Bankruptcy Court or other court of competent jurisdiction to take place within fourteen (14) days,
or as soon as such court’s calendar permits. The Oversight Committee shall file a written
objection with the Bankruptcy Court or other court of competent jurisdiction, as applicable, no
later than seven (7) days prior to the scheduled hearing. Any response to the Oversight
Committee’s objection must be submitted no later than three (3) days prior to the scheduled
hearing. All objections to a Fee Statement shall be resolved either by (i) a written agreement
between the party requesting payment of fees and expenses and the Oversight Committee, or
(ii) by resolution of the disputed amount by the Bankruptcy Court or other court of competent
jurisdiction. The Trustee shall promptly pay any amounts determined to be owing following the
resolution described in the preceding sentence.
(e) If the cash in the Litigation Trust shall be insufficient to compensate and reimburse the
Trustee or any employees, professionals or consultants retained by the Trustee for any amounts
to which they are entitled hereunder, then the Trustee is hereby authorized, with the written
approval of the Oversight Committee, to reduce to cash that portion of the Trust Property
necessary so as to effect such compensation and reimbursement.
2.5 Reporting Duties of the Trustee.
(a) From time to time as reasonably requested by the Oversight Committee, the Trustee shall
report in writing to the Oversight Committee as to the status of the Contributed Claims and all
other matters that materially affect the Litigation Trust or the Trust Property. In addition, Trustee
shall communicate with members of the Oversight Committee and with the Beneficiaries
regarding all matters that may materially affect the Litigation Trust or the Trust
Property. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the Trustee shall not provide
or disclose any information that the Trustee reasonably believes is privileged or otherwise
protected from discovery without first ensuring that the inclusion of that information will not waive
any such privilege or protection.
(b) The Trustee shall comply with tax reporting responsibilities, as further provided in Article VIII
below.
2.6 Investments and Bonds. Subject to Section 2.3, the Trustee may invest the Trust Assets in
Permitted Investments, subject to any applicable limitations under Bankruptcy Code Section 345;
provided, however, that the Trustee is not authorized to engage in any investments inconsistent
with the treatment of the Litigation Trust as a liquidating trust under applicable Internal Revenue
Service guidelines, rulings, or other controlling authorities.
2.7 Replacement of the Trustee. The Trustee may resign at any time upon thirty (30) days’
written notice delivered to the Bankruptcy Court and the members of the Oversight Committee,
provided that such resignation shall only become effective upon the appointment of a permanent
or interim successor Trustee. The Oversight Committee may
10
remove the Trustee with or without cause upon thirty (30) days’ written notice delivered to the
Trustee. The Trustee may be removed by the Bankruptcy Court upon motion and after notice and
a hearing, which motion may be brought by any party in interest (including any members of the
Oversight Committee). In the event of the death, medical incapacity, dissolution, resignation or
removal of the Trustee, the Oversight Committee may designate a person to serve as successor
Trustee. If the Oversight Committee shall fail to appoint a successor within thirty (30) days, the
successor Trustee shall be appointed by the Bankruptcy Court upon request and based upon
submissions from interested parties (including the Oversight Committee, any Beneficiary or
counsel to the Litigation Trust). Upon its appointment, the successor Trustee, without any further
act, shall become fully vested with all of the rights, powers, duties and obligations of its
predecessor and all responsibilities of the predecessor Trustee relating to the Litigation Trust
shall be terminated; provided, however, that the original Trustee’s right to indemnification shall
survive termination and is subject to Sections 4.2 and 4.3 hereof. In the event the Trustee’s
appointment terminates for any reason, such Trustee (or his estate or representatives) shall be
promptly compensated for all reasonable fees and expenses accrued through the effective date
of termination, whether or not previously invoiced. The provisions of Article IV shall survive the
resignation or removal of any Trustee.
2.8 Litigation Trust Continuance. The death, medical incapacity, dissolution, resignation, or
removal of the Trustee shall not terminate the Litigation Trust or revoke any existing agency
created by the Trustee pursuant to this Agreement or invalidate any action theretofore taken by
the Trustee, and the successor Trustee agrees that the provisions of this Agreement shall be
binding upon and inure to the benefit of the successor Trustee and all its successors or assigns.
ARTICLE III
OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE
3.1 Oversight Committee.
(a) As of the Effective Date, the Oversight Committee shall be comprised of three (3) initial
members (each a “Member” and collectively, the “Members”). One of the Members shall be
appointed by the HoldCo Litigation Trust Beneficiaries (the “HoldCo Member”) and two of the
Members shall be appointed by the OpCo Litigation Trust Beneficiaries (the “OpCo
Members”). As of the Effective Date, each of Victor Danh and Omar Vaishnavi are hereby
appointed as the OpCo Members. As of the Effective Date, the HoldCo Litigation Trust
Beneficiaries have not yet appointed the HoldCo Member. The OpCo Members shall select an
individual to serve as HoldCo Member until such time as a HoldCo Member is appointed
pursuant to Section 3.1(b).
(b) If the HoldCo Member resigns or a vacancy is otherwise created in respect of the HoldCo
Member, HoldCo Litigation Trust Beneficiaries holding a majority of the Litigation Trust Interests
held by all HoldCo Litigation Trust Beneficiaries shall have the right to appoint the successor
HoldCo Member. If an OpCo Member resigns or a vacancy is otherwise created in respect of one
or both of the OpCo Members, (a) if one OpCo Member remains, such remaining OpCo Member
shall have the right to appoint the successor OpCo Member and (b) if no Opco Members remain,
OpCo Litigation Trust Beneficiaries holding a majority of the Litigation Trust Interests held by all
OpCo Litigation Trust Beneficiaries shall have the right to appoint both successor OpCo
Members.
(c) Except as otherwise expressly provided in the Plan and this Agreement, the Oversight
Committee shall not have any power or authority as to the Trust Assets, Contributed Claims, or
other assets or property belonging to the Debtors or the Debtors’ Estate or Litigation Trust.
11
3.2 Reports to Oversight Committee. The Trustee shall report to the Oversight Committee as
provided in Section 2.5(a), and as otherwise reasonably requested by the Oversight
Committee. The Oversight Committee shall keep all such information strictly confidential, except
to the extent that the Oversight Committee deems it reasonably necessary to disclose such
information to the Bankruptcy Court (in which case, a good faith effort shall be made to file such
information under seal).
3.3 Actions Requiring Approval of the Oversight Committee. The Trustee shall obtain the
approval of the Oversight Committee prior to taking any action regarding any of the following
matters:
(a) The Prosecution of any Contributed Claims by the Litigation Trust,
(b) The settlement, compromise, dismissal, abandonment, release, submission to binding
arbitration or mediation, or waiver, in whole or in part, of any Contributed Claims or any claims,
rights, causes of action, appeals, or collection efforts arising thereunder or in connection
therewith, of any Contributed Claim by the Litigation Trust where the disputed amount at issue
equals or exceeds $250,000;
(c) The abandonment of any non-Cash asset that has a valuation as reasonably determined by
the Trustee (for any individual transaction or series of related transactions) of at least $250,000;
(d) Retention of employees, professionals, and consultants to advise and assist in the
administration, prosecution and distribution of the Trust Assets; provided, however, that the
Trustee shall not be required to obtain the approval of the Oversight Committee prior to retaining
any professionals that are used in the ordinary course of business;
(e) The borrowing of any funds by the Litigation Trust or pledge of any portion of the Trust
Property;
(f) Any matter which could reasonably be expected to have a material adverse effect on the
amount of distributions to be made by the Litigation Trust; and
(g) The decision whether to enter into an agreement with any Entity respecting the joint
prosecution of Contributed Claims and causes of action belonging to Beneficiaries.
12
3.4 Approval of the Oversight Committee and Consultation with the Reorganized Debtors.
(a) Any approval, action or direction of the Oversight Committee shall require, and shall be
effective upon, such approval, action or direction given by a majority vote of the Oversight
Committee, provided that wherever the approval of the Oversight Committee is required prior to
the Trustee taking any action hereunder (other than with respect to Section 2.7 or Section 10.1
hereof), such approval shall be deemed given if the Members of the Oversight Committee do not
object in writing to any such action upon two (2) Business Days’ prior written (including e-mail)
notice or such shorter period as is necessary under the circumstances from the Trustee, and if
any objection is received in writing, then any such action must be approved by a majority vote of
the Oversight Committee; provided that written approval shall be required at all times with respect
to the matters set forth in Section 3.3(a) and 3.3(b) above.
(b) In view of the potential ongoing relationship between the reorganized Debtors and any
potential defendant with respect to any Contributed Claims, the Oversight Committee agrees to
use good faith efforts to consult with the reorganized Debtors before taking or authorizing any
action with respect to the matters set forth in Section 3.3(a)( and 3.3(b). To the extent that any
consultation with respect to such matters occurs, the reorganized Debtors, the Trustee and the
Members of the Oversight Committee hereby agree that such matters are within the common
interest of such parties therefore, they agree to treat any such discussions, correspondence,
materials or other information with respect to or regarding such matters as privileged and
confidential to be protected by the common interest doctrine unless such parties agree otherwise
in writing.
3.5 Compensation of Oversight Committee. Members of the Oversight Committee shall not be
entitled to receive compensation in connection with his or her duties; provided, however, each
Member of the Oversight Committee may receive reimbursement of reasonable out-of-pocket
expenses (which expense reimbursements shall not include payment of professional costs)
incurred in connection with his or her duties. Members of the Oversight Committee shall be
entitled to receive the benefit of any insurance as provided in Section 4.5 of this Agreement.
3.6 Restricted Actions. Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, the
Oversight Committee shall not take any action which will cause the Litigation Trust to fail to
qualify as a “grantor trust” for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
ARTICLE IV
LIABILITY OF TRUSTEE AND THE OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE
4.1 Standard of Care; Exculpation. Neither the Trustee, the Members of the Oversight
Committee, nor any director, officer, affiliate, employee, employer, professional, agent, or
representative of the Trustee shall be liable for losses, claims, damages, liabilities, or expenses
in connection with the affairs or property of the Litigation Trust to any Beneficiary of the Litigation
Trust, or any other person, for the acts or omissions of the Trustee or the Oversight Committee;
provided, however, that the foregoing limitation shall not apply as to any losses, claims,
damages, liabilities or expenses suffered or incurred by any Beneficiary that are found by a final
judgment by a court of competent jurisdiction (not subject to further appeal) to have resulted
primarily and directly from the fraud, gross negligence, or willful misconduct of such person or
entity.
4.2 Indemnification.
13
(a) Except as otherwise set forth in the Plan or Confirmation Order, the Trustee, the Members of
the Oversight Committee, and any director, officer, affiliate, employee, employer, professional,
agent, or representative of the Trustee (collectively, the “Indemnified Parties”) shall be defended,
held harmless, and indemnified from time to time by the Litigation Trust against any and all
losses, claims, damages, liabilities, penalties, obligations, and expenses, including the costs for
counsel or others in investigating, preparing, or defending any action or claim, whether or not in
connection with litigation in which any Indemnified Party is a party, or enforcing this Agreement
(including these indemnity provisions), as and when incurred, caused by, relating to, based on, or
arising out of (directly or indirectly) the Trustee’s or Oversight Committee’s acceptance of or the
performance or nonperformance of its obligations under this Agreement, the Plan, or the
Confirmation Order. Satisfaction of any obligation of the Litigation Trust arising pursuant to the
terms of this Section shall be payable only from the Trust Property, and may be advanced, with
the approval of the Oversight Committee, prior to the conclusion of such matter.
(b) Subject to Section 4.2(d), the reorganized Debtors and any director, officer, affiliate,
employee, employer, professional, agent, or representative of the reorganized Debtors
(collectively, the “Debtor Indemnified Parties”) shall be defended, held harmless, and indemnified
from time to time by the Litigation Trust against any and all losses, claims, damages, liabilities,
penalties, obligations, and expenses, including the costs for counsel or others arising from or
relating to any third party claims brought or asserted against the Debtors (including any purported
counterclaims or claims for contribution) that arise from any action or omission by the Trustee,
related to any Contributed Claims that the Trustee elects to Prosecute.
(c) Subject to the terms of the Plan, the Litigation Trust shall promptly pay expenses reasonably
incurred by any Indemnified Party or Debtor Indemnified Party in defending, participating in, or
settling any action, proceeding, or investigation in which such Indemnified Party or Debtor
Indemnified Party is a party or is threatened to be made a party or otherwise is participating in
connection with the Agreement or the duties, acts, or omissions of the Trustee, upon submission
of invoices therefor, whether in advance of the final disposition of such action, proceeding, or
investigation or otherwise. Each Indemnified Party or Debtor Indemnified Party hereby
undertakes, and the Litigation Trust hereby accepts its undertaking, to repay any and all such
amounts so advanced if it shall ultimately be determined that such Indemnified Party is not
entitled to be indemnified therefor under this Agreement.
(d) Notwithstanding Section 4.2(b), the reorganized Debtors hereby acknowledge and agree that
(i) to the extent any losses, claims, damages, liabilities, penalties, obligations, and expenses to
which any Debtor Indemnitee is entitled to indemnification under Section 4.2(b) (“Indemnifiable
Losses”) are (or but for Section 4.2(b) would be) covered by one or more insurance policies,
including any director and officer insurance policies, maintained by the reorganized Debtors
(collectively, the “Debtor Insurance Policies”), the reorganized Debtors shall be the indemnitor of
first resort to the Debtor Indemnified Parties with respect to such
14
Indemnifiable Losses, up to an amount equal to the limits of the Debtor Insurance Policies and
the reorganized Debtors’ retention amounts under such insurance policies, in each case as
applicable to such Indemnifiable Losses, and (ii) each reorganized Debtor irrevocably waives,
relinquishes and releases the Litigation Trust from any and all claims against the Litigation Trust
for contribution, subrogation or any other recovery of any kind in respect thereof.
4.3 No Liability for Acts of Successor/Predecessor Trustees. Upon the appointment of a
successor Trustee and the delivery of the Trust Assets to the successor Trustee, the predecessor
Trustee and any director, officer, affiliate, employee, employer, professional, agent, or
representative of the predecessor Trustee shall have no further liability or responsibility with
respect thereto. A successor Trustee shall have no duty to examine or inquire into the acts or
omissions of its immediate or remote predecessor and no successor Trustee shall be in any way
liable for the acts or omissions of any predecessor Trustee, unless a successor Trustee
expressly assumes such responsibility. A predecessor Trustee shall have no liability for the acts
or omissions of any immediate or subsequent successor Trustee for any events or occurrences
subsequent to the cessation of its role as Trustee.
4.4 Reliance by Trustee and the Oversight Committee on Documents or Advice of
Counsel. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the Trustee, the Oversight Committee,
any director, officer, affiliate, employee, employer, professional, agent, or representative of the
Trustee, and the Members of the Oversight Committee may rely, and shall be protected from
liability for acting, on any resolution, certificate, statement, instrument, opinion, report, notice,
request, consent, order, or other paper or document reasonably believed by the Trustee or the
Oversight Committee to be genuine and to have been presented by an authorized party. Neither
the Trustee nor the Oversight Committee shall be liable for any action taken or suffered by the
Trustee or the Oversight Committee, as applicable, in reasonable reliance upon the advice of
counsel or other professionals engaged by the Trustee or the Oversight Committee, as
applicable, in accordance with this Agreement.
4.5 Insurance. The Litigation Trust may purchase, using Trust Assets, and carry all insurance
policies and pay all insurance premiums and costs that the Oversight Committee or the Trustee
deem reasonably necessary or advisable, including, without limitation, purchasing any errors and
omissions insurance with regard to any liabilities, losses, damages, claims, costs, and expenses
it may incur, including but not limited to attorneys’ fees, arising out of or due to its actions or
omissions, or consequences of such actions or omissions, other than as a result of its fraud or
willful misconduct, with respect to the implementation and administration of the Plan or this
Agreement.
ARTICLE V
GENERAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING
ADMINISTRATION OF THE LITIGATION TRUST
5.1 Register of Beneficiaries. Debtors, on behalf of the Litigation Trust, shall maintain at all
times a register of or other means of identifying the names, mailing addresses, taxpayer
identification numbers, amounts of Allowed Claims, and the Pro Rata interests in the Litigation
Trust of the Beneficiaries (the “Register”). The Debtors shall make such Register available to the
Trustee as from time to time requested by the Trustee.
15
5.2 Books and Records. To the extent requested by the Oversight Committee, the Litigation
Trust also shall maintain in respect of the Litigation Trust books and records relating to the Trust
Assets and income realized therefrom and the payment of expenses of and claims against or
assumed by the Litigation Trust in such detail and for such period of time as may be necessary to
enable it to make full and proper reports in respect thereof. Except as expressly provided in this
Agreement, the Plan, or the Confirmation Order, or as may be required by applicable law
(including securities law), nothing in this Agreement is intended to require the Litigation Trust to
file any accounting or seek approval of any court with respect to the administration of the
Litigation Trust, or as a condition for making any payment or distribution out of the Trust
Assets. The Oversight Committee shall have the right to inspect the books and records of the
Litigation Trust at any time upon reasonable notice to the Trustee. Beneficiaries shall have the
right upon thirty (30) days’ prior written notice delivered to the Trustee to inspect the Litigation
Trust’s books and records, including the Register, provided such Beneficiary shall have entered
into a confidentiality agreement in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the
Trustee. Satisfaction of the foregoing condition notwithstanding, if (a) the Trustee and the
Oversight Committee determine in good faith that the inspection of the Litigation Trust’s books
and records, including the Register, by any Beneficiary would be detrimental to the Litigation
Trust or (b) such Beneficiary is a defendant (or potential defendant) in a pending (or potential)
action brought by the Litigation Trust, the Litigation Trust may deny such request for
inspection. The Bankruptcy Court shall resolve any dispute between any Beneficiary and the
Trustee under this Section 5.2.
5.3 Periodic Reporting Obligations to Bankruptcy Court. The Trustee may file with the
Bankruptcy Court on a periodic basis a report setting forth the amounts and dates of all
distributions made by the Trustee under the Plan through each applicable reporting period.
5.4 Reports to Holders of Litigation Trust Interests.
(a) Securities Laws. If the Litigation Trust Interests constitute “securities” under the Securities Act
of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), the issuance and distributions (and to the extent
constituting an offer and sale, the offer and sale) of Litigation Trust Interests under the Plan shall
be exempt pursuant to section 1145 of the Bankruptcy Code from registration under the
Securities Act and applicable state and local laws requiring registration of securities. If the
Trustee determines, with the advice of counsel, that the Litigation Trust is required to comply with
any of the registration, reporting, or other requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934,
as amended, or the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, then the Trustee shall take
any and all actions necessary to comply with such requirements or may seek exemption from the
Securities and Exchange Commission therefor, and, if granted, shall comply with the terms of any
such exemption.
(b) Other Reporting. At the request of the Oversight Committee, as soon as practicable after the
end of each calendar year and as soon as practicable upon termination of the Litigation Trust, the
Trustee shall provide to the members of the Oversight Committee and to each Beneficiary as of
the end of such period or such date of termination a written report
16
including financial statements of the Litigation Trust for such period, prepared in accordance with
U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, and, if the end of a calendar year, a report (which
may be prepared by an independent certified public accountant employed by the Trustee)
reflecting the result of such agreed upon procedures relating to the financial accounting
administration of the Litigation Trust as considered by the Trustee in its discretion, to be
appropriate under the circumstances. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein,
the Trustee shall not provide or disclose any information that it reasonably believes is privileged
or otherwise protected from discovery without first ensuring that inclusion of that information will
not waive any such privilege or protection. Subject to the foregoing sentence, the Trustee may
post any such report on a limited-access web site maintained by the Trustee and available to the
Beneficiaries. To the extent specifically authorized by a Beneficiary, the posting of any such
report may be in lieu of providing a copy to the Beneficiary (unless otherwise required by law).
5.5 Final Accounting of Trustee. The Trustee (or any such successor Trustee) shall within
ninety (90) days after the termination of the Litigation Trust or the death, dissolution, resignation,
or removal of the Trustee, render an accounting containing at least the following information:
(a) A description of the Trust Assets;
(b) A summarized accounting in sufficient detail of all gains, losses, receipts, disbursements, and
other transactions in connection with the Litigation Trust and the Trust Assets during the
Trustee’s term of service, including their source and nature;
(c) Separate entries for all receipts of principal and income;
(d) The ending balance of all Trust Assets as of the date of the accounting, including the Cash
balance on hand and the name(s) and location(s) of the depository or depositories where the
Cash is kept;
(e) All known liabilities of the Litigation Trust; and
(f) All pending actions.
5.6 Filing of Accounting. The accounting shall be filed with the Bankruptcy Court and all
Beneficiaries shall have notice that the final accounting has been filed and an opportunity to
have a hearing on the approval of the accounting and, to the extent applicable, the discharge of
the Trustee.
5.7 Costs and Expenses of the Trustee. Notwithstanding any other terms of this Agreement,
the Trustee shall not be required to incur any costs and expenses in connection with the
Trustee’s performance of any obligations under this Agreement unless the payment of such costs
and expenses has been made or provided for by one or more of the Beneficiaries or the Debtors
to the extent the Trust Proceeds then available are not sufficient to cover such costs and
expenses; provided further that no Beneficiary or Debtor is under any obligation to make or
provide for payment of any such costs or expenses and the Trustee shall not be required or
obligated to undertake any action or perform any obligation under this Agreement that would
require the incurrence of any such cost or expenses to the extent the provision for payment
therefor in accordance with the foregoing has not occurred.
17
ARTICLE VI
BENEFICIAL INTERESTS AND BENEFICIARIES
6.1 Trust Beneficial Interests. Each Beneficiary shall be a holder of an interest in the Litigation
Trust (“Litigation Trust Interests”) in proportion to its right to distributions from the Litigation Trust
under Article VII. The Litigation Trust Interests will be uncertificated; accordingly, distributions of
Litigation Trust Interests will be accomplished solely by the entry of the names of the holders and
their respective Litigation Trust Interests in the books and records of the Litigation Trust. Each
holder of a Litigation Trust Interest shall take and hold its uncertificated beneficial interest subject
to all of the terms and provisions of this Trust Agreement and the Confirmation
Order. Beneficiaries shall be entitled to receive distributions on account of their Litigation Trust
Interest as set forth in Article VII.
6.2 Interest Beneficial Only. The ownership of a Litigation Trust Interest shall not entitle any
Beneficiary to any title in or to the Trust Assets or to any right to call for a partition or division of
the Trust Assets or to require an accounting.
6.3 Evidence of Litigation Trust Interest. Ownership of a Litigation Trust Interest shall not be
evidenced by any certificate, security, or receipt or in any other form or manner whatsoever,
except as maintained on the Register. Except as otherwise required by law, references in this
Agreement to the identification of holders and the providing of information to holders shall be
read to mean holders of record as set forth in the Register and shall not mean any beneficial
owner not recorded on such Register. Unless expressly provided herein, the Trustee may
establish a record date, which it deems practicable for determining the holders for a particular
purpose. The distribution of Litigation Trust Interests to the holders of Litigation Trust Interests
shall be accomplished as set forth herein.
6.4 Transfers of Litigation Trust Interests. The issuance and distributions (and to the extent
constituting an offer and sale, the offer and sale) of the Litigation Trust Interests pursuant to the
Plan have not been registered under to the Securities Act or any state securities law. If the
Litigation Trust Interests constitute “securities,” the parties hereto intend that the exemption
provisions of section 1145 of the Bankruptcy Code shall apply to the issuance and distributions
(and to the extent constituting an offer and sale, the offer and sale) of the Litigation Trust Interests
pursuant to the Plan. The Litigation Trust Interests shall not be capable of being transferred,
assigned, pledged or hypothecated, in whole or in part. Any purported transfer, assignment,
pledge or hypothecation of a Litigation Trust Interest or any part thereof shall constitute a
violation of this Section 6.4 and shall be void ab initio. Beneficial interests in the Litigation Trust
shall be nontransferable except upon death of the interest Holder or by operation of law;
provided, however, for the avoidance of doubt, that a Beneficiary may abandon its interest back
to the Litigation Trust.
6.5 Absolute Owners. The Trustee may deem and treat the Beneficiary reflected as the owner of
Litigation Trust Interest on the Register as the absolute owner thereof for the purposes of
receiving distributions and payments on account thereof for federal and state income tax
purposes and for all other purposes whatsoever.
18
6.6 Change of Address. A Beneficiary may, after the Effective Date, select an alternative
mailing address by notifying the Litigation Trust in writing of such alternative address. Absent
such notice, the Trustee shall not recognize any such change of address. Such notification shall
be effective only upon receipt by the Trustee.
6.7 Effect of Death, Dissolution, Incapacity or Bankruptcy of Beneficiary. The death,
dissolution, incapacity, or bankruptcy of a Beneficiary during the term of the Litigation Trust shall
not operate to terminate the Litigation Trust during the term of the Litigation Trust nor shall it
entitle the representative or creditors of the deceased, dissolved, incapacitated, or bankrupt
Beneficiary to an accounting or to take any action in any court or elsewhere for the distribution of
the Trust Assets or for a partition thereof, nor shall it otherwise affect the rights and obligations of
the Beneficiary under this Agreement or in the Litigation Trust.
6.8 Standing. Except as expressly provided in this Agreement or the Confirmation Order, a
Beneficiary does not have standing to direct the Trustee to do or not to do any act or to institute
any action or proceeding at law or in equity against any party (other than against the Trustee to
the extent provided in this Agreement) with respect to the Trust Assets.
ARTICLE VII
DISTRIBUTIONS
7.1 Distributions to Beneficiaries from Trust Assets.
(a) All payments to be made by the Litigation Trust to any Beneficiary shall be made only in
accordance with this Agreement and the Plan.
(b) On any date determined by the Trustee with the approval of the Oversight Committee, or on
any date directed by the Oversight Committee, and in any event promptly upon receipt of any
payment or distribution received in connection with any judgment or settlement of a Contributed
Claim in an amount in excess of $1,000,000 and at least once in every twelve (12) month period
(as measured from the Effective Date or the prior distribution date, as applicable), the Trustee
shall distribute from the Litigation Trust the Trust Property Then Available For Distribution to the
holders of the Litigation Trust Interests entitled thereto, as described in this Section 7.1(b).
(i) HoldCo Litigation Proceeds. Subject to Section 9.3, the Trustee shall distribute to each
HoldCo Litigation Trust Beneficiary its Pro Rata share of the HoldCo Trust Property Then
Available For Distribution.
(ii) OpCo Litigation Proceeds. Subject to Section 9.3, the Trustee shall distribute to each OpCo
Litigation Trust Beneficiary its Pro Rata share of the OpCo Trust Property Then Available For
Distribution.
(c) Prior to making any distribution, the Trustee shall, in consultation with and subject to the
approval of the Oversight Committee, determine such amounts (the “Expense Reserve”) that are
(i) reasonably necessary to meet liabilities (whether fixed or contingent), (ii) necessary to pay
reasonable expenses (including, but not limited to, any fees to professionals retained by the
Litigation Trust or taxes imposed on the Litigation Trust or in respect of the Trust
19
Property), and (iii) necessary to satisfy other reasonable liabilities reasonably incurred by the
Litigation Trust (including the fees and expenses payable to the Trustee) in accordance with this
Agreement and the Plan. Liabilities and expenses attributable to Causes of Action contributed to
the Litigation Trust by HoldCo shall be included in the HoldCo Expense Reserve and liabilities
and expenses attributable to Causes of Action contributed to the Litigation Trust by OpCo shall
be included in the OpCo Expense Reserve, and liabilities and expenses that are attributable to
Causes of Action contributed to the Litigation Trust by HoldCo and Causes of Action contributed
to the Litigation Trust by OpCo or that are not attributable to any specific Cause of Action shall be
allocated among the HoldCo Expense Reserve and the OpCo Expense reserve as determined
by the Trustee in the Trustee’s good faith discretion based on the Litigation Trust’s cash on hand
and the Trustees good faith estimate of the relative value of the Contributed Claims then held by
the Litigation Trust (and the Trustee may from time to time true-up any the HoldCo expense
reserve and OpCo expense reserve to achieve the foregoing allocation., taking into account, for
purposes of the foregoing, the availability, where applicable, of cash already on hand or
scheduled to be received to satisfy such liabilities or expenses.
(d) All distributions made by the Trustee shall be payable to the holders of the Litigation Trust
Interests entitled thereto as reflected on the Register. If the distribution shall be in cash, the
Trustee shall distribute such cash by wire, check, or such other form as the Trustee deems
appropriate under the circumstances.
7.2 Distributions; Notice of Withholding. All distributions under this Agreement shall be made
by the Trustee. The Trustee may withhold from amounts distributable or otherwise allocable to
any Beneficiary any and all amounts, determined in the Trustee’s sole discretion, to be required
by any law, regulation, rule, ruling, directive, or other governmental requirement, and as further
provided in Section 8.3. All such amounts withheld shall be treated as amounts distributed to
such Beneficiary for all purposes of the Plan. Prior to the making of any distributions
contemplated hereunder to any class of Beneficiaries, the Trustee shall provide the Oversight
Committee with three (3) business days’ written notice of any such distribution, which notice shall
include a summary of the aggregate amounts to be distributed to each class of
Beneficiaries. Within two (2) business days of receipt of the notice of distribution, any Member of
the Oversight Committee may request additional information regarding the calculation of the
aggregate distribution amounts for such class of Beneficiaries.
ARTICLE VIII
TAXES
8.1 Income Tax Status. Consistent with Revenue Procedure 94-45, 1994-28 I.R.B. 124, the
Litigation Trust shall be treated, and the Trustee shall use his best efforts to operate and maintain
the Litigation Trust, as a liquidating trust pursuant to Treasury Regulation Section 301.7701-4(d)
and as a grantor trust pursuant to IRC Sections 671-677. Accordingly, the Beneficiaries shall be
treated, for federal income tax purposes, (i) as direct recipients of an undivided interest in the
Trust Assets (other than to the extent such Trust Assets are allocable to Disputed Claims or as is
otherwise set forth in the Plan) and as having immediately contributed such Trust Assets to the
Litigation Trust, and (ii) thereafter, as the grantors and the deemed owners of the Litigation Trust
and, thus, the direct owners of an undivided interest in the Trust Assets (other than the Trust
Assets as are allocable to Disputed Claims or as is otherwise set forth in the Plan).
20
8.2 Valuations. As soon as possible after the Effective Date, the Trustee, in consultation with any
financial advisors it deems appropriate, shall make a good faith valuation of the Trust Assets, and
such valuation shall be used consistently by all parties (including, without limitation, the Litigation
Trust and the Beneficiaries) for all federal income tax purposes. Accordingly, the Trustee shall,
as relevant from time to time, make such values available to the parties. The Litigation Trust also
shall file (or cause to be filed) any other statements, returns, or disclosures relating to the
Litigation Trust that are required by any governmental unit.
8.3 Tax Returns; Withholding of Taxes and Reporting Related to Litigation Trust
Operations.
(a) In accordance with IRC Section 6012 and Treasury Regulation Section 1.671-4(a), the
Litigation Trust shall file with the IRS annual tax returns on Form 1041. In addition, the Litigation
Trust shall file in a timely manner such other tax returns, including any state and local tax returns,
as are required by applicable law and pay any taxes shown as due thereon. Such returns shall
be consistent with the treatment of the Litigation Trust as a liquidating trust within the meaning of
Treasury Regulations Section 301.7701-4(d) that is a grantor trust pursuant to Treasury
Regulations Section 1.671-1(a), other than with respect to any Disputed Claims reserve, which
shall be consistent with the treatment of such Disputed Claims reserve as a “disputed ownership
fund” within the meaning of Treasury Regulations Section 1.468B-(9)(b)(1) as provided in
Section 8.5, and to the extent permitted by applicable law, report consistently the foregoing for
state and local income tax purposes. Within a reasonable time following the end of the taxable
year, the Litigation Trust shall send to each Beneficiary a separate statement setting forth the
Beneficiary’s share of items of income, gain, loss, deduction or credit and will instruct each such
Beneficiary to report such items on their federal income tax returns.
(b) Allocations of Litigation Trust taxable income among the Beneficiaries of the Litigation Trust
(other than taxable income allocable to any Disputed Claims reserve) shall be determined by
reference to the manner in which an amount of cash representing such taxable income would be
distributed (were such cash permitted to be distributed at such time) if, immediately prior to such
deemed distribution, the Litigation Trust had distributed all its assets (valued at their tax book
value, and other than assets allocable to any Disputed Claims reserve) to the holders of the
Litigation Trust interests, adjusted for prior taxable income and loss and taking into account all
prior and concurrent distributions from the Litigation Trust. Similarly, taxable loss of the Litigation
Trust shall be allocated by reference to the manner in which an economic loss would be borne
immediately after a hypothetical liquidating distribution of the remaining Trust Property. The tax
book value of the Trust Property for the purposes of this section 8.2(b) shall equal their fair market
value on the Effective Date, adjusted in accordance with tax accounting principles prescribed by
the IRC, applicable Treasury Regulations, and other applicable administrative and judicial
authorities and pronouncements.
(c) In connection with the Plan and all distributions thereunder, the Trustee shall, to the extent
applicable, comply with all tax withholding and reporting requirements
21
imposed by any federal, state, provincial, local, or foreign taxing authority, and all distributions
thereunder shall be subject to any such withholding and reporting requirements. The Trustee is
authorized by the Plan to take any and all actions that may be necessary or appropriate to
comply with such withholding and reporting requirements. Notwithstanding any other provision of
the Plan, (a) each holder of an Allowed Claim that is to receive a distribution pursuant to the Plan
has sole and exclusive responsibility for the satisfaction and payment of any tax obligations
imposed by any Governmental Unit, including income, withholding, and other tax obligations, on
account of such distribution, and (b) no distribution shall be made to or on behalf of such holder
pursuant to the Plan unless and until such holder has made arrangements satisfactory to the
Trustee for the payment and satisfaction of such withholding tax obligations. Any property to be
distributed pursuant to the Plan, pending the implementation of such arrangements, shall be
treated as an undeliverable distribution to be held by the Trustee until such time as the Trustee is
satisfied with the holder’s arrangements for any withholding tax obligations. The Trustee may
require any Beneficiary to furnish to the Trustee its social security number or employer or
taxpayer identification number as assigned by the IRS, and the Trustee may condition any
distribution to any Beneficiary upon the receipt of such identification number(s) or other
information the Trustee reasonably determines to be necessary in connection with the
withholding of taxes.
8.4 Treatment of Disputed Claims Reserve. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Agreement to the contrary, subject to definitive guidance from the IRS or a court of competent
jurisdiction to the contrary, the Trustee shall (i) treat any Trust Assets allocable to, or retained on
account of, the Disputed Claims as held by one or more discrete trusts for federal income tax
purposes, consisting of separate and independent shares to be established in respect of each
Disputed Claim, in accordance with the trust provisions of the IRC (sections 641 et seq.) or
(ii) elect to treat such Trust Assets as a “disputed ownership fund” governed by Treasury
Regulation Section 1.468B-9. All parties shall report, for income tax purposes, consistent with the
foregoing. In the event, and to the extent, any Cash retained on account of a Disputed Claim in
any Disputed Claims reserve is insufficient to pay the portion of any such taxes attributable to the
taxable income arising from the assets allocable to, or retained on account of, such Disputed
Claim, such taxes shall be (a) reimbursed from any subsequent Cash amounts retained on
account of such Disputed Claim, or (b) to the extent such Disputed Claim has subsequently been
resolved, deducted from any amounts distributable by the Trustee as a result of the resolution of
such Disputed Claim.
8.5 Expedited Determination of Taxes. The Litigation Trust may request an expedited
determination of taxes of the Debtors and of the Litigation Trust, including any Disputed Claims
reserve, under Bankruptcy Code section 505 for all returns filed for, or on behalf of, the Debtors
and the Litigation Trust for all taxable periods through the termination of the Litigation Trust.
ARTICLE IX
TERMINATION OF LITIGATION TRUST
9.1 Termination of Litigation Trust. The Trustee shall be discharged and the Litigation Trust
shall be terminated, at such time as (i) all of the Trust Assets have been liquidated, (ii) all duties
and obligations of the Trustee hereunder have been fulfilled, and (iii) all
22
distributions required to be made by the Trustee under the Plan and this Agreement have been
made; provided, however, that in no event shall the Litigation Trust be terminated later than the
term of the Litigation Trust under Section 9.2 of this Agreement, as such term may be extended
pursuant to Section 9.2.
9.2 Maximum Term. The term of the Litigation Trust shall end no later than the third (3rd)
anniversary of the Effective Date (the “Initial Litigation Trust Term”); provided, however, that on or
prior to such termination, the Bankruptcy Court, upon motion by Trustee or a party in interest, may
within the six-month period prior to the third (3rd) anniversary (or within the six-month period prior
to the end of any extension period), extend the term of the Litigation Trust for a fixed period if it is
necessary to facilitate or complete the liquidation and distribution of the Trust Assets, provided,
however, that the aggregate of all such extensions shall not exceed three (3) years, unless the
Trustee receives a favorable ruling from the IRS that any further extension would not adversely
affect the status of the Litigation trust as a grantor trust for federal income tax purposes. The
Trustee will not unduly prolong the duration of the Litigation Trust and will at all times endeavor
to resolve, settle or otherwise dispose of all Trust Assets, to effect distributions to Beneficiaries in
accordance with the terms hereof, the Plan and Confirmation Order and to terminate the Litigation
Trust as soon as practicable in a prompt and timely fashion. In the event that the Trustee elects to
terminate the Litigation Trust, he shall provide twenty (20) day notice thereof to the Office of the
United States Trustee, the Reorganized Debtors, and the Oversight Committee, and file such
notice with the Bankruptcy Court and upon such termination, the Trustee shall cease to act as the
Trustee and the Oversight Committee shall be disbanded such that neither the Trustee nor the
members of the Oversight Committee shall have any further duties or responsibilities under the
Agreement or otherwise.
9.3 Events Upon End of Term Termination. At the conclusion of the term of the Litigation Trust,
(a) the Trustee shall distribute any remaining Trust Proceeds, if any, to the Beneficiaries, in
accordance with Article VII; provided, however, that the Trustee shall not be obligated to make
distributions if the amount of the available cash is de minimis and is not sufficient to warrant the
incurrence of the cost of making such distribution and (b) any remaining Trust Assets (other than
Trust Proceeds) shall revert to and vest in the Reorganized Debtor (or its successor) that
contributed the applicable Trust Asset.
9.4 Winding Up and Discharge of the Trustee. For the purposes of winding up the affairs of the
Litigation Trust at the conclusion of its term, the Trustee shall continue to act as Trustee until its
duties under this Agreement have been fully discharged or its role as Trustee is otherwise
terminated under this Agreement and the Plan. Upon a motion by the Trustee, the Bankruptcy
Court may enter an order relieving the Trustee, its agents, and employees of any further duties,
discharging the Trustee and releasing its bond, if any.
ARTICLE X
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
10.1 Amendments. The Trustee may, with the approval of the Oversight Committee, modify,
supplement, or amend this Agreement but only to clarify any ambiguity or inconsistency, or
render the Agreement in compliance with its stated tax purposes, and only if such amendment
does not materially and adversely affect the interests, rights, treatment, or
23
distributions of any Beneficiaries. The Trustee may, with the approval of a majority of the
Members of the Oversight Committee, modify, supplement, or amend this Agreement in any way
that is not inconsistent with the Plan or the Confirmation Order. In the event that a majority of the
Members of the Oversight Committee are unable to reach a consensus regarding a proposed
modification, supplement, or amendment, the Trustee may seek Bankruptcy Court approval of
any such modification, supplement, or amendment. Notwithstanding anything in this Section 10.1
to the contrary, any amendments to this Agreement shall not be inconsistent with the purpose
and intention of the Litigation Trust to liquidate in an expeditious but orderly manner the Trust
Assets in accordance with Treasury Regulations Section 301.7701-4(d) and this Agreement.
10.2 Waiver. No failure by the Litigation Trust, the Trustee, or the Oversight Committee to
exercise or delay in exercising any right, power or privilege hereunder shall operate as a waiver,
nor shall any single or partial exercise of any right, power, or privilege hereunder preclude any
further exercise thereof, or of any other right, power or privilege.
10.3 Cumulative Rights and Remedies. The rights and remedies provided in this Agreement
are cumulative and are not exclusive of any rights under law or in equity.
10.4 No Bond Required. Notwithstanding any state law to the contrary, the Trustee (including
any successor Trustee) shall be exempt from giving any bond or other security in any jurisdiction.
10.5 Irrevocability. This Agreement and the Litigation Trust created hereunder shall be
irrevocable, except as otherwise expressly provided in this Agreement.
10.6 Relationship to the Plan. The principal purpose of this Agreement is to aid in the
implementation of the Plan and, therefore, this Agreement incorporates and is subject to the
provisions of the Plan and the Confirmation Order. In the event that any provision of this
Agreement is found to be inconsistent with a provision of the Plan or the Confirmation Order, the
provisions of the Plan or the Confirmation Order, as applicable, shall control. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in this Agreement, the Litigation Trust, the Oversight Committee, and the
Members shall be bound by the terms of the Plan and, accordingly, shall not commence any
proceeding with respect to any Cause of Action released, enjoined, and/or exculpated pursuant
to the Plan.
10.7 Division of Litigation Trust. Under no circumstances shall the Trustee have the right or
power to divide the Litigation Trust unless authorized to do so by the Oversight Committee and
the Bankruptcy Court.
10.8 Applicable Law. The Litigation Trust is made in the State of Delaware, and the Litigation
Trust and this Agreement, and the rights and obligations of the Trustee or the Oversight
Committee are to be governed by and construed and administered according to the laws of the
State of Delaware; provided, however, that, except as expressly provided in this Agreement,
there shall not be applicable to the Litigation Trust, the Trustee, the Oversight Committee or its
Members, or this Agreement any provisions of the laws (statutory or common) of the State of
Delaware pertaining to trusts which relate to or regulate: (i) the filing with any
24
court or governmental body or agency of trustee accounts or schedules of trustee fees and
charges; (ii) affirmative requirements to post bonds for trustees, officers, agents, or employees of
a trust; (iii) the necessity for obtaining court or other governmental approval concerning the
acquisition, holding or disposition of real or personal property; (iv) fees or other sums payable to
trustees, officers, agents or employees of a trust; (v) the allocation of receipts and expenditures to
income or principal; (vi) restrictions or limitations on the permissible nature, amount or
concentration of trust investments or requirements relating to the titling, storage or other manner
of holding of trust assets; or (vii) the establishment of fiduciary or other standards or
responsibilities or limitations on the acts or powers of trustees, which are inconsistent with the
limitations or liabilities or authorities and powers of the Trustee set forth or referenced in this
Agreement.
10.9 Retention of Jurisdiction. Notwithstanding the Effective Date, and to the fullest extent
permitted by law and as set forth in Article XII of the Plan, the Bankruptcy Court shall retain
exclusive jurisdiction over the Litigation Trust after the Effective Date, including, without
limitation, jurisdiction to resolve any and all controversies, suits, and issues that may arise in
connection therewith, including, without limitation, this Agreement, or any entity’s obligations
incurred in connection herewith, including without limitation, any action against the Trustee or
any Member of the Oversight Committee or any professional retained by the Trustee or the
Oversight Committee, in each case in its capacity as such. Each party to this Agreement and
each beneficiary of the Litigation Trust hereby irrevocably consents to the exclusive jurisdiction of
the Bankruptcy Court in any action to enforce, interpret, or construe any provision of this
Agreement or of any other agreement or document delivered in connection with this Agreement,
and also hereby irrevocably waives any defense of improper venue, forum non conveniens, or
lack of personal jurisdiction to any such action brought in the Bankruptcy Court. Each party
further irrevocably agrees that any action to enforce, interpret, or construe any provision of this
Agreement will be brought only in the Bankruptcy Court. Each party hereby irrevocably consents
to the service by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, of any process in any action
to enforce, interpret or construe any provision of this Agreement. Notwithstanding the preceding,
nothing herein shall be interpreted as requiring the commencement or prosecution of any Causes
of Action in the Bankruptcy Court, and all determinations regarding the proper forum for initiating
any Cause of Action shall be at the discretion of the Litigation Trust, consistent with applicable
law.
10.10 Severability. In the event that any provision of this Agreement or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance shall be determined by the Bankruptcy Court to be invalid or
unenforceable to any extent, the remainder of this Agreement, or the application of such provision
to persons or circumstance, other than those as to which it is held invalid or unenforceable, shall
not be affected thereby, and such provision of this Agreement shall be valid and enforced to the
fullest extent permitted by law.
10.11 Limitation of Benefits. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Agreement, the
Plan, or the Confirmation Order, nothing herein is intended or shall be construed to confer on or
to give any person other than the parties hereto and the Beneficiaries any rights or remedies
under or by reason of this Agreement.
25
10.12 Notices. All notices, requests, demands, consents, and other communication hereunder
shall be in writing and shall be deemed to have been duly given to a person, if delivered in
person or if sent by overnight mail, registered mail, certified mail or regular mail, with postage
prepaid, to the following addresses:
If to the Trustee:
Drivetrain Advisors, Ltd.
630 Third Avenue, 21st Floor
New York, NY 10017
Attention: Alan Carr
with a copy to:
Weil, Gotshal and Manges LLP
767 Fifth Avenue
New York, New York 10153
Attention: Matt Barr and David Griffiths
If to a Beneficiary:
To the name and mailing address set forth in the Register with respect to such Beneficiary.
If to the reorganized Debtors:
Seventy Seven Energy Inc.
777 NW 63rd Street
Oklahoma City, OK 73116
Attention: David Treadwell, Esq.
The parties may designate in writing from time to time other and additional places to which
notices may be sent.
10.13 Further Assurances. From and after the Effective Date, the parties hereto covenant and
agree to execute and deliver all such documents and notices and to take all such further actions
as may reasonably be required from time to time to carry out the intent and purposes of this
Agreement, and to consummate the transactions contemplated hereby.
10.14 Integration. This Agreement, the Plan, and the Confirmation Order constitute the entire
agreement with, by, and among the parties thereto, and there are no representations, warranties,
covenants, or obligations except as set forth herein, in the Plan, and in the Confirmation
Order. This Agreement, together with the Plan and the Confirmation Order, supersede all prior
and contemporaneous agreements, understandings, negotiations, and discussions, written or
oral, of the parties hereto, relating to any transaction contemplated hereunder. Except as
otherwise provided in this Agreement, the Plan, or Confirmation Order, nothing herein is intended
or shall be construed to confer upon or give any person other than the
26
parties hereto and the Beneficiaries any rights or remedies under or by reason of this
Agreement. To the extent there is an inconsistency between the Plan and this Agreement, the
Plan shall control.
10.15 Interpretation. The enumeration and Section headings contained in this Agreement are
solely for convenience of reference and shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this
Agreement or of any term or provision hereof. Unless context otherwise requires, whenever used
in this Agreement the singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular,
and words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and the neuter, if
appropriate, and vice versa, and words importing persons shall include partnerships,
associations and corporations. The words herein, hereby, and hereunder and words with similar
import, refer to this Agreement as a whole and not to any particular Section or subsection hereof
unless the context requires otherwise. Any reference to the “Trustee” shall be deemed to include
a reference to the “Litigation Trust” and any reference to the “Litigation Trust” shall be deemed to
include a reference to the “Trustee” except for the references in Sections 5.1, 5.2, and such other
provisions in which the context otherwise requires.
10.16 Counterparts. This Agreement may be signed by the parties hereto in counterparts,
which, when taken together, shall constitute one and the same document.
[Signature Page(s) Follow(s)]
27
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have either executed and acknowledged this
Agreement, or caused it to be executed and acknowledged on their behalf by their duly
authorized officers or representatives, all as of the date first above written.
DEBTORS
SEVENTY SEVEN ENERGY INC.
on behalf of itself and each of the other
Debtors
By:
 /s/ Cary Baetz
Title:
 Cary Baetz
Name:
Chief Financial Officer and
 
Treasurer
THE LITIGATION TRUSTEE
By: /s/ Alan Carr
Alan Carr
AGREED AND ACKNOWLEDGED BY:
Members of the Oversight Committee
/s/ Omar Vaishnavi
Omar Vaishnavi
/s/ Victor Danh
Victor Danh
Schedule A
“Beneficiaries” means, collectively the HoldCo Litigation Trust Beneficiaries and the OpCo
Litigation Trust Beneficiaries.
“Cause of Action” means any action, claim, cross-claim, third-party claim, cause of action,
controversy, demand, right, lien, indemnity, contribution, guarantee, suit, obligation, liability, debt,
damage, judgment, account, defense, remedy, offset, power, privilege, license and franchise of
any kind or character whatsoever, known, unknown, contingent or non-contingent, matured or
unmatured, suspected or unsuspected, liquidated or unliquidated, disputed or undisputed,
foreseen or unforeseen, direct or indirect, choate or inchoate, secured or unsecured, assertable
directly or derivatively (including, without limitation, under alter ego theories), whether arising
before, on, or after the Petition Date, in contract or in tort, in law or in equity or pursuant to any
other theory of law. For the avoidance of doubt, Cause of Action includes: (a) any right of setoff,
counterclaim or recoupment and any claim for breach of contract or for breach of duties imposed
by law or in equity; (b) the right to object to Claims or Interests; (c) any claim pursuant to sections
362 or chapter 5 of the Bankruptcy Code; (d) any claim or defense including fraud, mistake,
duress and usury and any other defenses set forth in section 558 of the Bankruptcy Code; and (e)
any claims under any state or foreign law, including, without limitation, any fraudulent transfer or
similar claims.
“HoldCo Expense Reserve” means the Expense Reserve to the extent attributable to Causes of
Action contributed to the Litigation Trust by HoldCo.
“HoldCo Litigation Proceeds” means the proceeds of any Causes of Action assigned and
transferred to the Litigation Trust by HoldCo.
“HoldCo Litigation Trust Beneficiaries” means, collectively, the holders of the OpCo Notes
Guaranty Claims and the holders of the HoldCo Notes Claims.
“HoldCo Notes Claims” has the meaning given such term in the Plan.
“HoldCo Trust Property Then Available For Distribution” means all cash and cash
equivalents (including without limitation all Permitted Investments) that constitute HoldCo
Litigation Proceeds, or any earnings thereon, less the amount of the HoldCo Expense Reserve.
“OpCo Expense Reserve” means the Expense Reserve to the extent attributable to Causes of
Action contributed to the Litigation Trust by OpCo.
“OpCo Litigation Proceeds” means the proceeds of any Causes of Action assigned and
transferred to the Litigation Trust by any Debtor other than HoldCo.
“OpCo Litigation Trust Beneficiaries” means the holders of the OpCo Notes Claims.
“OpCo Notes Claims” has the meaning given such term in the Plan.
“OpCo Notes Guaranty Claims” has the meaning given such term in the Plan.
“OpCo Trust Property Then Available For Distribution” means all cash and cash equivalents
(including without limitation all Permitted Investments) that constitute Opco Litigation Proceeds,
or any earnings thereon, less the amount of the OpCo Expense Reserve.
“Permitted Investments” means:
(i) securities issued or directly and fully guaranteed or insured by the government of the
United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof having maturities of not more than
one year from the date of acquisition;
(ii) time deposits, certificates of deposit and bankers’ acceptances of any domestic
commercial bank the short term debt obligations of which have been rated A-1 by
Standard & Poor’s Corporation or P-1 by Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. and which
mature in not more than one year;
(iii) commercial paper rated A-1 or the equivalent thereof by Standard & Poor’s Corporation
or P-1 or the equivalent thereof by Moody’s Investors Service, Inc., and in each case
having maturities of not more than ninety (90) days from the date of acquisition; and
(iv) money market funds or money market mutual funds (other than closed-end funds) which
maintain a constant net asset value and have at the time of such investment a rating by
Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. or Standard & Poor’s Corporation at least equivalent to
“A.”
“Pro Rata” means (i) with respect each HoldCo Litigation Trust Beneficiary, the aggregate
amount of the Allowed OpCo Note Guaranty Claims and HoldCo Note Claims held by such
HoldCo Litigation Trust Beneficiary divided by the aggregate amount of all Allowed OpCo Note
Guaranty Claims and HoldCo Note Claims held by all HoldCo Litigation Trust Beneficiaries, (ii)
with respect each OpCo Litigation Trust Beneficiary, the aggregate amount of the Allowed OpCo
Notes Claims held by such OpCo Litigation Trust Beneficiary divided by the aggregate amount of
all Allowed OpCo Notes Claims held by all OpCo Litigation Trust Beneficiaries, and (iii) with
respect to any matter that requires pro rata application as among the Beneficiaries other than with
respect to Holdco Litigation Trust Beneficiaries, as a class (covered by clause (i) above), or with
respect to Opco Litigation Trust Beneficiaries, as a class (covered by clause (ii) above), the
aggregate amount of Allowed HoldCo Notes Claims, Allowed OpCo Notes Guaranty Claims and
Allowed OpCo Notes Claims held by that person over the aggregate of the Allowed HoldCo
Notes Claims, Allowed OpCo Notes Guaranty Claims and Allowed OpCo Notes Claims.
“Proceeding” means any judicial, administrative or arbitral action, suit, proceeding (public or
private), litigation, investigation, complaint, demand, claim, action, charge, dispute, governmental
proceeding or other similar formal proceeding.
“Prosecute” means to pursue the resolution of, enforcement of rights under and recovery of
amounts or other damages, through any Proceeding or otherwise.
“Released Parties” means, collectively, and in each case in their capacities as such: the
Exculpated Parties (as defined in the Plan).
“Spin-Off” means the series of transactions by which HoldCo was formed and, together with the
other Debtors, became separated from Chesapeake Energy Corporation and its affiliates.
“Trust Proceeds” means the proceeds and other receipts of, from or attributable to the Trust
Assets.
“Trust Property” means, collectively, the Trust Assets and the Trust Proceeds.
“Trust Property Then Available For Distribution” as of any distribution date shall be
determined by the Trustee in advance of each distribution date by subtracting the Expense
Reserve from the then available Trust Proceeds.
Schedule B
Trustee Compensation
$50,000, paid in a single lump sum payment. The Trustee’s compensation shall be earned on a
monthly basis in advance, at the rate of $1,400.00 per month for the first 35 months and $1,000
for the 36th month, provided the full amount of $50,000 shall be fully earned on any termination of
the trust prior to the full fee otherwise being earned, and if the trustee resigns for reasons other
than the failure of the provision of payment for costs and expenses deemed necessary by the
Trustee in connection with the Trustee’s performance of any obligations under this Agreement as
provided in Section 5.7 any unearned amount of such compensation shall be property of the
Trust.