
FORM 52-109F2
CERTIFICATION OF INTERIM FILINGS
FULL CERTIFICATE
I, Matthew Manson, President and Chief Executive Officer of Stornoway Diamond Corporation,  certify 
the following:
1. Review:  I  have  reviewed  the  interim  financial  report  and  interim  MD&A  (together,  the  "interim 
filings") of Stornoway Diamond Corporation (the "issuer") for the interim period ended June 30, 2016.
2.  No  misrepresentations:  Based  on  my  knowledge,  having  exercised  reasonable  diligence,  the 
interim  filings  do  not  contain  any  untrue  statement  of  a  material  fact  or  omit  to  state  a  material 
fact  required  to  be  stated  or  that  is  necessary  to  make  a  statement  not  misleading  in  light  of  the 
circumstances under which it was made, with respect to the period covered by the  interim filings.
3.  Fair  presentation:  Based  on  my  knowledge,  having  exercised  reasonable  diligence,  the  interim 
financial  report  together  with  the  other  financial  information  included  in  the  interim  filings 
fairly 
present  in  all  material  respects  the  financial  condition,  financial  performance  and  cash  flows of the 
issuer, as of the date of and for the periods presented in the interim filings.
4. Responsibility:  The  issuer’s  other  certifying  officer(s)  and  I  are  responsible  for  establishing  and 
maintaining  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  (DC&P)  and  internal  control  over  financial  reporting 
(ICFR),  as  those  terms  are  defined  in  Regulation  52-109  respecting  Certification  of  Disclosure  in 
Issuers’ Annual and Interim Filings (c. V-1.1, r. 27), for the issuer.
5. Design:  Subject  to  the  limitations,  if  any,  described  in  paragraphs  5.2  and  5.3,  the  issuer’s  other 
certifying officer(s) and I have, as at the end of the period covered by the interim filings
(a)  designed  DC&P,  or  caused 
reasonable assurance that
it  to  be  designed  under  our  supervision,  to  provide
(i)  material  information  relating  to  the  issuer  is  made  known  to  us  by  others, 
particularly during the period in which the interim filings are being prepared; and
(ii) information  required  to  be  disclosed  by  the  issuer  in  its  annual  filings,  interim 
filings  or  other  reports  filed  or  submitted  by  it  under  securities  legislation  is 
recorded,  processed,  summarized  and  reported  within  the  time  periods  specified  in 
securities legislation; and
ICFR,  or  caused
(b)  designed 
it  to  be  designed  under  our  supervision,  to  provide 
reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of 
financial statements for external purposes in accordance with the issuer’s GAAP.
5.1  Control  framework:  The  control  framework  the  issuer’s  other  certifying  officer(s)  and  I  used  to 
design  the  issuer’s  ICFR  is  based  on  the  framework  establish  in  the  Internal  Control  –  Integrated 
Framework issued in 2013 by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission 
(COSO).
1
5.2  N/A
5.3  N/A
6. Reporting changes in ICFR: The issuer has disclosed in its interim MD&A any change in the  issuer’s 
ICFR  that  occurred  during  the  period  beginning  on April 1, 2016  and  ended  on June 30, 2016  that  has 
materially  affected,  or  is  reasonably  likely  to  materially  affect,  the  issuer’s ICFR.
Date: August 8, 2016
/s/ “Matthew Manson”
Matthew Manson 
President and Chief Executive Officer
M.O. 2008-16, Sch. 52-109F2; M.O. 2010-17, s. 5.
2