
.
MR  SAM  SAMPLE
123  SAMPLES  STREET
SAMPLETOWN  SS  X9X 9X9
9th Floor, 100 University Avenue
Toronto, Ontario M5J 2Y1
www.computershare.com
Security Class
123
Holder Account Number
C1234567890
X X X
Form of Proxy - Annual and Special Meeting to be held on May 9, 2007
This Form of Proxy is solicited by and on behalf of Management.
Notes to proxy
1. Every unitholder has the right to appoint some other person or company of their choice, who need not be a unitholder, to attend and act on their behalf at the meeting. If you wish
to appoint a person or company other than the persons whose names are printed herein, please insert the name of your chosen proxyholder in the space provided (see reverse).
2. If  the  securities  are  registered  in  the  name  of  more  than  one  owner  (for  example,  joint  ownership,  trustees,  executors,  etc.),  then  all  those  registered  should  sign  this  proxy.  If  you
are  voting  on  behalf  of  a  corporation  or  another  individual  you  may  be  required  to  provide  documentation  evidencing  your  power  to  sign  this  proxy  with  signing  capacity  stated.
3. This  proxy  should  be  signed  in  the  exact  manner  as  the  name  appears  on  the  proxy.
4. If  this  proxy  is  not  dated,  it  will  be  deemed  to  bear  the  date  on  which  it  is  mailed  by  Management  to  the  unitholder.
5. The securities represented by this proxy will be voted as directed by the unitholder, however, if such a direction is not made in respect of any matter, this proxy will be voted as
recommended by Management.
6. The  securities  represented  by  this  proxy  will  be  voted  or  withheld  from  voting,  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  of  the  unitholder,  on  any  ballot  that  may  be  called  for  and,  if  the
unitholder  has  specified  a  choice  with  respect  to  any  matter  to  be  acted  on,  the  securities  will  be  voted  accordingly.
7.  This  proxy  confers  discretionary  authority  in  respect  of  amendments  to  matters  identified  in  the  notice  of  meeting  or  other  matters  that  may  properly  come  before  the  meeting.
8.  This  proxy  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  the  accompanying  documentation  provided  by  Management.
Proxies submitted must be received by 3:00 pm, Calgary Time, on May 7, 2007.
Fold
Fold
VOTE USING THE TELEPHONE OR INTERNET 24 HOURS A DAY 7 DAYS A WEEK!
.
.
.
To Vote Using the Telephone
To Vote Using the Internet
To Receive Documents Electronically
• Call  the  number  listed  BELOW  from  a  touch  tone
telephone.
1-866-732-VOTE (8683) Toll Free
• Go  to  the  following  web  site: 
www.computershare.com/proxy
• You  can  enroll  to  receive  future  securityholder
communications  electronically,  by  visiting
www.computershare.com  -  click  "Enroll  for  e-delivery"
under  the  Shareholder  Services  menu.
If you vote by telephone or the Internet, DO NOT mail back this proxy.
Voting by mail may  be  the  only  method  for  securities  held  in  the  name  of  a  corporation  or  securities  being  voted  on  behalf  of  another  individual.
Voting by mail or by Internet are  the  only  methods  by  which  a  unitholder  may  appoint  a  person  as  proxyholder  other  than  the  Management  nominees  named  on  the  reverse  of  this
proxy.  Instead  of  mailing  this  proxy,  you  may  choose  one  of  the  two  voting  methods  outlined  above  to  vote  this  proxy.
To vote by telephone or the Internet, you will need to provide your CONTROL NUMBER, HOLDER ACCOUNT NUMBER and ACCESS NUMBER listed below.
CONTROL NUMBER 123456
HOLDER  ACCOUNT NUMBER C1234567890
ACCESS NUMBER 12345
00FL7D
CPUQC01.E.INT/000001/i1234
.
MR  SAM  SAMPLE
Appointment of Proxyholder
The  undersigned  unitholder  of  Precision  Drilling  Trust  (the  "Trust")
hereby  appoints  Gene  C.  Stahl  of  Calgary, Alberta,  or  failing  him,
Doug  J.  Strong  of  Calgary, Alberta
C1234567890
XXX
123
OR
Print the name of the person you are
appointing if this person is someone
other than the Management
Nominees listed herein.
as  proxyholder  to  attend  and  vote  for  and  on  behalf  of  the  undersigned  at  the  annual  and  special  meeting  of  the  Trust  (the  “Meeting”)  to  be  held  at  the  Calgary  Chamber  of
Commerce,  100-6th Avenue  S.W.,  Calgary, Alberta  on  Wednesday,  May  9,  2007  at  3:00  p.m.  (Calgary  Time)  and  at  any  adjournments  thereof,  and  without  limiting  the  foregoing,
the  said  proxyholder  is  hereby  instructed  to  vote  at  the  said  Meeting  as  follows:
VOTING RECOMMENDATIONS ARE INDICATED BY HIGHLIGHTED TEXT OVER THE BOXES.
1. Electing  the  following  nominees  as  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  Trust  for  the  ensuing  year:
Robert  J.S.  Gibson,  Patrick  M.  Murray, Allen  R.  Hagerman
2. Approving  the  following  nominees  for  appointment  to  the  Board  of  Directors  of  Precision  Drilling  Corporation  for  the  ensuing  year:
W.C.  (Mickey)  Dunn,  Brian A.  Felesky,  Robert  J.S.  Gibson, Allen  R.  Hagerman,  Stephen  J.J.  Letwin,  Patrick  M.  Murray,  Frederick  W.  Pheasey,
Robert  L.  Phillips,  Hank  B.  Swartout
3. Appointing  KPMG  LLP  as  the  auditor  of  the  Trust  for  the  ensuing  year.
4. The  adoption  of  the  ordinary  resolution  (the  “DTU  Plan  Resolution”)  authorizing  and  approving  the  Deferred  Trust  Unit  Plan,  the  full  text  of  which  is
set  forth  in  the  Information  Circular  under  the  heading  “Approval  of  Deferred  Trust  Unit  Plan  for  Non-Management  Directors”  and  approving  the
reservation  and  issuance  of  up  to  200,000  Trust  Units  to  be  issued  to  the  directors  of  Precision  Drilling  Corporation  pursuant  to  the  Deferred  Trust
Unit  Plan,  as  more  particularly  described  in  the  accompanying  Information  Circular.
5. The  adoption  of  the  ordinary  resolution  (the  “Rights  Plan  Resolution”)  authorizing  and  approving  the  adoption  of  a  unitholder  rights  plan  of  the  Trust,
the  full  text  of  which  is  set  forth  in  the  Information  Circular  under  the  heading  “Approval  of  Unitholder  Rights  Plan.”
For
Withhold
Fold
For
Against
For
Withhold
For
Against
For
Against
At  the  discretion  of  such  nominee  with  respect  to  amendments  to  the  matters  identified  in  the  Notice  of  Meeting  and  on  such  other  business  as  may  properly  come  before  such
meeting  or  any  adjournment  thereof.
Fold
Authorized Signature(s) - This section must be
completed for your instructions to be executed.
I/We  authorize  you  to  act  in  accordance  with  my/our  instructions  set  out  above.  I/We
hereby  revoke  any  proxy  previously  given  with  respect  to  the  Meeting.  If no voting
instructions are indicated above, this Proxy will be voted as recommended by
Management.
Interim Financial Statements
Mark  this  box  if  you  would  like  to  receive  Interim  Financial  Statements  and
accompanying  Management’s  Discussion  and Analysis  by  mail.
If  you  are  not  mailing  back  your  proxy,  you  may  register  online  to  receive  the  above  financial  report(s)  by  mail  at  www.computershare.com/mailinglist.
9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9
0 0 1 1 1 1
9 X X
A R 2
P D A Q
00FL8I
Signature(s)
Date
MM / DD / YY
k
Annual Report 
Mark  this  box  if  you  would  NOT  like  to  receive  the Annual
Report  and  accompanying Annual  Financial  Statements  and
Management’s Discussion  and Analysis  by  mail.