
Information Form and Checklist
(ASX Listing)
Name of entity 
Skyland Petroleum Group Limited
ABN/ARBN/ARSN
613 928 671
We (the entity named above) supply the following information and documents to support our application 
for admission to the official list of ASX Limited (ASX) as an ASX Listing.
Note: the entity warrants in its Appendix 1A ASX Listing Application and Agreement that the information and documents referred to in this 
Information Form and Checklist are (or will be) true and complete and indemnifies ASX to the fullest extent permitted by law in respect of 
any claim, action or expense arising from, or connected with, any breach of that warranty. 
Any Annexures to this Information Form and Checklist form part of the Information Form and Checklist and are covered by the warranty 
referred to above. 
Terms used in this Information Form and Checklist and in any Annexures have the same meaning as in the ASX Listing Rules. 
Part 1 – Key Information 
Instructions: please complete each applicable item below. If an item is not applicable, please mark it as “N/A”.
All entities – corporate details1
Place of incorporation or 
establishment
Date of incorporation or 
establishment
Legislation under which incorporated 
or established
Address of registered office in place 
of incorporation or establishment
Cayman Islands
22 March 2016
Cayman Islands Companies Law (2013 Revision)
89 Nexus Way, Camana Bay, Grand Cayman, KY1-9007, Cayman Islands
Main business activity
Exploration and production oil and gas company
Other exchanges on which the entity 
is listed
N/A
Street address of principal 
administrative office
Postal address of principal 
administrative office
Level 5  
56 Pitt Street  
Sydney New South Wales 2000
P.O. Box 388 
St Peter Port 
Guernsey GY1 3FG 
British Isles
1
If the entity applying for admission to the official list is a stapled structure, please provide these details for each entity comprising the stapled structure.
ASX Listing Information Form and Checklist
Page 1
ME_130026426_3 (W2007)
Telephone number of principal 
administrative office
+44 1481 729981
E-mail address for investor enquiries
info@skylandpetroleum.com
Website URL
www.skylandpetroleum.com
All entities – management details2
Full name and title of CEO/managing 
director
Ms Denise Lay
Full name and title of chairperson of 
directors
Ms Denise Lay
Full names of all existing directors
Ms Denise Lay
Full names of any persons proposed 
to be appointed as additional or 
replacement directors
Full name and title of company 
secretary
All entities – ASX contact details3
Full name and title of ASX contact(s)
Business address of ASX contact(s)
Business phone number of ASX 
contact(s)
Dr. David Robson 
Mr. Mark Sarssam 
Mr. Timothy Hargreaves 
Mr. Piers Johnson 
Mr. Domenic Martino 
Dr. Raden Sukhyar 
Mr. Ghassan Zok
Ms Louisa Martino
Mr. James Rowe 
 
ASX Compliance Pty Ltd 
Level 8, Exchange Plaza 
2 The Esplanade 
Perth WA 6000 
 
(02) 9227 0000
Mobile phone number of ASX 
contact(s)
N/A
Email address of ASX contact(s)
james.rowe@asx.com.au
2 
3
If the entity applying for admission to the official list is a trust, enter the management details for the responsible entity of the trust. 
Under Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 12, a listed entity must appoint a person responsible for communication with ASX. You can appoint more than one 
person to cater for situations where the primary nominated contact is not available.
ASX Listing Information Form and Checklist
Page 2
ME_130026426_3 (W2007)
All entities – auditor details4
Full name of auditor
All entities – registry details5
Name of securities registry
Pricewaterhouse Coopers LLP  
111-5th Avenue SW 
Suite 3100 
Calgary 
Canada
Advanced Share Registry Limited ACN 127 175 946 trading as Advanced Share 
Registry Services.
Address of securities registry
110 Stirling Hwy, Nedlands WA 6009
Phone number of securities registry
(08) 9389 8033
Fax number of securities registry
(08) 9262 3723
Email address of securities registry
l.wang@advancedshare.com.au
Type of subregisters the entity will 
operate6
All entities – key dates
CHESS and issuer sponsored subregisters
Annual balance date
31 December.
Month in which annual meeting is 
usually held (or intended to be held)7
Months in which dividends or 
distributions are usually paid (or are 
intended to be paid)
Trusts – additional details
Name of responsible entity
Duration of appointment of directors 
of responsible entity
Full names of the members of the 
compliance committee (if any)
May
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
4
In certain cases, ASX may require the applicant to provide information about the qualifications and experience of its auditor for release to the market 
before quotation commences (see Guidance Note 1 section 2.10). 
If the entity has different registries for different classes of securities, please indicate clearly which registry details apply to which class of securities. 
Example: CHESS and issuer sponsored subregisters (see Guidance Note 1 section 3.16).
5 
6 
7  May not apply to some trusts.
ASX Listing Information Form and Checklist
Page 3
ME_130026426_3 (W2007)
Entities incorporated or established outside Australia – additional details
Name and address of the entity’s 
Australian agent for service of 
process
If the entity has or intends to have a 
certificated subregister for quoted 
securities, the location of the 
Australian subregister
Address of registered office in 
Australia (if any)
P.O. Box 388 
St Peter Port 
Guernsey GY1 3FG 
British Isles
Advanced Registry Services Limited 
110 Stirling HWY 
Nedlands 
WA 
6009
Level 5  
56 Pitt Street  
Sydney New South Wales 2000
Entities listed or to be listed on another exchange or exchanges
Name of the other exchange(s) where 
the entity is or proposes to be listed
N/A
Primary listing
Is the ASX listing intended to be the 
entity’s primary or secondary listing 
 
Part 2 – Checklist Confirming Compliance with Admission Requirements 
Instructions: please indicate in the “Location/Confirmation” column for each item below and in any Annexures where the information or 
document referred to in that item is to be found (eg in the case of information, the specific page reference in the Offer Document where 
that information is located or, in the case of a document, the folder tab number where that document is located). If the item asks for 
confirmation of a matter, you may simply enter “Confirmed”” in the “Location/Confirmation” column. If an item is not applicable, please mark 
it as “N/A”. 
In this regard, it will greatly assist ASX and speed up its review of the application if the various documents referred to in this Checklist and 
any Annexures (other than the 25 copies of the applicant’s Offer Document referred to in item 4) are provided in a folder separated by 
numbered tabs and if the entity’s constitution and copies of all material contracts are provided both in hard copy and in electronic format. 
Note that completion of this Checklist and any Annexures is not to be taken to represent that the entity is necessarily in full or substantial 
compliance with the ASX Listing Rules or that ASX will admit the entity to its official list. Admission to the official list is in ASX’s absolute 
discretion and ASX may refuse admission without giving any reasons (see Listing Rule 1.19). 
A reference in this Checklist and in any Annexures to the “Offer Document” means the listing prospectus, product disclosure statement or 
information memorandum lodged by the applicant with ASX pursuant to Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 3. 
If the applicant lodges a supplementary or replacement prospectus, product disclosure statement or information memorandum with ASX, 
ASX may require it to update this Checklist and any Annexures by reference to that document.
All entities – key supporting documents
No  Item 
1.   A copy of the entity’s certificate of incorporation, certificate of registration or
Location/Confirmation 
See Annexure A
other evidence of status (including any change of name)
ASX Listing Information Form and Checklist
Page 4
ME_130026426_3 (W2007)
No  Item 
2.   A copy of the entity’s constitution (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 1A)8
3.   Either:
(a) confirmation that the entity’s constitution includes the provisions of
Appendix 15A or Appendix 15B (as applicable); or
(b) a completed checklist that the constitution complies with the Listing
Rules (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 2)9
4.   An electronic version and 25 copies of the Offer Document, as lodged with
ASIC (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 3)
5.   If the entity’s corporate governance statement10 is included in its Offer
Document, the page reference where it is included. Otherwise, a copy of the 
entity’s corporate governance statement (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 13)
6.   If the entity will be included in the S & P All Ordinaries Index on admission to 
the official list,11 where in its Offer Document does it state that it will have an 
audit committee (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 13)
7.   If the entity will be included in the S & P / ASX 300 Index on admission to the 
official list,12 where in its Offer Document does it state that it will comply with 
the recommendations set by the ASX Corporate Governance Council in 
relation to composition and operation of the audit committee (Listing Rule 1.1 
Condition 13)
8.   Original executed agreement with ASX that documents may be given to ASX
and authenticated electronically (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 14)13
9.   If the entity’s trading policy is included in its Offer Document, the page
reference where it is included. Otherwise, a copy of the entity’s trading policy 
(Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 15)
10. If the entity will be included in the S & P / ASX 300 Index on admission to the
official list,14 where in its Offer Document does it state that it will have a 
remuneration committee comprised solely of non-executive directors (Listing 
Rule 1.1 Condition 16)
11. For each director or proposed director,15 a list of the countries in which they
have resided over the past 10 years (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 17 and 
Guidance Note 1 section 3.15)16
Location/Confirmation 
See Annexure B
Confirmed
See email to Jeremy Newman of 21 
June 2016 with Scheme Booklet and 
Information Memorandum attached
See Annexure C
N/A
N/A
See Annexure D
See Annexure E
N/A
N/A
It will assist ASX if the copy of the constitution is provided both in hard copy and in electronic format. 
An electronic copy of the checklist is available from the ASX Compliance Downloads page on ASX’s website.
8 
9 
10  The entity’s “corporate governance statement” is the statement disclosing the extent to which the entity will follow, as at the date of its admission to the 
official list, the recommendations set by the ASX Corporate Governance Council. If the entity does not intend to follow all the recommendations on its 
admission to the official list, the entity must separately identify each recommendation that will not be followed and state its reasons for not following the 
recommendation and what (if any) alternative governance practices it intends to adopt in lieu of the recommendation. 
If the entity is unsure whether they will be included in the S & P All Ordinaries Index on admission to the official list, they should contact ASX or S & P. 
If the entity is unsure whether they will be included in the S & P / ASX 300 Index on admission to the official list, they should contact ASX or S & P.
11 
12 
13  An electronic copy of the ASX Online Agreement is available from the ASX Compliance Downloads page on ASX’s website. 
14 
15
If the entity is unsure whether they will be included in the S & P / ASX 300 Index on admission to the official list, they should contact ASX or S & P. 
If the entity applying for admission to the official list is a trust, references in items 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 to a director or proposed director mean a 
director or proposed director of the responsible entity of the trust.
16  The information referred to in items 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 is required so that ASX can be satisfied that the director or proposed director is of good fame
and character under Listing Rule 1 Condition 17.
ASX Listing Information Form and Checklist
Page 5
ME_130026426_3 (W2007)
Location/Confirmation 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
No  Item 
12. For each director or proposed director who is or has in the past 10 years 
been a resident of Australia, an original or certified true copy of a national 
criminal history check obtained from the Australian Federal Police, a State or 
Territory police service or a broker accredited by CrimTrac which is not more 
than 12 months old (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 17 and Guidance Note 1 
section 3.15)
13. For each director or proposed director who is or has in the past 10 years
been a resident of a country other than Australia, an original or certified true 
copy of an equivalent national criminal history check to that mentioned in 
item 12 above for each country in which the director has resided over the 
past 10 years (in English or together with a certified English translation) 
which is not more than 12 months old or, if such a check is not available in 
any such country, a statutory declaration from the director confirming that 
fact and that he or she has not been convicted in that country of: 
(a)  any  criminal  offence  involving  fraud,  dishonesty,  misrepresentation,
concealment of material facts or breach of director’s duties; or
(b)  any other criminal offence which at the time carried a maximum term of 
imprisonment of five years or more (regardless of the period, if any, for 
which he or she was sentenced),
or, if that is not the case, a statement to that effect and a detailed 
explanation of the circumstances involved (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 17 and 
Guidance Note 1 section 3.15)
14. For each director or proposed director who is or has in the past 10 years
been a resident of Australia, an original or certified true copy of a search of 
the Australian Financial Security Authority National Personal Insolvency 
Index which is not more than 12 months old (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 17 
and Guidance Note 1 section 3.15)
15. For each director or proposed director who is or has in the past 10 years
been a resident of a country other than Australia, an original or certified true 
copy of an equivalent national bankruptcy check to that mentioned in item 14 
above for each country in which the director has resided over the past 
10 years (in English or together with a certified English translation) which is 
not more than 12 months old or if such a check is not available in any such 
country, a statutory declaration from the director confirming that fact and that 
he or she has not been declared a bankrupt or been an insolvent under 
administration in that country or, if that is not the case, a statement to that 
effect and a detailed explanation of the circumstances involved (Listing 
Rule 1.1 Condition 17 and Guidance Note 1 section 3.15)
16. A  statutory  declaration  from  each  director  or  proposed  director  confirming
that: 
(a)  the  director  has  not  been  the  subject  of  any  criminal  or  civil  penalty 
proceedings or other enforcement action by any government agency in 
which he or she was found to have engaged in behaviour involving fraud, 
dishonesty, misrepresentation, concealment of material facts or breach 
of duty;
(b)  the  director  has  not  been  refused  membership  of,  or  had  their 
membership suspended or cancelled by, any professional body on the 
ground  that  he  or  she  has  engaged  in  behaviour  involving  fraud, 
dishonesty, misrepresentation, concealment of material facts or breach 
of duty;
(c)  the director has not been the subject of any disciplinary action (including 
any  censure,  monetary  penalty  or  banning  order)  by  a  securities 
exchange or other authority responsible for regulating securities markets 
for failure to comply with his or her obligations as a director of a listed 
entity;
ASX Listing Information Form and Checklist
Page 6
ME_130026426_3 (W2007)
No  Item
(d)  no listed entity of which he or she was a director (or, in the case of a 
listed  trust,  in  respect  of  which  he  or  she  was  a  director  of  the 
responsible  entity)  at  the  time  of  the  relevant  conduct  has  been  the 
subject  of  any  disciplinary  action  (including  any  censure,  monetary 
penalty,  suspension  of  trading  or  termination  of  listing)  by  a  securities 
exchange or other authority responsible for regulating securities markets 
for  failure  to  comply  with  its  obligations  under  the  Listing  Rules 
applicable to that entity; and
(e)  the director is not aware of any pending or threatened investigation or 
enquiry by a government agency, professional body, securities exchange 
or other authority responsible for regulating securities markets that could 
lead to proceedings or action of the type described in (a), (b), (c) or (d) 
above,
or, if the director is not able to give such confirmation, a statement to that 
effect  and  a  detailed  explanation  of  the  circumstances  involved  (Listing 
Rule 1.1 Condition 17 and Guidance Note 1 section 3.15)
17. A specimen certificate/holding statement for each class of securities to be
quoted or a specimen holding statement for CDIs (as applicable)
18. Payment for the initial listing fee.17
All entities – capital structure
19. Where in the Offer Document is there a table showing the existing and
proposed capital structure of the entity, broken down as follows: 
(a)  the number and class of each equity security and each debt security
currently on issue; and
(b)  the number and class of each equity security and each debt security
proposed to be issued between the date of this application and the date 
the entity is admitted to the official list; and
(c)  the resulting total number of each class of equity security and debt
security proposed to be on issue at the date the entity is admitted to the 
official list; and
(d)  the number and class of each equity security proposed to be issued
following admission in accordance with material contracts or 
agreements?
Note: This applies whether the securities are quoted or not. If the entity is proposing to issue a 
minimum, maximum or oversubscription number of securities, the table should be presented to 
disclose each scenario.
20. For each class of securities referred to in the table mentioned in item 19,
where in the Offer Document does it disclose the terms applicable to those 
securities? 
Note: This applies whether the securities are quoted or not. 
For equity securities (other than options to acquire unissued securities or convertible debt 
securities), this should state whether they are fully paid or partly paid; if they are partly paid, the 
amount paid up and the amount owing per security; voting rights; rights to dividends or 
distributions; and conversion terms (if applicable).
Location/Confirmation
See Annexure F
Forthcoming.
Paragraph 13 of the Information 
Memorandum
Appendix D of the Scheme Booklet 
sections 4.10 and 5.3 of the Scheme 
Booklet.
17  See  Guidance  Notes 15  and  15A  for  the  fees  payable  on  the  application.  You  can  also  use  the  ASX  online  equity  listing  fees  calculator: 
http://www.asx.com.au/professionals/cost-listing.htm. Payment should be made either by cheque made payable to ASX Operations Pty Ltd or by electronic 
funds transfer to the following account:
Bank: National Australia Bank 
Account Name: ASX Operations Pty Ltd 
BSB: 082 057 
A/C: 494728375 
Swift Code (Overseas Customers): NATAAU3202S
If payment is made by electronic funds transfer, please email your remittance advice to ar@asx.com.au or fax it to (612) 9227-0553, describing the payment 
as the “initial listing fee” and including the name of the entity applying for admission, the ASX home branch where the entity has lodged its application (ie 
Sydney, Melbourne or Perth) and the amount paid.
ASX Listing Information Form and Checklist
Page 7
ME_130026426_3 (W2007)
No  Item
For options to acquire unissued securities, this should state the number outstanding, exercise 
prices and expiry dates. 
For debt securities or convertible debt securities, this should state their nominal or face value; 
rate of interest; dates of payment of interest; date and terms of redemption; and conversion 
terms (if applicable).
21. If the entity has granted, or proposes to grant, any rights to any person, or to 
any class of persons (other than through the holding of securities referred to 
in the table mentioned in item 19), to participate in an issue of the entity’s 
securities, where in the Offer Document are details of those rights set out?
22. Details of all issues of securities (in all classes) in the last 5 years and the
consideration received by the entity for such issues
23. A copy of every prospectus, product disclosure statement or information
memorandum issued by the entity in connection with any issue of securities 
(in all classes) in the last 5 years
24. A copy of any court order in relation to a reorganisation of the entity’s capital
in the last 5 years
25. Where in the Offer Document does it confirm that the issue/sale price of all 
securities for which the entity seeks quotation is at least 20 cents in cash 
(Listing Rule 2.1 Condition 2)?
26. If the entity has or proposes to have any options on issue, where in the Offer 
Document does it confirm that the exercise price for each underlying security 
is at least 20 cents in cash (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 11)?
27. If the entity has any partly paid securities and it is not a no liability company,
where in the Offer Document does it disclose the entity’s call program, 
including the date and amount of each proposed call and whether it allows 
for any extension for payment of a call (Listing Rule 2.1 Condition 4)?
28. If the entity’s free float at the time of listing is less than 10%, where in the
Offer Document does it outline the entity’s plans to increase that percentage 
to at least 10% and the timeframe over which it intends to do that (Guidance 
Note 1 sections 3.1 and 3.3)?
29. If the entity has or proposes to have any debt securities or convertible debt 
securities on issue, a copy of any trust deed applicable to those securities
30. Is the entity is proposing to offer any securities by way of a bookbuild? If so, 
please enter “Confirmed” in the column to the right to indicate that the entity 
is aware of the disclosure requirements for bookbuilds in the Annexure to 
Guidance Note 1
All entities – other information and documents
31. Where in the Offer Document is there a description of the history of the
entity?
32. Where in the Offer Document is there a description of the entity’s existing
and proposed activities and level of operations?
33. Where in the Offer Document is there a description of the key features of the
entity’s business model (ie how it makes or intends to make a return for 
investors or otherwise achieve its objectives)?
Location/Confirmation
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A (Waiver granted by ASX)
N/A (Waiver granted by ASX)
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Section 5.1 of the Scheme Booklet
Section 7 at page 62 and Sections 9 
and 10 at pages 74 and 83 of the 
Replacement Prospectus
Chairman’s letter, Investment Overview 
and Sections 2, 9 and 10 of the 
Replacement Prospectus
ASX Listing Information Form and Checklist
Page 8
ME_130026426_3 (W2007)
No  Item 
 
34. Where in the Offer Document is there a description of the material business
risks the entity faces?
35. If the entity has any child entities, where in the Offer Document is there a list 
of all child entities stating, in each case, the name, the nature of its business 
and the entity’s percentage holding in it?
36. If the entity has any investments in associated entities for which it will apply
equity accounting, where in the Offer Document is there a list of all 
associated entities stating, in each case, the name, the nature of its business 
and the entity’s percentage holding in it?
37. Where in the Offer Document is there a description of the entity’s proposed
dividend/distribution policy?
38. Does the entity have or propose to have a dividend or distribution
reinvestment plan? 
If so, where are the existence and main terms of the plan disclosed in the 
Offer Document? 
 
A copy of the terms of the plan
39. Does the entity have or propose to have an employee incentive scheme?
If so, where are the existence and main terms of the scheme disclosed in the 
Offer Document?
Where in the Offer Document is there a statement as to whether directors18
are entitled to participate in the scheme and, if they are, the extent to which 
they currently participate or are proposed to participate? 
 
A copy of the terms of the scheme
40. Has the entity entered into any material contracts (including any underwriting
agreement relating to the securities to be quoted on ASX)?19 
If so, where are the existence and main terms of those material contracts 
disclosed in the Offer Document? 
 
Copies of all of the material contracts referred to in the Offer Document
41. If the following information is included in the Offer Document, the page
reference where it is included. Otherwise, either a summary of the material 
terms of, or a copy of, any employment, service or consultancy agreement
Location/Confirmation
Section 1.4 at page 15 and Section 4 at 
page 38 of the Replacement 
Prospectus.
Paragraph 14 of the Information 
Memorandum
N/A
Paragraph 12.2 of the Information 
Memorandum
N/A
N/A
Section 12.4 of the Information 
Memorandum. The employee options 
will be issued pursuant to Stock 
Incentive Plan which will be provided as 
Pre Quotation Disclosure
Section 4.10 and 5.3 of the Scheme 
Booklet.
Skyland Stock Incentive Plan to be 
provided as Pre Quotation Disclosure
Section 12.3 at page 149 of the 
Replacement Prospectus
N/A
See disclosure Annexure 9 of the 
Skyland Group Limited, Information 
Form and Checklist released to ASX on 
20 April 2016
Section 12.4 of the Information 
Memorandum, section 12.3.2 at page 
150 of the Replacement Prospectus and
18 
19
If the entity applying for admission to the official list is a trust, references to a director mean a director of the responsible entity of the trust. 
It will assist ASX if the material contracts are provided both in hard copy and in electronic format.
ASX Listing Information Form and Checklist
Page 9
ME_130026426_3 (W2007)
No  Item
the entity or a child entity has entered into with:
(a)  its chief executive officer (or equivalent) 
(b)  any of its directors or proposed directors; or 
(c)  any other person or entity who is a related party of the persons referred
to in (a) or (b) above (Listing Rule 3.16.4).
Note: if the entity applying for admission to the official list is a trust, references to a chief 
executive officer, director or proposed director mean a chief executive officer director or 
proposed director of the responsible entity of the trust. However, the entity need not provide a 
summary of the material terms of, or a copy of, any employment, service or consultancy 
agreement the responsible entity or a related entity has entered into with any of the persons 
referred to in (a), (b) or (c) above if the costs associated with the agreement are borne by the 
responsible entity or the related entity from out of its own funds rather than from out of the trust.
42. Please enter “Confirmed” in the column to the right to indicate that the
material contracts summarised in the Offer Document include, in addition to 
those mentioned in item 41, any other material contract(s) the entity or a 
child entity has entered into with: 
(a)  its chief executive officer (or equivalent) 
(b)  any of its directors or proposed directors; or 
(c)  any other person or entity who is a related party of the persons referred
to in (a) or (b) above
43. Please enter “Confirmed” in the column to the right to indicate that all
information that a reasonable person would expect to have a material effect 
on the price or value of the securities to be quoted is included in or provided 
with this Information Form and Checklist
44. A copy of the entity’s most recent annual report
Entities that are trusts
45. Evidence that the entity is a registered managed investment scheme (Listing
Rule 1.1 Condition 5)
46. Please enter “Confirmed” in the column to the right to indicate that the 
responsible entity is not under an obligation to allow a security holder to 
withdraw from the trust (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 5)
Entities applying under the profit test (Listing Rule 1.2)
47. Evidence that the entity is a going concern or the successor of a going
concern (Listing Rule 1.2.1)
48. Evidence that the entity has been in the same main business activity for the
last 3 full financial years (Listing Rule 1.2.2)
49. Audited accounts for the last 3 full financial years and audit reports (Listing
Rule 1.2.3(a))
50. If last financial year ended more than 8 months before the date of this
application, accounts for the last half year (or longer period if available) and 
audit report or review (Listing Rule 1.2.3(b))
51. A pro forma statement of financial position and review (Listing
Rule 1.2.3(c))20
Location/Confirmation 
section 4.4 of the Scheme Booklet.
Confirmed
Confirmed
N/A (Waiver granted by ASX)
N/A
N/A
N/A (Waiver granted by ASX)
N/A (Waiver granted by ASX)
N/A (Waiver granted by ASX)
N/A (Waiver granted by ASX)
N/A (Waiver granted by ASX)
20  Note: the review must be conducted by a registered company auditor (or if the entity is a foreign entity, an overseas equivalent of a registered company
auditor) or independent accountant.
ASX Listing Information Form and Checklist
Page 10
ME_130026426_3 (W2007)
No  Item 
 
52. Evidence that the entity’s aggregated profit from continuing operations for
the last 3 full financial years has been at least $1 million (Listing Rule 1.2.4)
53. Evidence that the entity’s profit from continuing operations in the past
12 months to a date no more than 2 months before the date of this 
application has exceeded $400,000 (Listing Rule 1.2.5)
54. A statement from all directors21 confirming that they have made enquiries
and nothing has come to their attention to suggest that the entity is not 
continuing to earn profit from continuing operations up to the date of the 
application (Listing Rule 1.2.5A)
Entities applying under the assets test (Listing Rule 1.3)
55. Evidence that the entity:
(a)  has, if the entity that is not an investment entity, net tangible assets of at
least $3 million (after deducting the costs of fund raising) or a market 
capitalisation of at least $10 million; or
(b)  has, if the entity that is an investment entity other than pooled 
development fund, net tangible assets of at least $15 million; or 
(c)  is a pooled development fund with net tangible assets of at least
$2 million (Listing Rule 1.3.1 and 1.3.1A)
56. Evidence that:
(a)  at least half of the entity’s total tangible assets (after raising any funds) is
not cash or in a form readily convertible to cash;22 or
(b)  there are commitments to spend at least half of the entity’s cash and
assets in a form readily convertible to cash (Listing Rule 1.3.2)
57. Is there a statement in the Offer Document that there is enough working
capital to carry out the entity’s stated objectives. 
If so, where is it? 
If not, attach a statement by an independent expert confirming that the entity 
has enough working capital to carry out its stated objectives (Listing 
Rule 1.3.3(a))
58. Evidence that the entity’s working capital is at least $1.5 million or, if it is not,
that it would be at least $1.5 million if the entity’s budgeted revenue for the 
first full financial year that ends after listing was included in the working 
capital (Listing Rule 1.3.3(b))23
59. Accounts for the last 3 full financial years (or shorter period if ASX agrees)
and the audit report or review or a statement that the accounts are not 
audited or not reviewed (Listing Rule 1.3.5(a) first bullet point)
60. If last financial year ended more than 8 months before the date of this
application, accounts for the last half year (or longer period if available) and 
the audit report or review or a statement that the half year accounts not 
audited or not reviewed (Listing Rule 1.3.5(a) second bullet point)
21 
22
Location/Confirmation
N/A (Waiver granted by ASX)
N/A (Waiver granted by ASX)
N/A (Waiver granted by ASX)
N/A (Waiver granted by ASX)
N/A (Waiver granted by ASX)
N/A (Waiver granted by ASX)
N/A (Waiver granted by ASX)
N/A (Waiver granted by ASX)
N/A (Waiver granted by ASX)
If the entity applying for admission to the official list is a trust, the statement should come from all directors of the responsible entity of the trust. 
In deciding if an entity’s total tangible assets are in a form readily convertible to cash, ASX would normally not treat inventories or receivables as readily 
convertible to cash.
23  For mining exploration entities and oil and gas exploration entities, the amount must be available after allowing for the first full financial year’s budgeted 
administration costs and the cost of acquiring plant, equipment, mining tenements and/or petroleum tenements. The cost of acquiring mining tenements 
and/or petroleum tenements includes the cost of acquiring and exercising an option over them.
ASX Listing Information Form and Checklist
Page 11
ME_130026426_3 (W2007)
No  Item 
61. A pro forma statement of financial position and review (Listing
Rule 1.3.5(c))24
Location/Confirmation 
N/A (Waiver granted by ASX)
Entities with restricted securities
62. A statement setting out a list of any person (either on their own or together
with associates) who has held a relevant interest in at least 10% of the 
entity’s voting securities at any time in the 12 months before the date of this 
application
63. A completed ASX Restricted Securities Table25
64. Copies of all restriction agreements (Appendix 9A) entered into in relation to
restricted securities26
65. Copies of all undertakings issued by any bank, recognised trustee or the
provider of registry services to the entity in relation to such restriction 
agreements
Elizabeth Landles holds the sole share 
on issue in Skyland Petroleum Group 
Limited
To be provided prior to listing
To be provided prior to listing
To be provided prior to listing
Entities (other than mining exploration entities and oil and gas exploration entities) with classified 
assets27
66. Within the 2 years preceding the date of the entity’s application for admission
to the official list, has the entity acquired, or entered into an agreement to 
acquire, a classified asset? 
If so, where in the Offer Document does it disclose:
(cid:129) 
(cid:129) 
(cid:129) 
(cid:129)
the date of the acquisition or agreement; 
full details of the classified asset, including any title particulars; 
the name of the vendor; 
if the vendor was not the beneficial owner of the classified asset at the 
date of the acquisition or agreement, the name of the beneficial 
owner(s);
N/A
(cid:129)  details of the relationship between the vendor (or, if the vendor was not
the beneficial owner of the tenement at the date of the acquisition or 
agreement, between the beneficial owner(s)) and the entity or any 
related party or promoter of the entity; and
(cid:129)  details of the purchase price paid or payable and all other consideration 
(whether legally enforceable or not) passing directly or indirectly to the 
vendor.
Is the vendor (or, if the vendor was not the beneficial owner of the classified  N/A
24  Note: the review must be conducted by a registered company auditor (or if the entity is a foreign entity, an overseas equivalent of a registered company
auditor) or independent accountant.
25  An electronic copy of the ASX Restricted Securities Table is available from the ASX Compliance Downloads page on ASX’s website. 
26  Note: ASX will advise which restricted securities are required to be escrowed under Listing Rule 9.1.3 as part of the admission and quotation decision. 
If properly completed restriction agreements and related undertakings have not been provided for all such securities advised by ASX, that will need to 
be rectified prior to admission occurring and quotation commencing.
27  A “classified asset” is defined in Listing Rule 19.12 as:
(a)  an interest in a mining exploration area or oil and gas exploration area or similar tenement or interest; 
(b)  an interest in intangible property that is substantially speculative or unproven, or has not been profitably exploited for at least three years, and
which entitles the entity to develop, manufacture, market or distribute the property;
(c)  an interest in an asset which, in ASX’s opinion, cannot readily be valued; or 
(d)  an interest in an entity the substantial proportion of whose assets (held directly, or through a controlled entity) is property of the type referred to in
paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) above.
ASX Listing Information Form and Checklist
Page 12
ME_130026426_3 (W2007)
No  Item
asset at the date of the acquisition or agreement, is any of the beneficial 
owner(s)) a related party or promoter of the entity? 
If so, please enter “Confirmed” in the column to the right to indicate that the 
consideration paid by the entity for the classified asset was solely restricted 
securities, save to the extent it involved the reimbursement of expenditure 
incurred in developing the classified asset28 or the entity was not required to 
apply the restrictions in Appendix 9B under Listing Rule 9.1.3 (Listing 
Rule 1.1 Condition 10) 
 
Please also provide a copy of the agreement(s) relating to the acquisition 
entered into by the entity and any expert’s report or valuation obtained by the 
entity in relation to the acquisition
Mining entities
67. A completed Appendix 1A Information Form and Checklist Annexure I
(Mining Entities)29
Oil and gas entities
Location/Confirmation
N/A
N/A
68. A completed Appendix 1A Information Form and Checklist Annexure II (Oil
and Gas Entities)30
Entities incorporated or established outside of Australia
69. A completed Appendix 1A Information Form and Checklist Annexure III
(Foreign Entities)31
Annexure G
Annexure H
Externally managed entities
70. A completed Appendix 1A Information Form and Checklist Annexure IV
(Externally Managed Entities)32
Stapled entities
71. A completed Appendix 1A Information Form and Checklist Annexure V
(Stapled Entities)33
Further documents to be provided before admission to the official list
N/A
N/A
Please note that in addition to the information and documents mentioned above, all entities will be required to provide the 
following before their admission to the official list and the quotation of their securities commences: 
(cid:129)
A statement setting out the names of the 20 largest holders in each class of securities to be quoted, and the number 
and percentage of each class of securities held by those holders; 
A  distribution  schedule  of  each  class  of  equity  securities  to  be  quoted,  setting  out  the  number  of  holders  in  the 
categories: 
(cid:129) 
(cid:129)
1 - 1,000 
1,001 - 5,000
(cid:129)
28  ASX may require evidence to support expenditure claims. 
29  An electronic copy of this Appendix is available from the ASX Compliance Downloads page on ASX’s website. 
30  An electronic copy of this Appendix is available from the ASX Compliance Downloads page on ASX’s website. 
31  An electronic copy of this Appendix is available from the ASX Compliance Downloads page on ASX’s website. 
32  An electronic copy of this Appendix is available from the ASX Compliance Downloads page on ASX’s website. 
33  An electronic copy of this Appendix is available from the ASX Compliance Downloads page on ASX’s website.
ASX Listing Information Form and Checklist
Page 13
ME_130026426_3 (W2007)
(cid:129) 
(cid:129) 
(cid:129)
5,001 - 10,000 
10,001 - 100,000 
100,001 and over
(cid:129)
(cid:129) 
(cid:129)
The number of holders of a parcel of securities (excluding restricted securities) with a value of more than $2,000, 
based on the issue/sale price; 
Any outstanding restriction agreements (Appendix 9A) and related undertakings;34 and 
Any other information that ASX may require under Listing Rule 1.17.35
34  See note 26 above. 
35  Among other things, this may include evidence to verify that an entity has met Listing Rule 1 Condition 7 and achieved minimum spread without using
artificial means (see Guidance Note 1 section 3.6).
ASX Listing Information Form and Checklist
Page 14
ME_130026426_3 (W2007)