
EX-99 2 ex99-08042016_020835.htm Secconnect.com
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
PetroRiver De-Risks Larne Basin with Discovery of Thermogenic Gas in Woodburn Forest
#1-Well
Partners To Commence Phase II of Exploration Program
NEW YORK, NY – August 4, 2016 – Petro River Oil Corp. (OTCBB: PTRC) (“Petro River” or the
“Company”) today announced that the analysis of its first exploratory well – Woodburn Forest #1
– located in Larne Basin, Northern Ireland, confirmed the presence of an active petroleum system
in  the  Larne  Basin.  The  drilling  of  the  well  detected  background  gas  in  the  drilling  fluid,  and
samples  were  sent  to  Applied  Petroleum  Technology  UK  Ltd  (“APT”),  an  internationally-
recognized consultancy with an independent geochemical laboratory in Oslo, Norway.
APT’s  report  determined  that  the  gas  was  thermogenic,  likely  originating  from  deeper
Carboniferous shales. The samples were similar to a gas sample from a producing gas field in
Lancashire, England, just across the North Channel.
The  discovery  of  thermogenic  gas  limits  the  risks  associated  with  Petro  River’s  Larne  Basin
exploration program by providing further evidence of a mature source rock within the basin, and
supports Petro River’s prior estimates of prospective resources of more than 1 billion barrels of
potential oil and gas equivalents across the license. Carboniferous-sourced basins throughout
Europe have historically been very prolific. By fulfilling the current work program, the onshore
license has been extended for a five-year period, which affords ample time for the Company to
work with Horizon Energy Partners, LLC (“Horizon Energy”) and other partners to develop Phase
II of the exploration program, which includes the following:
Reprocess 2-D seismic data. The joint venture partners are currently reprocessing a closely-
spaced  2-D  grid  of  1,100  line  kilometers  of  offshore  seismic  data  acquired  in  2009.    When
finalized,  the  reprocessing  should  provide  clearer  structural  imaging  within  the  Carboniferous,
better trap definition in the Triassic and Permian and possibly show hydrocarbon indicators in the
shallower  formations.  We  intend  to “shoot” several 2D tie lines which will tie the offshore and
onshore data sets. Management estimates completion of 2-D seismic reprocessing by the end of
October, 2016.
Reprocess 3-D seismic. A small 3-D survey in the area, originally acquired from a nearby salt
storage project, may also be reprocessed during the next several months.
Evaluation of Offshore Drilling Program. The offshore portion of the basin does not contain
surface  basalts.  As  such,  the  seismic  data  quality  is  markedly  better.    The  next  steps  in  the
exploration effort may be acquisition of a new 3-D seismic or further exploratory drilling – funded
either internally or through a farm-out transaction.
Background:
-1 of 3-
Petro River owns a 9% direct working interest and a 3.2% indirect interest through its investment
in  Horizon  Energy  in  both  an  onshore  license  (PL1/10)  and  offshore  license  (P2123),  which
together  comprise  about  130,000  acres  and  encompass  the  heart  of  the  Larne  Basin.  Good
reservoir quality had been confirmed from prior drilling and the existence of hydrocarbon traps
was evident from recently acquired 2-D seismic data.
In May, 2016, the Woodburn Forest #1 well commenced drilling.  The primary objective of the
well for Petro River was to confirm the existence and maturity of the Carboniferous source rock
for  the  conventional  reservoirs,  and  the  secondary  objective  was  to  test  three  potential
hydrocarbon-bearing  objective  zones.  The  well  reached  total  depth  in  mid-June  2016.  The
Carboniferous-aged  shales  were  expected  to  be  encountered  at  approximately  1,550  meters.
Unexpectedly,  the  overlying  Permian  section  thickened  considerably  and  at  2,000  meters  the
well was still drilling in the basal Permian.  After stopping at 2,000 meters and conducting basic
evaluation  tests  (electric  logs,  a  check-shot  survey,  imaging  tool,  etc.)  and  assessing  the
information gained from these tests, the consensus decision was made not to drill deeper. As a
result, the Carboniferous section was not directly evaluated.
During the drilling of the Woodburn Forest #1 well through the Permian section background gas
shows were present in the drilling fluids. Samples were collected and analyzed by APT, who
determined  that  the  gas  was  thermogenic  and  originated  from  the  Carboniferous.    The  gas
sample contained carbon isotopes from C-1 to C-6 and the maturity indicated it to be at the top of
the gas window, implying a burial at the time of generation of approximately 4,000 meters and a
temperature of approximately 150 degrees Centigrade. These results evidenced a mature source
rock from which hydrocarbons have migrated, and therefore supports the existence of an active
petroleum system in the Larne Basin.
Based  on  the  new  Woodburn  Forest  #1  well  data,  which  furthers  our  understanding  of  the
petroleum system, reservoir deposition, and trapping mechanisms, the Company believes that
substantial  progress  has  been  made  in  moving  the  Larne  Basin  project  toward  eventual
commerciality. This was the first exploration drilled in the Larne Basin in 45 years.
Historically, large basinal discoveries are found and developed only after thorough analysis of
technical  data  derived  from  both  seismic  acquisition  and  drilling  of  wells.  The  Larne  Basin
continues  to  be  a  very  attractive  exploration  opportunity  based  on  technical  merit,  modest
exploration costs, low political risk and excellent fiscal terms.
About: Petro River Oil Corp.
Petro  River  Oil  Corp.  (OTC  Pink:  PTRC)  is  an  independent  energy  company  with  its  core
holdings  in  Northeast  Oklahoma,  the  Larne  Basin  in  Northern  Ireland,  and  Kern  County,
California. Petro River’s strategy is to apply modern technology, such as 3D Seismic analysis to
exploit hydrocarbon-prone resources in historically prolific plays and underexplored prospective
basins to build reserves and to create  value  for  the  Company  and  its  shareholders.  For  more
information, please visit our website at www.petroriveroil.com.
-2 of 3-
About: Horizon Energy Partners, LLC.
Horizon  Energy  is  an  oil  and  gas  exploration  and  development  company  with  a  portfolio  of
domestic and international assets. The majority of the funding for Horizon Energy has come from
seasoned  oil  and  gas  industry  professionals,  including  several  former  senior  oil  industry
executives who have run both major and large independent oil and gas companies, and have
advised large energy focused private equity funds and hedge funds. Horizon Energy is managed
by  Jonathan  Rudney;  Mr.  Rudney  has  over  30  years  of  senior  executive  experience  in  the
upstream oil and gas industry, and, throughout his career, has been instrumental in the growth
and success of several private E&P companies. Horizon Energy was formed to take advantage
of the current depressed oil market and has identified and acquired a portfolio of highly attractive
oil  and  gas  assets.  A  common  theme  underlying  each  project  is  the  application  of  modern
technology, such as the use of 3-D seismic data.
Forward-Looking Statements.
This  news  release  contains  forward-looking  and  other  statements  that  are  not  historical  facts.
Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements, as there can
be no assurance that the plans, intentions or expectations upon which they are based will occur.
By their nature, forward-looking statements involve numerous assumptions, known and unknown
risks  and  uncertainties,  both  general  and  specific,  that  contribute  to  the  possibility  that  the
predictions, forecasts, projections and other forward looking statements will not occur, which may
cause actual performance and results in future periods to differ materially from any estimates or
projections  of  future  performance  or  results  expressed  or  implied  by  such  forward  looking
statements. These forward looking statements, projections and statements are subject to change
and could differ materially from final reported results. Readers are cautioned not to place undue
reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the dates on which they are
made. Petro River assumes no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements,
whether  as  a  result  of  new  information,  future  events  or  otherwise,  except  as  required  by
applicable securities law. Additionally, Petro River undertakes no obligation to comment on the
expectations of, or statements made by, third parties in respect to the matters discussed above.
Readers should also carefully review the “Risk Factors” in Petro River’s annual report on Form
10-K, its quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, and other reports filed with the SEC under the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
For additional information about Petro River Oil, please visit http://petroriveroil.com/ or contact:
Mike Straka
Investor Relations
ir@petroriveroil.com
telephone: (469) 828-3900
-3 of 3-