
424B5 1 d250204d424b5.htm 424B5 424B5
Table of Contents
Filed pursuant to Rule 424(b)(5)
Registration Nos. 333-199736
333-199736-01
The information in this preliminary prospectus supplement and the attached prospectus is not complete and
may be changed. A registration statement relating to these securities has been filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission. This prospectus supplement and the attached prospectus are not an offer to sell
these securities nor are they soliciting an offer to buy these securities in any jurisdiction where the offer or
sale is not permitted.
Subject to Completion, dated September 7, 2016
PRELIMINARY PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
(To Prospectus dated October 31, 2014)
$
Shell International Finance B.V.
$                      % Guaranteed Notes due 2019
$                      % Guaranteed Notes due 2021
$                      % Guaranteed Notes due 2026
$                      % Guaranteed Notes due 2046
$             Floating Rate Guaranteed Notes due 2019
Guaranteed as to the Payment of Principal and Interest by
Royal Dutch Shell plc
Shell International Finance B.V. will pay interest on the        % Guaranteed Notes due 2019 (the “2019 notes”) on             and            of each year,
beginning on            , 2017, the            % Guaranteed Notes due 2021 (the “2021 notes”) on            and            of each year, beginning
on            , 2017, the            % Guaranteed Notes due 2026 (the “2026 notes”) on            and            of each year, beginning on                 , 2017,
the            % Guaranteed Notes due 2046 (the “2046 notes”) on            and            of each year, beginning on                 , 2017, and the Floating
Rate Guaranteed Notes due 2019 (the “2019 floating rate notes”, and together with the 2019 notes, the 2021 notes, the 2026 notes and the 2046
notes, the “notes”) on             ,             ,             and              of each year, beginning on             , 2016. Shell International Finance B.V. may
redeem some or all of the 2019 notes, the 2021 notes, the 2026 notes and the 2046 notes at any time at the redemption prices described in this
prospectus supplement. The notes will otherwise not be redeemable prior to maturity except upon the occurrence of certain tax events described in
this prospectus supplement. The 2019 notes will mature on             , 2019, the 2021 notes will mature on             , 2021, the 2026 notes will mature
on             , 2026, the 2046 notes will mature on             , 2046 and the 2019 floating rate notes will mature on             , 2019.
Payments of the principal and interest on the notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by Royal Dutch Shell plc.
Application will be made for listing of the notes on the New York Stock Exchange.
See the “Risk Factors” identified on page S-8 of this prospectus supplement, on page 4 of
the attached prospectus and on pages 8-12 of our Annual Report on Form 20-F for the
Year Ended December 31, 2015 for a discussion of certain factors you should consider
before investing in the notes.
Public offering price(1)
Underwriting discount
Proceeds before
expenses, to us
The 2019 floating
The 2019 notes
Total
Per note
The 2021 notes
Total
Per note
The 2026 notes
Total
Per note
The 2046 notes
Total
Per note
Per note
rate notes
%   $              
        %   $
Total
%    $                 
        %    $
%   $                 
        %   $
%   $                 
        %   $
%   $                 
        %   $
%    $
%   $
%   $
%   $
%   $
(1) Plus accrued interest from September     , 2016 if settlement occurs after that date.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any other regulatory body has approved or disapproved of these securities or passed
upon the accuracy or adequacy of this prospectus supplement or the attached prospectus. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal
offense.
The notes will be ready for delivery in book-entry form through the facilities of The Depository Trust Company and its participants, including Euroclear
Bank S.A./N.V. (“Euroclear”) and Clearstream Banking, société anonyme (“Clearstream, Luxembourg”), on or about September    , 2016.
Joint Book-Running Managers
Citigroup
Goldman, Sachs & Co.
J.P. Morgan
The date of this prospectus supplement is September     , 2016.
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN INFORMATION BY REFERENCE
SUMMARY
RISK FACTORS
CAPITALIZATION AND INDEBTEDNESS
USE OF PROCEEDS
DESCRIPTION OF NOTES
ENFORCEABILITY OF CERTAIN CIVIL LIABILITIES
TAXATION
EXPENSES
EXPERTS
LEGAL MATTERS
UNDERWRITING
PROSPECTUS
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
ROYAL DUTCH SHELL PLC
SHELL INTERNATIONAL FINANCE B.V.
RISK FACTORS
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
ENFORCEABILITY OF CERTAIN CIVIL LIABILITIES
USE OF PROCEEDS
LEGAL OWNERSHIP
DESCRIPTION OF DEBT SECURITIES
DESCRIPTION OF ROYAL DUTCH SHELL WARRANTS
DESCRIPTION OF ROYAL DUTCH SHELL ORDINARY SHARES
DESCRIPTION OF ROYAL DUTCH SHELL AMERICAN DEPOSITARY SHARES
CLEARANCE AND SETTLEMENT
TAXATION
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
EXCHANGE CONTROLS
LIMITATIONS ON RIGHTS TO OWN SECURITIES
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
S-2  
  S-3  
  S-8  
  S-9  
  S-9  
 S-10  
 S-14  
 S-15  
 S-19  
 S-20  
 S-20  
 S-21
2  
 
3  
 
3  
 
4  
 
7  
 
 
8  
  10  
  12  
  13  
  15  
  26  
  28  
  39  
  46  
  51  
  69  
  71  
  71  
  71  
  71
You should rely on the information contained or incorporated by reference in this prospectus supplement and
the attached prospectus. We have not, and the underwriters have not, authorized any other person to provide
you with different information. We are not, and the underwriters are not, making an offer to sell these
securities in any jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not permitted. You should not assume that the
information appearing in this prospectus supplement and the attached prospectus, as well as information in
documents incorporated by reference, is accurate as of any date other than the date on the front of these
documents. Our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects may have changed since
those dates.
S-1
Table of Contents
INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN INFORMATION BY REFERENCE
The Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) allows us to incorporate by reference the information we file
with or furnish to them. This means:
•
•
•
incorporated documents are considered part of this prospectus supplement and the attached prospectus;
we can disclose important information to you by referring you to those documents; and
information that we file with or furnish to the SEC will automatically update and supersede this prospectus
supplement and the attached prospectus (in the case of furnished information, to the extent we expressly
state that we incorporate such furnished information by reference).
Furthermore, we incorporate by reference each of the following documents that we will file with or furnish to the SEC
after the date of this prospectus supplement but before the end of the notes offering:
•
•
all of our subsequent annual reports on Form 20-F that are filed with the SEC under the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”);
any reports on Form 6-K furnished by us pursuant to the Exchange Act that expressly state that we
incorporate them by reference; and
•
reports filed under Sections 13(a), 13(c) or 15(d) of the Exchange Act.
Without limiting the information incorporated by reference by the attached prospectus, we incorporate by reference
Royal Dutch Shell plc’s annual report on Form 20-F for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015 as filed with the SEC
on March 10, 2016 (the “2015 Form 20-F”), Royal Dutch Shell plc’s Form 6-K, as furnished to the SEC on May 4,
2016, including the three-month period ended March 31, 2016 Unaudited Condensed Interim Financial Report and
Royal Dutch Shell plc’s Form 6-K, as furnished to the SEC on July 28, 2016 (the second Form 6-K so furnished on
such date, the “RDS Q2 QRA/6K”), including the three- and six-month periods ended June 30, 2016 Unaudited
Condensed Interim Financial Report.
You may request a copy of any documents referred to above, at no cost, by contacting us at the following address:
Royal Dutch Shell plc
Carel van Bylandtlaan 30
2596 HR The Hague
The Netherlands
Tel. No.: (011 31 70) 377 9111
Table of Contents
S-2
SUMMARY
This summary may not contain all of the information that is important to you. You should read carefully the entire
prospectus supplement, the attached prospectus and the additional documents incorporated by reference herein for
more information on Royal Dutch Shell plc (“Royal Dutch Shell”), Shell International Finance B.V., with corporate seat
in The Hague (“Shell Finance”), and recent transactions involving Royal Dutch Shell and Shell Finance. In this
prospectus supplement, the terms “we”, “our” and “us” refer to Shell Finance and Royal Dutch Shell. Shell Finance is
the issuer and Royal Dutch Shell is the guarantor in this offering. The “Shell Group” or “Shell” refers to Royal Dutch
Shell and its consolidated subsidiaries, including Shell Finance.
Shell Activities
Royal Dutch Shell is one of the world’s largest independent oil and gas companies in terms of market capitalisation,
operating cash flow and production. Shell explores for crude oil and natural gas worldwide, both in conventional fields
and from sources such as tight rock, shale and coal formations.
Shell works to develop new crude oil and natural gas supplies from major fields. For example, in 2015, production
began from the Bonga Phase 3 and Erha North Phase 2 projects in Nigeria, and the Corrib gas field in Ireland. Shell
also extracts bitumen from oil sands, which Shell converts into synthetic crude oil. Shell cools natural gas to provide
liquefied natural gas (“LNG”) that can be safely shipped to markets around the world, and Shell converts gas to liquids
(“GTL”).
Shell’s portfolio of refineries and chemical plants enables Shell to capture value from the oil and gas that Shell
produces, turning them into a range of refined and petrochemical products, which are moved and marketed around the
world for domestic, industrial and transport use. The products Shell sells include gasoline, diesel, heating oil, aviation
fuel, marine fuel, LNG for transport, lubricants, bitumen and sulphur. Shell also produces and sells ethanol from sugar
cane in Brazil, through our Raízen joint venture. The distinctive Shell pecten, (a trademark in use since the early part
of the 20th century), and trademarks in which the word Shell appears, help raise the profile of our brand globally. A
strong patent portfolio underlies the technology that we employ in our various businesses. In total, Shell has about
12,000 granted patents and pending patent applications.
Shell Businesses
Our businesses and organisations described below were in place with effect from January 1, 2016.
Integrated Gas is engaged in the liquefaction and transportation of gas, and the conversion of natural gas to liquids to
provide fuels and other products, as well as projects with an integrated activity from producing to commercialising
gas.
Upstream combines the operating segments Upstream, which is engaged in the exploration for and extraction of
crude oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids, the transportation of oil and wind energy, and Oil Sands, which is
engaged in the extraction of bitumen from oil sands that is converted into synthetic crude oil.
Downstream is made up of a number of different Oil Products and Chemicals business activities, part of an
integrated value chain, that collectively turn crude oil into a range of refined products which are moved and marketed
around the world for domestic, industrial and transport use. The products we sell include gasoline, diesel, heating oil,
aviation fuel, marine fuel, LNG for transport, lubricants, bitumen and sulphur. In addition, we produce and sell
petrochemicals for industrial use worldwide.
Shell’s Oil Products activities comprise Refining, Trading and Supply, Pipelines and Marketing, referred to as classes
of business. Marketing includes Retail, Lubricants, Business to Business and Alternative Energies. In
Table of Contents
S-3
Trading and Supply, Shell trades crude oil, oil products and petrochemicals, to optimise feedstocks for Refining and
Chemicals, to supply our Marketing businesses and third parties, and for Shell’s own profit. Chemicals has major
manufacturing plants, located close to refineries, and its own marketing network.
Projects & Technology manages the delivery of Shell’s major projects and drives research and innovation to develop
new technology solutions. It provides technical services and technology capability covering both Upstream and
Downstream activities. It is also responsible for providing functional leadership across Shell in the areas of safety and
environment, contracting and procurement,wells activities and CO2 management.
Table of Contents
S-4
The Offering
Please refer to “Description of Notes” on page S-10 of this prospectus supplement and “Description of Debt
Securities” on page 15 of the attached prospectus for more information about the notes.
Notes:
$             aggregate principal amount of         % Guaranteed Notes due
2019.
$             aggregate principal amount of         % Guaranteed Notes due
2021.
$             aggregate principal amount of         % Guaranteed Notes due
2026.
$             aggregate principal amount of         % Guaranteed Notes due
2046.
$             aggregate principal amount of Floating Rate Guaranteed Notes
due 2019.
The notes will be fully and unconditionally guaranteed by Royal Dutch
Shell as to the payment of principal, premium (if any) and interest,
including any additional amounts that may be payable.
We will repay the 2019 notes at 100% of their principal amount plus
accrued interest on                     , 2019, the 2021 notes at 100% of their
principal amount plus accrued interest on                     , 2021, the 2026
notes at 100% of their principal amount plus accrued interest on
                    , 2026, the 2046 notes at 100% of their principal amount
plus accrued interest on                     , 2046, and the 2019 floating rate
notes at 100% of their principal amount plus accrued interest on
                , 2019.
The interest rate on the 2019 floating rate notes for the first interest
period will be the 3-month U.S. dollar London Interbank Offered Rate
(“LIBOR”), as determined on             , 2016, plus         %. Thereafter, the
interest rate for any interest period will be U.S. dollar LIBOR, as
determined on the applicable interest determination date, plus         %.
The interest rate on the 2019 floating rate notes will be reset quarterly on
the first day of each interest period as described in “Description of Notes”
below.
Every             and             , commencing on                     , 2017 for the
2019 notes. Every             and             , commencing on                     ,
2017 for the 2021 notes. Every             and             , commencing on
                    , 2017 for the 2026 notes. Every             and             ,
commencing on                     , 2017 for the 2046 notes. Every             ,
            ,              and             , commencing on             , 2016 for the
2019 floating rate notes.
Every             and             for the 2019 notes. Every             and
            for the 2021 notes. Every             and             for the 2046
notes. The fifteenth calendar day preceding the relevant interest payment
date, whether or not such day is a Business Day (as defined below) for
the 2019 floating rate notes.
Guarantee:
Maturity:
Interest Rate on the 2019 floating rate
notes:
Interest payment dates:
Regular record dates:
Table of Contents
Ranking:
Optional redemption:
Tax redemption:
Substitution:
Book-entry issuance,
denominations, settlement
and clearance:
S-5
The notes and the guarantees will constitute unsecured and
unsubordinated indebtedness of Shell Finance and Royal Dutch Shell,
respectively, and will rank equally with all other unsecured and
unsubordinated indebtedness from time to time outstanding of Shell
Finance and Royal Dutch Shell, respectively. Because Royal Dutch Shell
is a holding company, the guarantee will effectively rank junior to any
indebtedness of its subsidiaries.
The 2019 notes, the 2021 notes, the 2026 notes and the 2046 notes: The
2019 notes, the 2021 notes, the 2026 notes and the 2046 notes will be
redeemable as a whole or in part, at the option of Shell Finance at any
time or from time to time, at a redemption price equal to the greater of
(i) 100% of the principal amount of the 2019 notes, the 2021 notes, the
2026 notes or the 2046 notes, as applicable, being redeemed and (ii) the
sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments of
principal and interest thereon (exclusive of interest accrued and unpaid to
the date of redemption) discounted to the redemption date on a
semiannual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day
months) at the Treasury Rate plus             basis points, in the case of
the 2019 notes,             basis points, in the case of the 2021 notes,
             basis points, in the case of the 2026 notes, and             basis
points, in the case of the 2046 notes, plus in each case accrued and
unpaid interest thereon to the date of redemption.
The 2019 floating rate notes: None.
In the event of tax law changes that require us to pay additional amounts
as described under “Description of Debt Securities—Provisions
Applicable to Each Indenture—Optional Tax Redemption” in the attached
prospectus, we may call the notes for redemption, in whole but not in
part, prior to maturity.
We may cause Royal Dutch Shell or any subsidiary of Royal Dutch Shell
to assume the obligations of Shell Finance under the notes. Additionally,
should any entity become the 100% owner of Royal Dutch Shell, such
entity may assume the obligations of Royal Dutch Shell. U.S. tax
implications of these provisions to holders are described under “Taxation
—U.S. Taxation—U.S. Taxation of Debt Securities—Merger and
Consolidation/Substitution of Issuer” of the attached prospectus.
We will issue the notes in fully registered form in minimum
denominations of $1,000 and integral multiples of $1,000. Each series of
Table of Contents
Separate series; further
issues:
notes will be represented by one or more global securities registered in
the name of a nominee of The Depository Trust Company (“DTC”). You
will hold beneficial interests in the notes through DTC and its direct and
indirect participants, including Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg,
and DTC and its direct and indirect participants will record your beneficial
interest on their books. We will not issue
S-6
certificated notes except in limited circumstances that we explain under
“Legal Ownership—Global Securities—Special Situations When the
Global Security Will Be Terminated” in the attached prospectus. For
information on DTC’s book-entry system, see “Clearance and Settlement
—The Clearing Systems—DTC” in the attached prospectus.
The terms of the 2019 notes, the 2021 notes, the 2026 notes, the 2046
notes and the 2019 floating rate notes will be identical, except as set
forth in this prospectus supplement. The 2019 notes, the 2021 notes, the
2026 notes, the 2046 notes and the 2019 floating rate notes will each
constitute a separate series of notes under the indenture relating to the
notes. Each such series will be separate from any other series of debt
securities that may be issued from time to time in the future under the
indenture.
The issuance of each of the 2019 notes, the 2021 notes, the 2026 notes
the 2046 notes and the 2019 floating rate notes is not conditioned on the
issuance of any other series of notes.
The indenture does not limit the aggregate principal amount of debt
securities that may be issued thereunder and we may, without the
consent of the holders of the notes, issue additional debt securities,
including additional notes, having the same ranking and same interest
rate (in the case of the 2019 notes, the 2021 notes, the 2026 notes and
the 2046 notes) or interest rate basis and number of basis points to be
added to or subtracted from the related interest rate basis (in the case of
the 2019 floating rate notes), maturity date, redemption terms and other
terms as the notes described in this prospectus supplement (except for
the price to public, issue date, and in some cases, the first interest
payment date). If we reopen any series of notes and issue additional
notes, such additional notes will constitute part of a single series of debt
securities consisting of such additional notes along with the related
series of notes offered hereby.
Listing:
Use of proceeds:
Application will be made for listing of the notes on the New York Stock
Exchange.
We intend to use the net proceeds from the sale of the notes for general
corporate purposes.
Trustee and Principal Paying Agent:
Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas.
Closing and delivery:
Risk factors:
Table of Contents
We currently expect delivery of the notes to occur on September     ,
2016.
You should carefully consider all of the information in this prospectus
supplement and the attached prospectus, which includes information
incorporated by reference from our 2015 Form 20-F. In particular, you
should evaluate the specific factors identified on page S-8 of this
prospectus supplement and under “Risk Factors” beginning on page 4 of
the attached prospectus, as well as the risk factors set out on pages 8-
12 of our 2015 Form 20-F.
S-7
RISK FACTORS
Investing in the notes involves risk. You should consider carefully all of the information included, or incorporated by
reference, in this prospectus supplement and the attached prospectus, including the risk factors described below and
the “Risk Factors” identified on page 4 of the attached prospectus and on pages 8-12 of the 2015 Form 20-F before
you decide to invest in the notes. If any of these risks actually occur, our business, financial condition and results of
operations could suffer, and the trading price and liquidity of the notes could decline, in which case you may lose all
or part of your investment.
Risk Relating to the 2019 floating rate notes
The amount of interest payable on the 2019 floating rate notes is set only once per interest period based on
the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) on the applicable interest determination date.
Historically, LIBOR has experienced significant changes usually reflecting changes in the overall interest rate
environment. However, historical levels, fluctuations and trends of the LIBOR are not necessarily indicative of future
levels. Any historical upward or downward trend in the LIBOR is not an indication that the LIBOR is more or less likely
to increase or decrease at any time during an interest period, and the historical levels of the LIBOR may not be an
indication of its future movements. Although the actual LIBOR on an interest payment date or at other times during an
interest period may be higher than the LIBOR on the applicable interest determination date, holders of the 2019
floating rate notes will not benefit from the LIBOR at any time other than on the interest determination date for such
interest period. As a result, changes in the LIBOR may not result in a comparable change in the market value of the
2019 floating rate notes.
Changes or reforms relating to the LIBOR calculation process, or uncertainty as to such changes or reforms,
may adversely affect the value of the 2019 floating rate notes.
Regulators and law enforcement agencies in the United Kingdom and elsewhere have been conducting civil and
criminal investigations into whether the banks that contribute in connection with the calculation of daily LIBOR may
have been manipulating or attempting to manipulate LIBOR. It is unknown at this time what effect, if any, these
investigations and any related litigation will have on the use of LIBOR as a global benchmark.
Actions by ICE Benchmark Administration Limited (or any successor administrator of LIBOR) (the “IBA”), legislative
bodies, regulators or law enforcement agencies may result in changes to the manner in which LIBOR is determined.
At this time, it is not possible to predict the effect of any such changes and any other reforms to LIBOR that may be
enacted in the United Kingdom or elsewhere. Any changes or reforms to the manner in which LIBOR is determined, or
any uncertainty as to the nature of such potential changes or reforms, may adversely affect the trading market for
LIBOR-based securities, including the 2019 floating rate notes.
The IBA as the administrator of LIBOR has no obligation to investors, and may take actions in respect of LIBOR
without regard to the interests of any investor in the 2019 floating rate notes. Any changes or reforms to LIBOR may
result in a sudden or prolonged increase or decrease in the reported LIBOR rate, or affect its volatility, which could
have an adverse impact on the value of the 2019 floating rate notes.
Table of Contents
S-8
CAPITALIZATION AND INDEBTEDNESS
The following table sets forth, in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (“IFRS”) as issued by
the International Accounting Standards Board, the unaudited consolidated combined capitalization and indebtedness
of the Shell Group as of June 30, 2016, and as adjusted to give effect to the issuance of the notes. Other than the
changes noted below to reflect the anticipated issuance of the notes, there has been no material change in the
capitalization and indebtedness of the Shell Group since June 30, 2016.
June 30, 2016
Equity
Total equity attributable to shareholders of Royal Dutch Shell plc
Current debt
Non-Current debt
Total debt
Total capitalization
(unaudited)
$ million
$        190,670  
11,863(1) 
   
78,466(1) 
   
    
 
   
    
  $
90,329(2)(3)
280,999
Adjusted for
Offering
(unaudited)
$ million
$        190,670  
 
11,863
$
(1) Compared to the RDS Q2 QRA/6K, current debt in the table above, as at June 30, 2016, has been adjusted
upwards by $1.0 billion, with an equal and opposite downward adjustment to non-current debt. This
reclassification is considered immaterial and will be amended on a prospective basis in the next earnings report
for the third quarter 2016 on Form 6-K.
(2) Of total debt, $83.6 billion was unsecured and $6.7 billion was secured.
(3)
Includes, as at June 30, 2016, $57.5 billion of debt issued by Shell International Finance B.V., a 100%-owned
subsidiary of Royal Dutch Shell plc which is guaranteed by Royal Dutch Shell plc (December 31, 2015:
$49.5 billion), with the remainder raised by other subsidiaries with no recourse beyond the immediate borrower
and/or the local assets. As at June 30, 2016, Shell also had outstanding guarantees of $0.5 billion, of which $0.3
billion related to debt of joint ventures and associates.
We estimate that the net proceeds (after underwriting discounts and our estimated net offering expenses) from the
sale of the notes will be approximately $             . We will use the proceeds for general corporate purposes.
USE OF PROCEEDS
Table of Contents
S-9
DESCRIPTION OF NOTES
This section describes the specific financial and legal terms of the notes and supplements the more general
description under “Description of Debt Securities” in the attached prospectus. To the extent that the following
description is inconsistent with the terms described under “Description of Debt Securities” in the attached prospectus,
the following description replaces that in the attached prospectus.
General
The 2019 notes will be issued in an initial aggregate principal amount of $             and will mature on                     ,
2019, the 2021 notes will be issued in an initial aggregate principal amount of $             and will mature
on                     , 2021, the 2026 notes will be issued in an intial aggregate principal amount of $             and will
mature on                     , 2026, the 2046 notes will be issued in an initial aggregate principal amount of $             and
will mature on                    , 2046 and the 2019 floating rate notes will be issued in an initial aggregate principal
amount of $                 and will mature on                 , 2019. Book-entry interests in the notes will be issued in
minimum denominations of $1,000 and in integral multiples of $1,000.
The 2019 notes, the 2021 notes, the 2026 notes and the 2046 notes will bear interest at the rates per annum shown
on the cover page of this prospectus supplement, payable in arrears on             and            of each year to holders of
record on the preceding             and             , as the case may be, commencing on            , 2017 (or the first
following Business Day (as defined below), if such day is not otherwise a Business Day, as if made on the date
payment was due, and no interest will accrue on the amount payable for the period from and after the interest
payment date). Interest on the 2019 notes, the 2021 notes, the 2026 notes and the 2046 notes will be computed on
the basis of a 360-day year of twelve 30-day months.
The interest rate on the 2019 floating rate notes for the first Interest Period (as defined below) will be the 3-month
U.S. dollar LIBOR, as determined on                 , 2016 plus         %. Thereafter, the interest rate on the 2019 floating
rate notes for any Interest Period will be U.S. dollar LIBOR, as determined on the applicable Interest Determination
Date (as defined below), plus         %. The interest rate on the 2019 floating rate notes will be reset quarterly on each
Interest Reset Date (as defined below). The first Interest Payment Date (as defined below) on the 2019 floating rate
notes will be                 , 2016. For each Interest Period, interest on the 2019 floating rate notes will be calculated on
the basis of the actual number of days in the Interest Period divided by 360.
The Calculation Agent (as defined below) will determine U.S. dollar LIBOR in accordance with the following provisions:
With respect to any Interest Determination Date, U.S. dollar LIBOR will be the rate for deposits in U.S. dollars having
a maturity of three months commencing on the Interest Reset Date that appears on the designated LIBOR page as of
11:00 a.m., London time, on that Interest Determination Date. If no rate appears, U.S. dollar LIBOR, in respect of that
Interest Determination Date, will be determined as follows: the Calculation Agent will request the principal London
offices of each of four major reference banks in the London interbank market, as selected by the Calculation Agent
(after consultation with us), to provide the Calculation Agent with its offered quotation for deposits in U.S. dollars for
the period of three months, commencing on the Interest Reset Date, to prime banks in the London interbank market at
approximately 11:00 a.m., London time, on that Interest Determination Date and in a principal amount that is
representative for a single transaction in U.S. dollars in that market at that time. If at least two quotations are
provided, then U.S. dollar LIBOR on that Interest Determination Date will be the arithmetic mean of those quotations.
If fewer than two quotations are provided, then U.S. dollar LIBOR on the Interest Determination Date will be the
arithmetic mean of the rates quoted at approximately 11:00 a.m., New York City time, on the Interest Determination
Date by three major banks in The City of New York selected by the Calculation Agent (after consultation with us) for
loans in U.S. dollars to leading European banks, having a three-month maturity and in a principal amount that is
representative for a single transaction in U.S. dollars in that market at that time; provided, however, that if the banks
selected by the Calculation Agent are not providing quotations in the manner described by this sentence, U.S. dollar
LIBOR determined as of that Interest Determination Date will be U.S. dollar LIBOR in effect on that
Table of Contents
S-10
Interest Determination Date. The designated LIBOR page is the Reuters screen “LIBOR01”, or any successor service
for the purpose of displaying the London interbank rates of major banks for U.S. dollars. The Reuters screen
“LIBOR01” is the display designated as the Reuters screen “LIBOR01”, or such other page as may replace the
Reuters screen “LIBOR01” on that service or such other service or services as may be denominated by the IBA for
the purpose of displaying London interbank offered rates for U.S. dollar deposits. All calculations made by the
Calculation Agent for the purposes of calculating the Interest Rate on the notes shall be conclusive and binding on the
holders of notes, Royal Dutch Shell plc, Shell International Finance B.V. and the trustee, Deutsche Bank Trust
Company Americas, absent manifest error.
“Business Day” means any week day on which banking or trust institutions in neither New York nor London are
authorized generally or obligated by law, regulation or executive order to close.
“Business Day Convention” means that if any Interest Payment Date falls on a day that is not a Business Day, that
Interest Payment Date will be postponed to the next succeeding Business Day unless that Business Day is in the
next succeeding calendar month, in which case the Interest Payment Date will be the immediately preceding
Business Day.
“Calculation Agent” means Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas.
“Interest Determination Date” means, for each particular Interest Reset Date, the second London Business Day (as
defined below) preceding such Interest Reset Date.
“Interest Payment Date” means                 ,                 ,                 and                 of each year, subject to the
Business Day Convention.
“Interest Period” means the period beginning on, and including, an Interest Payment Date and ending on, but not
including, the following Interest Payment Date; provided that the first Interest Period will begin on                 , 2016
and will end on, but not include, the first Interest Payment Date.
“Interest Reset Date” means, for each Interest Period other than the first Interest Period, the first day of such Interest
Period, subject to the Business Day Convention.
“London Business Day” means any week day on which banking or trust institutions in London are not authorized
generally or obligated by law, regulation or executive order to close.
The interest rate, as described above, on the 2019 floating rate notes shall be payable quarterly in arrears on the
Interest Payment Dates, to holders of record on the fifteenth calendar day preceding the relevant Interest Payment
Date, whether or not such day is a Business Day.
All percentages resulting from any of the above calculations will be rounded, if necessary, to the nearest one hundred-
thousandth of a percentage point, with five one-millionths of a percentage point rounded upwards (e.g., 9.876545% (or
.09876545) being rounded to 9.87655% (or .0987655)), and all dollar amounts used in or resulting from such
calculations will be rounded to the nearest cent (with one-half cent being rounded upwards).
Application will be made for listing of the notes on the New York Stock Exchange. No assurance can be made that
such application will be approved or that a liquid trading market for the notes will develop. The notes and guarantees
are governed by New York law.
The notes will be the unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness of Shell Finance and will rank equally with all of its
other unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness from time to time outstanding.
Royal Dutch Shell will fully and unconditionally guarantee on an unsubordinated basis the due and punctual payment
of the principal of, premium (if any), and interest on the notes, including any additional amounts, when
Table of Contents
S-11
and as any such payments become due and payable, whether at maturity, upon redemption or declaration of
acceleration, or otherwise. The guarantee of the notes will be unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness of Royal
Dutch Shell and will rank equally with all of its other unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness from time to time
outstanding. Because Royal Dutch Shell is a holding company, the guarantee will effectively rank junior to any
indebtedness of its subsidiaries.
The 2019 notes, the 2021 notes, the 2026 notes, the 2046 notes and the 2019 floating rate notes will each constitute
a separate series of notes under the indenture relating to the notes. Each such series will be separate from any other
series of debt securities that may be issued from time to time in the future under the indenture relating to guaranteed
debt securities issued by Shell Finance, dated as of June 27, 2006, among Shell Finance, Royal Dutch Shell and the
trustee, Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas. The indenture does not limit the aggregate principal amount of debt
securities that may be issued thereunder and we may, without the consent of the holders of the notes, issue
additional debt securities, including additional notes, having the same ranking and same interest rate (in the case of
the 2019 notes, the 2021 notes, the 2026 notes, and the 2046 notes) or interest rate basis and number of basis points
to be added to or subtracted from the related interest rate basis (in the case of the 2019 floating rate notes), maturity
date, redemption terms and other terms as the notes described in this prospectus supplement (except for the price to
public, issue date, and in some cases, the first interest payment date). If we reopen any series of notes and issue
additional notes, such additional notes will constitute part of a single series of debt securities consisting of such
additional notes along with the related series of notes offered hereby.
The trustee at its principal corporate trust office in the city of New York is designated as the principal paying agent.
We may at any time designate additional paying agents or rescind the designation of paying agents or approve a
change in the office through which any paying agent acts.
We will issue the notes in fully registered form. Each series of notes will be represented by one or more global
securities registered in the name of a nominee of DTC. You will hold a beneficial interest in the notes through DTC
and its participants, including Clearstream, Luxemburg and Euroclear. See “Clearance and Settlement” in the attached
prospectus for more information about these clearing systems.
Payment of Additional Amounts
The government of any jurisdiction where Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance is resident may require Royal Dutch
Shell or Shell Finance to withhold amounts from payments on the principal or interest on the notes or any amounts to
be paid under the guarantee, as the case may be, for taxes or any other governmental charges. If a withholding of this
type is required, Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance, as the case may be, may be required to pay you an additional
amount so that the net amount you receive will be the amount specified in the note to which you are entitled. For more
information on additional amounts and the situations in which Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance must pay additional
amounts, see “Description of Debt Securities—Provisions Applicable to Each Indenture—Payment of Additional
Amounts” in the attached prospectus; for these purposes, paragraph (ix) of that section of the attached prospectus
should be deleted.
Redemption
Optional Redemption
The 2019 notes will be redeemable as a whole or in part, at the option of Shell Finance at any time or from time to
time, at a redemption price equal to the greater of (i) 100% of the principal amount of the 2019 notes being redeemed
and (ii) the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest thereon
(exclusive of interest accrued and unpaid to the date of redemption) discounted to the redemption date on a
semiannual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months) at the Treasury Rate plus            
basis points, plus in each case accrued and unpaid interest thereon to the date of redemption.
The 2021 notes will be redeemable as a whole or in part, at the option of Shell Finance at any time or from time to
time, at a redemption price equal to the greater of (i) 100% of the principal amount of the 2021 notes
Table of Contents
S-12
being redeemed and (ii) the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest
thereon (exclusive of interest accrued and unpaid to the date of redemption) discounted to the redemption date on a
semiannual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months) at the Treasury Rate plus            
basis points, plus in each case accrued and unpaid interest thereon to the date of redemption.
The 2026 notes will be redeemable as a whole or in part, at the option of Shell Finance at any time or from time to
time, at a redemption price equal to the greater of (i) 100% of the principal amount of the 2026 notes being redeemed
and (ii) the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest thereon
(exclusive of interest accrued and unpaid to the date of redemption) discounted to the redemption date on a
semiannual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months) at the Treasury Rate plus             
basis points, plus in each case accrued and unpaid interest thereon to the date of redemption.
The 2046 notes will be redeemable as a whole or in part, at the option of Shell Finance at any time or from time to
time, at a redemption price equal to the greater of (i) 100% of the principal amount of the 2046 notes being redeemed
and (ii) the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest thereon
(exclusive of interest accrued and unpaid to the date of redemption) discounted to the redemption date on a
semiannual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months) at the Treasury Rate plus            
basis points, plus in each case accrued and unpaid interest thereon to the date of redemption.
“Treasury Rate” means, with respect to any redemption date, the rate per annum equal to the semiannual equivalent
yield to maturity or interpolated (on a day count basis) of the Comparable Treasury Issue, assuming a price for the
Comparable Treasury Issue (expressed as a percentage of its principal amount) equal to the Comparable Treasury
Price for such redemption date.
“Comparable Treasury Issue” means the United States Treasury security or securities selected by an Independent
Investment Bank as having an actual or interpolated maturity comparable to the remaining term of the notes to be
redeemed that would be utilized, at the time of selection and in accordance with customary financial practice, in
pricing new issues of corporate debt securities of a comparable maturity to the remaining term of such notes.
“Independent Investment Bank” means one of the Reference Treasury Dealers appointed by Shell Finance.
“Comparable Treasury Price” means, with respect to any redemption date, (A) the average of the Reference Treasury
Dealer Quotations for such redemption date, after excluding the highest and lowest such Reference Treasury Dealer
Quotations, or (B) if Shell Finance obtains fewer than four such Reference Treasury Dealer Quotations, the average of
all such quotations.
“Reference Treasury Dealer Quotations” means, with respect to each Reference Treasury Dealer and any redemption
date, the average, as determined by an Independent Investment Bank, of the bid and asked prices for the Comparable
Treasury Issue (expressed in each case as a percentage of its principal amount) quoted in writing to Shell Finance by
such Reference Treasury Dealer at 3:30 p.m. New York time on the third business day preceding such redemption
date.
“Reference Treasury Dealer” means each of Citigroup Global Markets Inc., Goldman, Sachs & Co. and J.P. Morgan
Securities LLC or their affiliates which are primary U.S. Government securities dealers, and their respective
successors, plus three other primary U.S. government securities dealers; provided, however, that if any of the
foregoing or their affiliates shall cease to be a primary U.S. Government securities dealer in the city of New York (a
“Primary Treasury Dealer”), Shell Finance shall substitute therefor another Primary Treasury Dealer.
Notice of any redemption will be mailed at least 30 days but not more than 60 days before the redemption date to
each holder of notes to be redeemed.
Unless Shell Finance defaults in payment of the redemption price, and Royal Dutch Shell defaults in payment under
its guarantee of the notes, on and after the redemption date interest will cease to accrue on the notes or portions
thereof called for redemption.
There is no optional redemption for the 2019 floating rate notes.
Table of Contents
Tax Redemption
S-13
In the event of tax law changes after the date of this prospectus supplement that require us to pay additional
amounts, as described in the attached prospectus under “Description of Debt Securities—Provisions Applicable to
Each Indenture—Payment of Additional Amounts”, we may call all, but not less than all, the notes for redemption.
This means we may repay them early. You have no right to require us to call the notes. We discuss our ability to
redeem the notes in greater detail under “Description of Debt Securities—Provisions Applicable to Each Indenture—
Optional Tax Redemption” in the attached prospectus.
If we call the notes, we must pay you 100% of their principal amount. We will also pay you accrued interest, and any
additional amounts, if we have not otherwise paid you interest through the redemption date, provided that we have
made payment to the trustee.
Notice of any redemption will be mailed at least 15 days but not more than 60 days before the redemption date to
each holder of notes to be redeemed.
Substitution
We may cause Royal Dutch Shell or any subsidiary of Royal Dutch Shell to assume the obligations of Shell Finance
under the notes as described under “Description of Debt Securities—Provisions Applicable to Each Indenture—
Substitution of Shell Finance as Issuer” of the attached prospectus. Additionally, should any entity become the 100%
owner of Royal Dutch Shell, such entity may assume the obligations of Royal Dutch Shell under the notes as
described under “Description of Debt Securities—Provisions Applicable to Each Indenture—Consolidation, Merger and
Sale of Assets” of the attached prospectus. U.S. tax implications of these provisions to holders are described under
“Taxation—U.S. Taxation—U.S. Taxation of Debt Securities—Merger and Consolidation/Substitution of Issuer” of the
attached prospectus.
Defeasance and Discharge
We may release ourselves from any payment or other obligations on the notes as described under “Description of
Debt Securities—Provisions Applicable to Each Indenture—Defeasance” in the attached prospectus.
Trustee
The trustee for the holders of the notes will be Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas. See “Description of Debt
Securities—Provisions Applicable to Each Indenture—Trustee” and “—Events of Default” in the attached prospectus
for a description of the trustee’s procedures and remedies available in the event of a default.
ENFORCEABILITY OF CERTAIN CIVIL LIABILITIES
The last sentence of the last paragraph of the section of the attached prospectus entitled “ENFORCEABILITY OF
CERTAIN CIVIL LIABILITIES” should be amended to read as follows:
“However, a court in the Netherlands would generally give binding effect to a final judgment that has been rendered in
the U.S. if it finds that the jurisdiction of the federal or state court in the U.S. has been based on grounds that are
internationally acceptable, that proper legal procedures have been observed, that it would not contravene Dutch public
policy to give binding effect to such final judgment and that the judgment is not irreconcilable with a judgment of a
court in the Netherlands or an earlier judgment of a foreign court that is capable of being recognised in the
Netherlands.”
Table of Contents
U.S. Taxation
S-14
TAXATION
The first section in the attached prospectus under “TAXATION—U.S. Taxation” should be replaced with the section
below:
“This section describes the material U.S. federal income tax consequences of acquiring, owning and disposing of
securities we may offer pursuant to this prospectus. It applies to you only if you acquire the offered securities in an
offering or offerings contemplated by this prospectus and you hold the offered securities as capital assets for tax
purposes. This section, to the extent it represents a discussion of U.S. federal income tax law, is the opinion of
Cravath, Swaine & Moore LLP, U.S. counsel to the issuer.
This section applies to you only if you are a U.S. holder. You are a U.S. holder if you are a beneficial owner of an
offered security and you are for U.S. federal income tax purposes:
•
•
•
•
a citizen or resident of the U.S.;
a corporation, or entity taxable as a corporation, that was created or organized under the laws of the U.S. or
any of its political subdivisions;
an estate whose income is subject to U.S. federal income tax regardless of its source; or
a trust if (i) a U.S. court can exercise primary supervision over the trust’s administration and one or more
U.S. persons are authorized to control all substantial decisions of the trust; or (ii) the trust has made a valid
election under applicable U.S. Treasury regulations to be treated as a U.S. person.
This section does not apply to you if you are a member of a special class of holders subject to special rules,
including:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
a dealer in securities or currencies;
a trader in securities that elects to use a mark-to-market method of accounting for its securities holdings;
a regulated investment company;
a real estate investment trust;
a tax-exempt organization;
an insurance company;
a financial institution;
in the case of warrants, ordinary shares or ADSs, a person that actually or constructively owns 10% or more
of the voting stock of Royal Dutch Shell;
a person that holds offered securities as part of a straddle or a hedging or conversion transaction (including,
in the case of debt securities, debt securities owned as a hedge, or that are hedged, against interest rate or
currency risks), or as part of a constructive sale or other integrated financial transaction;
a person who is an investor in a pass through entity (such as a partnership);
a person who acquires shares through the exercise of options, or otherwise as compensation, or through a
tax-qualified retirement plan;
a U.S. expatriate;
holders of options granted under any benefit plan;
holders of options granted under any benefit plan;
•
a person liable for alternative minimum tax; or
S-15
Table of Contents
•
a person whose functional currency is not the U.S. dollar.
This section is based on the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), its legislative history, existing
and proposed regulations, published rulings and court decisions, all as currently in effect. These laws are subject to
change, possibly on a retroactive basis.
If a partnership holds the offered securities, the tax treatment of a partner generally will depend upon the status of the
partner and the activities of the partnership. If you are a partner of a partnership holding the offered securities, you
should consult your tax advisor.
This summary does not address the alternative minimum tax, any non-income tax (such as estate or gift taxes) or
any state, local or non-U.S. tax consequences of the acquisition, ownership or disposition of our securities.
You are urged to consult your own tax advisor regarding the U.S. federal, state and local and other tax consequences
of acquiring, owning and disposing of offered securities in your particular circumstances.”
The section in the attached prospectus entitled “TAXATION—U.S. Taxation—U.S. Taxation of Ordinary Shares and
ADSs” should be replaced with the section below:
“U.S. Taxation of Ordinary Shares and ADSs
Taxation of Cash Distributions. The gross amount of any cash distribution (other than in liquidation, and before
reduction for any applicable Dutch tax withholding) that a U.S. holder receives with respect to Royal Dutch Shell’s
ordinary shares or ADSs generally will be includible in such U.S. holder’s gross income on the day on which, in the
case of a holder of our ordinary shares, such holder receives such distribution or, in the case of a holder of our ADSs,
the depositary receives such distribution on behalf of the holder of the applicable ADSs. The tax treatment of the
distribution will depend on the amount of the distribution and the amount of the U.S. holder’s adjusted tax basis in the
applicable ordinary shares or ADSs as follows:
•
Distributions paid by Royal Dutch Shell with respect to the underlying ordinary shares will be taxed as
ordinary dividends to the extent such distributions do not exceed Royal Dutch Shell’s current or accumulated
earnings and profits (“E&P”), as calculated for U.S. federal income tax purposes. The current maximum
income tax rate imposed on certain dividends received by U.S. holders that are individuals is 20% (the
“Reduced Rate”), so long as certain holding period requirements are met and Royal Dutch Shell is a Qualified
Foreign Corporation (“QFC”) and not a passive foreign investment company (a “PFIC”), as defined in the
Code. We believe that Royal Dutch Shell is a QFC and is not a PFIC. As a result, dividends received by
individual U.S. holders will generally constitute qualified dividend income for U.S. federal income tax
purposes and be eligible for the Reduced Rate (see “—Taxation of Sale or Other Disposition”). There can be
no assurance, however, that Royal Dutch Shell will continue to be considered a QFC or that Royal Dutch
Shell will not be classified as a PFIC in the future. Thus, there can be no assurance that Royal Dutch Shell’s
dividends will continue to be eligible for the Reduced Rate. Special rules apply for purposes of determining
the recipient’s investment income (which limits deductions for investment interest) and non-U.S. source
income (which may affect the amount of foreign tax credit) and to certain extraordinary dividends.
Because Royal Dutch Shell is not a U.S. corporation, dividends Royal Dutch Shell pays generally will not be
eligible for the dividends received deduction allowable to corporations under the Code.
To the extent that distributions by Royal Dutch Shell exceed its current or accumulated E&P but do not
exceed such U.S. holder’s adjusted tax basis in Royal Dutch Shell’s ordinary shares or ADSs, such
distributions will be treated as a tax-free return of capital, to both individual and corporate U.S. holders.
•
•
S-16
Table of Contents
•
•
•
As a return of capital, such distribution will reduce such U.S. holder’s adjusted tax basis in the ordinary
shares or ADSs on a dollar-for-dollar basis (thereby increasing any gain or decreasing any loss on a future
disposition of the ordinary shares or ADSs).
To the extent that the distributions exceed both Royal Dutch Shell’s current or accumulated E&P and the
U.S. holder’s adjusted tax basis in the ordinary shares or ADSs, such U.S. holder will be taxed as having
recognized gain on the sale or disposition of the ordinary shares or ADSs (see “—Taxation of Sale or Other
Disposition”).
It is anticipated that dividends on Royal Dutch Shell’s ADSs will be announced and paid to the depositary in
U.S. dollars, and holders of Royal Dutch Shell ADSs will receive dividend payments in U.S. dollars from the
depositary. The U.S. holder would include in gross income as a dividend the U.S. dollar amount received by
the depositary, plus any applicable Dutch withholding tax. It is anticipated that dividends on Royal Dutch
Shell ordinary shares will be announced in U.S. dollars but the dividend will be distributed in euros or pounds
sterling. The U.S. holder would include in gross income as a dividend the amount as received, plus any
applicable Dutch withholding tax, calculated by reference to the exchange rate in effect on the day the U.S.
holder receives the dividend.
Dividend Withholding Tax. Dividends distributed by Royal Dutch Shell on ordinary shares and ADSs will not be subject
to U.K. tax withholding but may be subject to Dutch tax withholding, depending on ordinary share or ADS holdings of
the U.S. holder.
A holder of Class A ordinary shares or Class A ADSs is generally subject to Dutch dividend withholding tax on
dividends distributed by Royal Dutch Shell (see “Dutch Taxation—Dutch Taxation of Ordinary Shares and ADSs”).
However, for U.S. holders whose dividends are subject to this Dutch dividend withholding tax, a foreign tax credit may
be available to offset a portion of their U.S. federal income tax, as noted in the following paragraph.
Dividends paid by Royal Dutch Shell generally will be treated as foreign source income for U.S. foreign tax credit
limitation purposes. Subject to certain limitations, U.S. holders may elect to claim a foreign tax credit against their
U.S. federal income tax liability for non-U.S. tax withheld (if any) from dividends received in respect of the ordinary
shares or ADSs. (See “—Dutch Taxation—Dutch Taxation of Ordinary Shares and ADSs—Withholding tax on
dividend payments” for a discussion of Dutch withholding taxes and applicable treaty exemptions.) The limitation on
non-U.S. taxes eligible for credit is calculated separately with respect to specific classes of income. For this purpose,
dividends paid in respect of Royal Dutch Shell’s ordinary shares or ADSs generally will be “passive category income”
and therefore any U.S. federal income tax imposed on these dividends cannot be offset by excess foreign tax credits
that such U.S. holders may have from non-U.S. source income not qualifying as passive income. In the case of
certain types of U.S. holders, any such dividends may be treated as “general category income” for purposes of
calculating the U.S. foreign tax credit limitations. U.S. holders that do not elect to claim a foreign tax credit may
instead claim a deduction for non-U.S. tax withheld (if any).
If holders of Class B ordinary shares or Class B ADSs receive dividends directly from Royal Dutch Shell and not
under the dividend access mechanism, those dividends will generally be taxed in the same manner as the Class A
ordinary shares or Class A ADSs (see the discussion immediately above). However, if holders of Class B ordinary
shares and Class B ADSs receive dividends under the dividend access mechanism, there will be no Dutch
withholding tax to consider.
Taxation of Sale or Other Disposition. A U.S. holder generally will recognize capital gain or loss upon a sale or other
disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs in an amount equal to the difference between the amount realized on their
disposition and such U.S. holder’s adjusted tax basis in the ordinary shares or ADSs.
Under current law, capital gains realized by corporate and individual taxpayers generally are subject to U.S. federal
income taxes at the same rate as ordinary income, except that long-term capital gains realized by non-
Table of Contents
S-17
corporate U.S. holders are currently subject to U.S. federal income taxes at a maximum rate of 20%. Certain
limitations exist on the deductibility of capital losses by both corporate and individual taxpayers. Capital gains and
losses on the sale or other disposition by a U.S. holder of ordinary shares or ADSs generally should constitute gains
or losses from sources within the U.S.
For cash basis U.S. holders who receive foreign currency in connection with a sale or other taxable disposition of
ordinary shares or ADSs, the amount realized will be based on the U.S. dollar value of the foreign currency received
with respect to such ordinary shares or ADSs as determined on the settlement date of such sale or other taxable
disposition.
Accrual basis U.S. holders may elect the same treatment required of cash basis taxpayers with respect to a sale or
other taxable disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs, provided that the election is applied consistently from year to
year. Such election may not be changed without the consent of the U.S. Internal Revenue Service. Accrual basis
U.S. holders who or which do not elect to be treated as cash basis taxpayers (pursuant to the U.S. Treasury
regulations applicable to foreign currency transactions) for this purpose may have a foreign currency gain or loss for
U.S. federal income tax purposes because of differences between the U.S. dollar value of the foreign currency
received prevailing on the date of the sale or other taxable disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs and the date of
payment. Any such foreign currency gain or loss generally will constitute gain or loss from sources within the U.S.
and generally will be treated as ordinary income or loss and would be in addition to gain or loss, if any, recognized on
the sale or other taxable disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs.
Deposits, Withdrawals and Pre-Releases. Deposits and withdrawals by U.S. holders of ordinary shares in exchange
for ADSs and of ADSs in exchange for ordinary shares will not be subject to any U.S. federal income tax. The U.S.
Treasury Department, however, has expressed concerns that parties involved in transactions where depositary shares
are pre-released may be taking actions that are not consistent with the claiming of foreign tax credits by the holders of
the applicable ADSs. Accordingly, the analysis of the creditability of non-U.S. withholding taxes described above
could be affected by future actions that may be taken by the U.S. Treasury Department.
U.S. Backup Withholding and Information Reporting. In general, information reporting requirements will apply to
payments of dividends on ordinary shares or ADSs and the proceeds of certain sales of ordinary shares or ADSs in
respect of U.S. holders other than certain exempt persons (such as corporations). A backup withholding tax (at a rate
of 28%) will apply to such payments if the U.S. holder fails to provide a correct taxpayer identification number or other
certification of exempt status or, with respect to certain payments, the U.S. holder fails to report in full all dividend
and interest income and the U.S. Internal Revenue Service notifies the payer of such under-reporting. Amounts
withheld under the backup withholding rules may be credited against a holder’s U.S. federal tax liability, and a refund
of any excess amounts withheld under the backup withholding rules may be obtained by filing the appropriate claim
form with the U.S. Internal Revenue Service.”
The following section should be added to the attached prospectus immediately following the section entitled
“TAXATION—U.S. Taxation—Tax Reporting”:
“Medicare Tax on Certain Investment Income
Certain non-corporate U.S. holders whose income exceeds certain thresholds may also be subject to a 3.8 percent
tax on their “net investment income” up to the amount of such excess. Ordinary dividends and interest received by a
U.S. holder of offered securities (without reduction for withholding taxes, if any), and gain or loss recognized on the
sale or other disposition by a U.S. holder of offered securities, will be includable in a U.S. holder’s net investment
income for purposes of this tax. Non-corporate U.S. holders should consult their own tax advisors regarding the
possible effect of such tax on their ownership of offered securities.”
Table of Contents
Dutch Taxation
S-18
The first sentence of the first paragraph of the section of the attached prospectus entitled “TAXATION—Dutch
Taxation” should be amended to read as follows:
“The following describes the material Dutch tax consequences for a U.S. holder of securities which may be offered
under this prospectus who is neither resident nor deemed to be resident in the Netherlands for Dutch tax purposes in
respect of the ownership and disposal of his/her securities.”
The first sentence of the seventh paragraph of the section of the attached prospectus entitled “Dutch Taxation” should
be amended to read as follows:
“A holder will also have a substantial interest if his/her partner or one of certain relatives of the holder or of his/her
partner has a substantial interest.”
European Directive on the Taxation of Savings
The section of the attached prospectus entitled “TAXATION—European Directive on the Taxation of Savings” should
be deleted.
We estimate that the expenses in connection with the offering, other than the underwriting discount, will be as follows:
EXPENSES
SEC Registration Fee
Printing
Legal Fees and Expenses
Accounting Fees and Expenses
NYSE Listing Fees
Trustee’s Fees and Expenses
Total
Table of Contents
S-19
$
   
   $ 14,500  
   $120,000  
   $ 75,000  
   $ 60,000  
   $ 10,000  
 
  
   
   $
EXPERTS
The consolidated financial statements and management’s assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over
financial reporting (which is included in management’s report on internal control over financial reporting), incorporated
in this prospectus supplement and the attached prospectus by reference to Royal Dutch Shell plc’s 2015 Form 20-F
have been so incorporated in reliance on the report of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public
accounting firm, given on the authority of said firm as experts in auditing and accounting.
LEGAL MATTERS
Cravath, Swaine & Moore LLP, U.S. counsel for us and Shell Finance, will pass upon the validity of the notes and the
guarantees as to certain matters of New York law. Slaughter and May, our English solicitors, will pass upon the
validity of the guarantees of Royal Dutch Shell as to certain matters of English law. De Brauw Blackstone Westbroek
London B.V., our Dutch Counsel, will pass upon the validity of the notes of Shell Finance as to certain matters of
Dutch law. The underwriters are being advised by Morrison & Foerster LLP on certain legal matters.
Table of Contents
S-20
UNDERWRITING
Subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the underwriting agreement dated September     , 2016 and
incorporated in the terms agreement dated September    , 2016, each of the underwriters has severally agreed to
purchase, and we have agreed to sell to each underwriter, the principal amount of notes set forth opposite the name of
each underwriter.
Underwriter
  
Citigroup Global Markets Inc.   
Goldman, Sachs & Co.
  
J.P. Morgan Securities LLC
Total
Principal
Amount of the
2019 notes     
$                 
$                 
$                 
   
    
$
Principal
Amount of the
2021 notes     
$                 
$                 
$                 
   
    
$
Principal
Amount of the
2026 notes     
$                 
$                 
$                 
   
    
$
Principal
Amount of the
2046 notes     
$                 
$                 
$                 
   
    
$
Principal
Amount of the
2019 floating
rate notes  
$               
$               
$               
   
 
$
The underwriting agreement and the terms agreement provide that the obligations of the several underwriters are
subject to certain conditions and that the underwriters will purchase all of the notes of the related series offered by
this prospectus supplement if any of such notes are purchased.
The underwriters have advised us that they propose to offer the notes to the public at the respective public offering
prices on the cover page of this prospectus supplement, and may offer the notes to dealers at that price less a
concession not in excess of        % of the principal amount of the 2019 notes,        % of the principal amount of the
2021 notes,         % of the principal amount of the 2026 notes,         % of the principal amount of the 2046 notes,
and        % of the principal amount of the 2019 floating rate notes. The underwriters may allow, and the dealers may
reallow, a discount not in excess of        % of the principal amount of the 2019 notes,        % of the principal amount
of the 2021 notes,         % of the principal amount of the 2026 notes,         % of the principal amount of the 2046
notes, and        % of the principal amount of the 2019 floating rate notes to the other dealers. After the initial public
offering, the public offering prices and other selling terms may be changed. The offering of the notes by the
underwriters is subject to receipt and acceptance and subject to the underwriters’ right to reject any order in whole or
in part.
The notes are a new issue of securities with no established trading market. Although we intend to apply for listing of
the notes on the New York Stock Exchange, there can be no assurance that an active trading market will develop on
or off such exchange or that quotations for the notes will be readily available. We have been advised by the
underwriters that they presently intend to make a market in the notes after completion of the offering. However, they
are under no obligation to do so and may discontinue any market making activities without any notice. We cannot
assure the liquidity of the trading markets for the notes will develop. If an active public trading market for the notes
does not develop, the market price and liquidity of the notes may be adversely affected.
In connection with the offering, the underwriters are permitted to engage in transactions to stabilize the market price of
the notes. Such transactions consist of bids or purchases to peg, fix or maintain the price of the notes. If the
underwriters create a short position in the notes in connection with the offering, i.e., if they sell more notes than are on
the cover page of the prospectus supplement, the underwriters may reduce that short position by purchasing notes in
the open market. Purchases of a security to stabilize the price or to reduce a short position could cause the price of
the security to be higher than it might be in the absence of such purchases.
The underwriters also may impose a penalty bid. This occurs when a particular underwriter repays to the underwriters
a portion of the underwriting discount received by it because the representatives have repurchased notes sold by or
for the account of such underwriter in stabilizing or short covering transactions.
Neither we nor any of the underwriters makes any representation or prediction as to the direction or magnitude of any
effect that the transactions described above may have on the price of the notes. In addition,
Table of Contents
S-21
neither we nor any of the underwriters makes any representation that the underwriters will engage in these
transactions or that these transactions, once commenced, will not be discontinued without notice.
Certain of the underwriters and/or their affiliates are lenders under our revolving credit facilities and may receive a
portion of the net proceeds of this offering if such proceeds are used to repay amounts outstanding under our
revolving credit facilities, if any.
The underwriters and their respective affiliates are full service financial institutions engaged in various activities,
which may include sales and trading, commercial and investment banking, advisory, investment management,
investment research, principal investment, hedging, market making, brokerage and other financial and non-financial
activities and services. In the ordinary course of their respective businesses, the underwriters and their affiliates have
engaged, and may in the future engage, in various banking and financial services for and commercial transactions
with us and our affiliates for which they have received, and will receive in the future, customary fees.
In addition, in the ordinary course of their various business activities, the underwriters and their respective affiliates,
officers, directors and employees may purchase, sell or hold a broad array of investments, including serving as
counterparties to certain derivative and hedging arrangements, and actively trade securities, derivatives, loans,
commodities, currencies, credit default swaps and other financial instruments for their own account and for the
accounts of their customers, and such investment and trading activities may involve or relate to assets, securities
and/or instruments of the issuer (directly, as collateral securing other obligations or otherwise) and/or persons and
entities with relationships with the issuer. The underwriters and their respective affiliates may also communicate
independent investment recommendations, market color or trading ideas and/or publish or express independent
research views in respect of such assets, securities or instruments and may at any time hold, or recommend to
clients that they should acquire, long and/or short positions in such assets, securities and instruments.
We estimate that expenses, excluding underwriting discounts, will be approximately $            .
We have agreed to indemnify the several underwriters against, or contribute to payments that the underwriters may be
required to make in respect of, various liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
It is expected that delivery of the notes will be made against payment therefor on the date specified on the cover page
of this prospectus supplement.
Selling Restrictions
The notes are offered for sale only in those jurisdictions where it is lawful to make such offers.
In relation to each Member State of the European Economic Area which has implemented the Prospectus Directive
(each, a “Relevant Member State”), each underwriter and dealer has represented and agreed, and each further
underwriter and dealer appointed will be required to represent and agree, that with effect from and including the date on
which the Prospectus Directive is implemented in that Relevant Member State, it has not made and will not make an
offer of notes which are the subject of the offering contemplated by this prospectus supplement to the public in that
Relevant Member State other than:
(a)
to any legal entity which is a qualified investor as defined in the Prospectus Directive;
(b)
to fewer than 100, or, if the Relevant Member State has implemented the relevant provision of the 2010 PD
Amending Directive, 150, natural or legal persons (other than qualified investors as defined in the Prospectus
Directive), subject to obtaining the prior consent of the Underwriters for any such offer; or
(c)
in any other circumstances falling within Article 3(2) of the Prospectus Directive,
S-22
Table of Contents
provided that no such offer of notes shall require Shell Finance or any underwriter or dealer to publish a prospectus
pursuant to Article 3 of the Prospectus Directive or supplement a prospectus pursuant to Article 16 of the Prospectus
Directive.
For the purposes of this provision, the expression an “offer of notes to the public” in relation to any notes in any
Relevant Member State means the communication in any form and by any means of sufficient information on the
terms of the offer and the notes to be offered so as to enable an investor to decide to purchase or subscribe the
notes, as the same may be varied in that Member State by any measure implementing the Prospectus Directive in
that Member State, and the expression “Prospectus Directive” means Directive 2003/71/EC (and amendments
thereto, including the 2010 PD Amending Directive, to the extent implemented in the Relevant Member State) and
includes any relevant implementing measure in each Relevant Member State, and the expression “2010 PD Amending
Directive” means Directive 2010/73/EU.
In connection with the notes, no prospectus is required in accordance with the Prospectus Directive (as defined
above).
Each underwriter and each dealer has represented and agreed, and each further underwriter and dealer appointed will
be required to represent and agree, that (a) it has only communicated or caused to be communicated and will only
communicate or cause to be communicated an invitation or inducement to engage in investment activity (within the
meaning of Section 21 of the Financial Services and Markets Act (the “FSMA”)) received by it in connection with the
issue or sale of the notes in circumstances in which Section 21(1) of the FSMA does not apply to Royal Dutch Shell
or Shell Finance; and (b) it has complied and will comply with all applicable provisions of the FSMA with respect to
anything done by it in relation to the notes in, from or otherwise involving the United Kingdom.
Each underwriter and each dealer has represented and agreed, and each further underwriter and dealer appointed will
be required to represent and agree, that it shall include in:
(a) any offer of notes to the public in The Netherlands other than an offer:
(i)
in respect of which a prospectus (and, as the case may be, any supplement or supplements if
required) approved by the Netherlands Authority for the Financial Markets (Stichting Autoriteit
Financiële Markten) (the “AFM”) (or, where appropriate, by the competent authority in another European
Economic Area Member State which has implemented the Prospectus Directive and notified to the
AFM in accordance with the Prospectus Directive) has been made generally available; or
(ii)
only to qualified investors as defined in the Prospectus Directive; and
(b) any advertisement (reclame-uiting) (within the meaning of the Dutch Financial Markets Supervision Act (Wet
op het financieel toezicht) relating to such an offer, and any document in which the prospect of such offer is
held out;
that:
(A) no prospectus approved by the AFM has been or will be made generally available; and
(B) such offer is not supervised by the AFM;
in such manner as prescribed by the AFM from time to time.
The notes may not be offered or sold by means of any document other than (i) in circumstances which do not
constitute an offer to the public within the meaning of the Companies Ordinance (Cap.32, Laws of Hong Kong), or
(ii) to “professional investors” within the meaning of the Securities and Futures Ordinance (Cap.571, Laws of Hong
Kong) and any rules made thereunder, or (iii) in other circumstances which do not result in the document being a
“prospectus” within the meaning of the Companies Ordinance (Cap.32, Laws of Hong Kong),
Table of Contents
S-23
and no advertisement, invitation or document relating to the notes may be issued or may be in the possession of any
person for the purpose of issue (in each case whether in Hong Kong or elsewhere), which is directed at, or the
contents of which are likely to be accessed or read by, the public in Hong Kong (except if permitted to do so under the
laws of Hong Kong) other than with respect to notes which are or are intended to be disposed of only to persons
outside Hong Kong or only to “professional investors” within the meaning of the Securities and Futures Ordinance
(Cap. 571, Laws of Hong Kong) and any rules made thereunder.
The notes have not been and will not be registered under the Financial Instruments and Exchange Law of Japan (the
“FIEL”) and each underwriter has agreed that it will not offer or sell any notes, directly or indirectly, in Japan or to, or
for the benefit of, any resident of Japan (which term as used herein means any person resident in Japan, including
any corporation or other entity organized under the laws of Japan), or to others for re-offering or resale, directly or
indirectly, in Japan or to a resident of Japan, except pursuant to an exemption from the registration requirements of,
and otherwise in compliance with, the FIEL and any other applicable laws, regulations and ministerial guidelines of
Japan.
This prospectus supplement and the attached prospectus have not been registered as a prospectus with the Monetary
Authority of Singapore. Accordingly, this prospectus supplement, the attached prospectus and any other document or
material in connection with the offer or sale, or invitation for subscription or purchase, of the notes may not be
circulated or distributed, nor may the notes be offered or sold, or be made the subject of an invitation for subscription
or purchase, whether directly or indirectly, to persons in Singapore other than (i) to an institutional investor under
Section 274 of the Securities and Futures Act, Chapter 289 of Singapore (the “SFA”), (ii) to a relevant person, or any
person pursuant to Section 275(1A), and in accordance with the conditions, specified in Section 275 of the SFA or
(iii) otherwise pursuant to, and in accordance with the conditions of, any other applicable provision of the SFA.
Where the notes are subscribed or purchased under Section 275 by a relevant person which is: (a) a corporation
(which is not an accredited investor) the sole business of which is to hold investments and the entire share capital of
which is owned by one or more individuals, each of whom is an accredited investor; or (b) a trust (where the trustee is
not an accredited investor) whose sole purpose is to hold investments and each beneficiary is an accredited investor,
shares, debentures and units of shares and debentures of that corporation or the beneficiaries’ rights and interest in
that trust shall not be transferable for 6 months after that corporation or that trust has acquired the notes under
Section 275 except: (1) to an institutional investor under Section 274 of the SFA or to a relevant person, or any
person pursuant to Section 275(1A), and in accordance with the conditions, specified in Section 275 of the SFA;
(2) where no consideration is given for the transfer; or (3) by operation of law.
The notes may not and will not be publicly offered, distributed or re-distributed in the Swiss Confederation.
Canada
The notes may be sold only to purchasers purchasing, or deemed to be purchasing, as principal that are accredited
investors, as defined in National Instrument 45-106 Prospectus Exemptions or subsection 73.3(1) of the Securities
Act (Ontario), and are permitted clients, as defined in National Instrument 31-103 Registration Requirements,
Exemptions and Ongoing Registrant Obligations. Any resale of the notes must be made in accordance with an
exemption from, or in a transaction not subject to, the prospectus requirements of applicable securities laws.
Securities legislation in certain provinces or territories of Canada may provide a purchaser with remedies for
rescission or damages if this prospectus (including any amendment thereto) contains a misrepresentation, provided
that the remedies for rescission or damages are exercised by the purchaser within the time limit prescribed by the
securities legislation of the purchaser’s province or territory. The purchaser should refer to any applicable provisions
of the securities legislation of the purchaser’s province or territory for particulars of these rights or consult with a legal
advisor.
Table of Contents
S-24
Pursuant to section 3A.3 of National Instrument 33-105 Underwriting Conflicts (NI 33-105), the underwriters are not
required to comply with the disclosure requirements of NI 33-105 regarding underwriter conflicts of interest in
connection with this offering.
Table of Contents
S-25
PROSPECTUS
ROYAL DUTCH SHELL PLC
SENIOR DEBT SECURITIES
SUBORDINATED DEBT SECURITIES
WARRANTS
CLASS A ORDINARY SHARES
CLASS B ORDINARY SHARES
SHELL INTERNATIONAL FINANCE B.V.
with corporate seat in The Hague, the Netherlands
SENIOR DEBT SECURITIES
SUBORDINATED DEBT SECURITIES
Fully and unconditionally guaranteed by
ROYAL DUTCH SHELL PLC
Royal Dutch Shell plc may use this prospectus to offer from time to time senior or subordinated
debt securities, warrants or Class A ordinary shares or Class B ordinary shares, directly or in the
form of American Depositary Receipts. Shell International Finance B.V. may use this prospectus
to offer from time to time senior or subordinated debt securities fully and unconditionally
guaranteed by Royal Dutch Shell plc. Royal Dutch Shell plc’s Class A ordinary shares and Class
B ordinary shares are admitted to the Official List of the U.K. Listing Authority and to trading on
the main market for listed securities of the London Stock Exchange under the symbols “RDSA”
and “RDSB”, respectively, and listed on NYSE Euronext in Amsterdam (“Euronext Amsterdam”)
under the symbols “RDSA” and “RDSB”, respectively. Royal Dutch Shell plc’s Class A ordinary
shares and Class B ordinary shares are admitted for trading in the form of American Depositary
Shares (“ADSs”) on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbols “RDS.A” and “RDS.B”,
respectively.
This prospectus describes the general terms that may apply to the securities and the general
manner in which they may be offered. The specific terms of any securities to be offered and the
specific manner in which they will be offered will be set forth and described in a prospectus
supplement to this prospectus. Such supplements may also add to, update, supplement or clarify
information contained in this prospectus. You should read this prospectus and any applicable
prospectus supplement regarding the particular issue of securities carefully before you invest.
We may sell the securities offered by this prospectus through underwriters or dealers, directly to
purchasers or through agents. The names of any underwriters, dealers or agents involved in the
sale of the securities, together with any applicable commissions or discounts, will be stated in an
accompanying prospectus supplement. This prospectus may not be used to consummate sales
of any securities unless it is accompanied by the applicable prospectus supplement.
All dealers that effect transactions in the securities, whether or not participating in this offering,
may be required to deliver a prospectus. This is in addition to the dealers’ obligation to deliver a
prospectus when acting as underwriters and with respect to their unsold allotments or
subscriptions.
Investing in the securities involves certain risks. See “Risk Factors” beginning on page 4
to read about certain risk factors you should consider before investing in the securities.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any other regulatory body has
approved or disapproved of these securities or determined if this prospectus is truthful or
complete. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offence.
Prospectus dated October 31, 2014
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
ROYAL DUTCH SHELL PLC
SHELL INTERNATIONAL FINANCE B.V.
RISK FACTORS
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
ENFORCEABILITY OF CERTAIN CIVIL LIABILITIES
USE OF PROCEEDS
LEGAL OWNERSHIP
DESCRIPTION OF DEBT SECURITIES
DESCRIPTION OF ROYAL DUTCH SHELL WARRANTS
DESCRIPTION OF ROYAL DUTCH SHELL ORDINARY SHARES
DESCRIPTION OF ROYAL DUTCH SHELL AMERICAN DEPOSITARY SHARES
CLEARANCE AND SETTLEMENT
TAXATION
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
EXCHANGE CONTROLS
LIMITATIONS ON RIGHTS TO OWN SECURITIES
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
EX. 1.1
EX. 5.1
EX. 5.2
EX. 5.3
EX. 8.1
EX. 23.1
EX. 25.1
EX. 25.2
Page 
  
2 
 
3  
  
 
3  
  
 
4  
  
 
  
7  
 
 
  
8  
  10  
  
  
  12  
  13  
  
  15  
  
  
  26  
  28  
  
  39  
  
  
  46  
  51  
  
  69  
  
  
  71  
  71  
  
  71  
  
  
  71
EX. 25.2
Table of Contents
1
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
This prospectus is part of a registration statement on Form F-3 that we filed on October 31, 2014
with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”), utilizing a shelf registration process.
Under this shelf registration process, we may offer and sell any combination of the securities
described in this prospectus in one or more offerings. This prospectus provides you with a
general description of the securities we may offer. Each time we use this prospectus to offer
securities, we will provide a prospectus supplement that will contain specific information about
the offering and the terms of those securities. The prospectus supplement may also add, update
or change information contained in this prospectus. You should read both this prospectus and
any prospectus supplement together with the additional information described under the heading
“Where You Can Find More Information”, prior to purchasing any of the securities offered by this
prospectus. However, if there are any inconsistencies between the information contained herein
and the prospectus supplement, the information in the prospectus supplement shall prevail.
When acquiring any securities discussed in this prospectus, you should rely only on the
information contained or incorporated by reference in this prospectus, any prospectus
supplement and any “free writing prospectus” that we authorize to be delivered to you. Neither
we, nor any underwriters or agents, have authorized anyone to provide you with different
information. We are not offering the securities in any jurisdiction in which an offer or solicitation is
not authorized or in which the person making such offer or solicitation is not qualified to do so or
to anyone to whom it is unlawful to make an offer or solicitation.
You should not assume that the information in this prospectus, any prospectus supplement or
any document incorporated by reference is truthful or complete at any date other than the date
mentioned on the cover page of those documents.
In this prospectus “Royal Dutch Shell” refers to Royal Dutch Shell plc and, where the context
requires, its direct and indirect subsidiaries. “Shell Finance” refers to Shell International Finance
B.V. “Royal Dutch” refers to N.V. Koninklijke Nederlandsche Petroleum Maatschappij (also
known as Royal Dutch Petroleum Company). “Shell Transport” refers to The Shell Transport and
Trading Company Limited (formerly The “Shell” Transport and Trading Company, p.l.c.).
References to the “Shell Group” refer to Royal Dutch Shell and its subsidiaries collectively and
references to “we”, “our” and “us” refer to Royal Dutch Shell or the Shell Group, as the context
may require.
In this prospectus and any prospectus supplement, “U.S. dollars” or “$” refers to the lawful
currency of the United States (“U.S.”), “pounds sterling,” “£” or “pence” refers to the lawful
currency of the United Kingdom (“U.K.”), and “euro” or “€” refers to the currency established for
participating member states of the European Union as of the beginning of stage three of the
European Monetary Union on January 1, 1999.
In this prospectus “Intermediary” means each institution (intermediair), as defined in the Dutch
Securities Giro Act (Wet giraal effectenverkeer), which holds Royal Dutch Shell ordinary shares
on behalf of its clients, directly or indirectly, through Euroclear Nederland. References in this
prospectus to Royal Dutch Shell ordinary shares or to Royal Dutch Shell shares shall, where the
relevant shares are held by Euroclear Nederland in its capacity as central institute (centraal
instituut) under the Dutch Securities Giro Act and the context so permits, include references to
interests held in such shares by other persons in accordance with the Dutch Securities Giro Act.
In connection with any issue of securities through this prospectus, a stabilizing manager or any
person acting for him/her may over-allot or effect transactions with a view to supporting the
market price of such securities and any associated securities at a level higher than that which
might otherwise prevail for a limited period after the issue date. However, there will be no
obligation on the stabilizing manager or any agent of his/her to do this. Such stabilizing, if
commenced, may be discontinued at any time, and must be brought to an end after a limited
period.
Table of Contents
2
ROYAL DUTCH SHELL PLC
Royal Dutch Shell is the single parent company of Shell Petroleum N.V. (the legal successor of
Royal Dutch) and Shell Transport. From 1907 until 2005, Royal Dutch and Shell Transport were
the public parent companies of a group of companies known collectively as the “Royal
Dutch/Shell Group”. All operating activities were conducted through the subsidiaries of Royal
Dutch and Shell Transport. On July 20, 2005, Royal Dutch Shell became the single parent
company of Royal Dutch and Shell Transport (the “Unification”).
The companies of the Shell Group are engaged worldwide in all the principal aspects of the oil
and natural gas industry.
You can find a more detailed description of the Shell Group’s business and recent transactions in
the 2013 20-F and the Q3 Form 6-K (as such terms are defined below on page 8), which are
incorporated by reference into this prospectus, as well as any subsequent filings incorporated by
reference into this prospectus.
The Q3 Form 6-K also presents, in the Appendix to Exhibit 99.2 thereto, (i) the unaudited
consolidated ratio of earnings to fixed charges of Royal Dutch Shell for the last five fiscal years
and the nine month period ended September 30, 2014; and (ii) the unaudited consolidated
combined capitalization and indebtedness of Royal Dutch Shell as of September 30, 2014,
which items are incorporated by reference into this prospectus.
SHELL INTERNATIONAL FINANCE B.V.
Shell Finance was incorporated as a private company with limited liability under the laws of the
Netherlands on March 5, 2004. Shell Finance was renamed to its current name on June 6, 2005
and became a 100% owned subsidiary of Royal Dutch Shell on July 20, 2005. Shell Finance is a
financing vehicle for Royal Dutch Shell and its consolidated subsidiaries. Shell Finance has no
independent operations, other than raising debt for use by the Shell Group, hedging such debt
when appropriate and on-lending funds raised to companies in the Shell Group. Shell Finance
will lend substantially all proceeds of its borrowings to companies in the Shell Group. Royal
Dutch Shell will fully and unconditionally guarantee the guaranteed debt securities issued by
Shell Finance as to payment of principal, premium (if any), interest and any other amounts due.
Table of Contents
3
RISK FACTORS
Investing in the securities offered using this prospectus involves risk. Accordingly, you should
consider carefully all of the information included, or incorporated by reference, in this document
and any risk factors included in the applicable prospectus supplement before you decide to buy
securities. If any of these risks actually occur, our business, financial condition and results of
operations could suffer, and the trading price and liquidity of the securities could decline, in
which case you may lose all or part of your investment.
Risks Relating to Royal Dutch Shell’s Business
You should read “Risk Factors” on pages 11 to 14 in the 2013 20-F, which is incorporated by
reference in this prospectus, or similar sections in subsequent filings incorporated by reference in
this prospectus, for information on risks relating to Royal Dutch Shell’s business.
Risks Relating to Royal Dutch Shell’s Ordinary Shares
Our Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares and Class A ADSs and Class B
ADSs (as such terms are defined on page 39) may trade at different prices.
Each class of our ordinary shares and ADSs may trade at different prices based on, among other
things, the fact that dividends to be received by holders of Class A ordinary shares or Class A
ADSs will have a Dutch source, for Dutch and U.K. tax purposes, and dividends to be received
by holders of Class B ordinary shares or Class B ADSs will have a U.K. source, for Dutch and
U.K. tax purposes, to the extent paid through the dividend access mechanism (as further
described in “Description of Royal Dutch Shell Ordinary Shares — Dividend Access Mechanism
for Class B ordinary shares”). Prices also may differ owing to differing levels of demand in
different markets for reasons external to Royal Dutch Shell, such as index inclusion and relative
index performance.
Certain provisions of Royal Dutch Shell’s Articles of Association (the “Articles”) may limit
your ability to obtain monetary or other relief, or increase the cost of seeking and
obtaining recoveries in a dispute.
The Articles provide that, subject to certain exceptions, all disputes (i) between a shareholder in
such capacity and Royal Dutch Shell and/or its directors, arising out of or in connection with the
Articles or otherwise; (ii) so far as permitted by law, between Royal Dutch Shell and any of its
directors in their capacities as such or as its employees, including all claims made by Royal
Dutch Shell or on its behalf against its directors; (iii) between a shareholder in such capacity and
Royal Dutch Shell’s professional service providers (which could include its auditors, legal
counsel, bankers and ADS depositaries); and (iv) between Royal Dutch Shell and its
professional service providers arising in connection with any claim within the scope of (iii) above,
shall be exclusively and finally resolved by arbitration in The Hague, the Netherlands under the
Rules of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce (the “ICC Rules”), as amended
from time to time. This would include all disputes arising under U.K., Dutch or U.S. law (including
securities laws), or under any other law, between parties covered by the arbitration provision.
Accordingly, the ability of shareholders to obtain monetary or other relief, including in respect of
securities law claims, may be determined in accordance with these provisions, and the ability of
shareholders to obtain monetary or other relief may therefore be limited and their cost of seeking
and obtaining recoveries in a dispute may be higher than otherwise would be the case.
The tribunal shall consist of three arbitrators to be appointed in accordance with the ICC Rules.
The chairman of the tribunal must have at least 20 years’ experience as a lawyer qualified to
practice in a common law jurisdiction which is within the Commonwealth (as constituted on
May 12, 2005) and each other arbitrator must have at least 20 years’ experience as a qualified
lawyer.
Pursuant to the exclusive jurisdiction provision in the Articles, if a court or other competent
authority in any jurisdiction determines that the arbitration requirement described above is invalid
or unenforceable in relation to
Table of Contents
4
any particular dispute in that jurisdiction, then that dispute may only be brought in the courts of
England and Wales, as is the case with any derivative claim brought under the U.K. Companies
Act of 2006 (the “Companies Act 2006”). The governing law of the Articles is the substantive law
of England and Wales.
Disputes relating to Royal Dutch Shell’s failure or alleged failure to pay all or part of a dividend
which has been declared and which has fallen due for payment will not be subject to the
arbitration and exclusive jurisdiction provisions of the Articles. Any derivative claim brought
under the Companies Act 2006 will not be subject to the arbitration provisions of the Articles.
Pursuant to the relevant depositary agreement, as summarized under “Description of Royal
Dutch Shell American Depositary Shares”, each holder of ADSs is bound by the arbitration and
exclusive jurisdiction provisions of the Articles as described in that section as if that holder were
a shareholder.
Risks Relating to the Debt Securities and Warrants
Because Royal Dutch Shell is a holding company and conducts its operations through
subsidiaries, your right to receive payments on debt securities issued by Royal Dutch
Shell or on the guarantees is structurally subordinated to the liabilities of its subsidiaries.
Royal Dutch Shell is organized as a holding company, and substantially all of its operations are
carried on through subsidiaries of Royal Dutch Shell. Royal Dutch Shell’s ability to meet its
financial obligations is dependent upon the availability of cash flows from its domestic and
foreign subsidiaries and affiliated companies through dividends, intercompany advances and
other payments. Moreover, Shell Finance is a special purpose financing vehicle that was formed
for the purpose of raising debt for the Shell Group. Shell Finance conducts no business or
revenue-generating operations of its own. Shell Finance has no subsidiaries and will rely on
payments (including principal and interest) from Royal Dutch Shell and other subsidiaries in the
Shell Group to whom it has on-lent the proceeds of any debt securities issued by it in order to
make payments on securities issued by it. Royal Dutch Shell’s subsidiaries are not guarantors of
the debt securities that may be offered under this prospectus. Claims of the creditors of Royal
Dutch Shell’s subsidiaries have priority as to the assets of such subsidiaries over the claims of
Royal Dutch Shell. Consequently, in the event of insolvency of Royal Dutch Shell, the claims of
holders of debt securities guaranteed or issued by Royal Dutch Shell would be structurally
subordinated to the prior claims of the creditors of subsidiaries of Royal Dutch Shell.
Because the debt securities are unsecured, your right to receive payments may be
adversely affected.
The debt securities that we are offering will be unsecured. If Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance
defaults on the debt securities or Royal Dutch Shell defaults on the guarantees, or in the event of
bankruptcy, liquidation or reorganization, then, to the extent that Royal Dutch Shell or Shell
Finance have granted security over their assets, the assets that secure these debts will be used
to satisfy the obligations under that secured debt before Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance
could make payment on the debt securities or the guarantees, respectively. If there is not enough
collateral to satisfy the obligations of the secured debt, then the remaining amounts on the
secured debt would share equally with all unsubordinated unsecured indebtedness, including
the senior debt securities. In addition, Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance may have to satisfy
obligations mandatorily preferred by law applying to companies generally before Royal Dutch
Shell or Shell Finance could make payments on the debt securities or the guarantees
respectively.
The debt securities and warrants lack a developed trading market, and such a market may
never develop.
Each of Royal Dutch Shell and Shell Finance may issue debt securities in different series with
different terms in amounts that are to be determined. Although any such debt securities issued
may be listed on a recognized stock exchange in the U.S. or Europe, there can be no assurance
that an active trading market will develop for any series of debt securities. Similarly, there can be
no assurance that an active trading market will develop for any
Table of Contents
5
warrants issued by Royal Dutch Shell. There can also be no assurance regarding the ability of
holders of our debt securities and warrants to sell their debt securities or warrants or the price at
which such holders may be able to sell their debt securities or warrants. If a trading market were
to develop, the debt securities and warrants could trade at prices that may be higher or lower
than the initial offering price and, in the case of debt securities, this may result in a return that is
greater or less than the interest rate on the debt securities, in each case depending on many
factors, including, among other things, prevailing interest rates, Royal Dutch Shell’s financial
results, any change in Royal Dutch Shell’s credit-worthiness and the market for similar securities.
Any underwriters, broker-dealers or agents that participate in the distribution of the debt securities
or warrants may make a market in the debt securities or warrants as permitted by applicable laws
and regulations but will have no obligation to do so, and any such market-making activities may
be discontinued at any time. Therefore, there can be no assurance as to the liquidity of any
trading market for the debt securities or warrants or that an active public market for the debt
securities or warrants will develop.
The substitution of the obligor on a particular series of our debt securities generally would
cause you to realize taxable gain or loss for U.S. tax purposes, if any, on any such debt
securities that you hold.
We have the right to cause Royal Dutch Shell or any of its subsidiaries to assume the obligations
of Shell Finance under any series of debt securities as described in “Description of Debt
Securities — Substitution of Shell Finance as Issuer” below. Also an entity that becomes the
owner of 100% of the voting stock of Royal Dutch Shell may assume the obligations of Royal
Dutch Shell with respect to one or more series of debt securities as described in “Description of
Debt Securities — Consolidation, Merger and Sale of Assets” below. Under U.S. tax law, the
change in the obligor on our debt securities under these provisions could be treated as a
disposition of any such debt securities that you hold, requiring you to realize gain or loss on our
debt securities even though you continue to hold our debt securities and receive no distribution in
connection with the deemed disposition. See “Taxation — U.S. Taxation of Debt Securities —
Sale or Retirement of Debt Securities” for discussion of possible tax consequences.
Any subordinated debt securities that we issue will be subordinate in ranking to our
existing debt and future senior debt.
We may issue one or more series of debt securities that by their terms are subordinated to all
existing and future “senior debt” (as defined in the relevant indenture). Under the subordination
terms, the subordinated debt will be subordinated in right of payment to all senior debt and may
be subject to payment blockage, standstill and other terms designed to enhance the rights of the
senior debt. As a result of these subordination terms, holders of subordinated debt may receive
less upon any bankruptcy or liquidation than holders of senior debt. See “Description of Debt
Securities — Provisions Applicable Solely to Subordinated Debt Securities”. You should read
carefully the specific terms of any particular series of debt securities which will be contained in
the prospectus supplement relating to such debt securities.
Shell Finance’s ability to satisfy its obligations in respect of the guaranteed debt securities
is dependent on other members of the Shell Group.
Shell Finance is a finance vehicle and its primary business is the raising of money for the
purpose of on-lending to other members of the Shell Group. Shell Finance’s ability to satisfy its
obligations in respect of the guaranteed debt securities will depend on payments made to Shell
Finance by other members of the Shell Group in respect of loans and advances made by Shell
Finance.
Table of Contents
6
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
The SEC encourages companies to disclose forward-looking information so that investors can
better understand a company’s future prospects and make informed investment decisions. This
prospectus, any prospectus supplement and documents incorporated by reference in this
prospectus and any prospectus supplement may contain forward-looking statements concerning
the financial condition, results of operations and businesses of Royal Dutch Shell. All statements
other than statements of historical fact are, or may be deemed to be, forward-looking statements.
Forward-looking statements are statements of future expectations that are based on
management’s current expectations and assumptions and involve known and unknown risks and
uncertainties that could cause actual results, performance or events to differ materially from those
expressed or implied in these statements. Forward-looking statements include, among other
things, statements concerning the potential exposure of Royal Dutch Shell to market risks and
statements expressing management’s expectations, beliefs, estimates, forecasts, projections and
assumptions.
These forward-looking statements are identified by their use of terms and phrases such as
“anticipate”, “believe”, “could”, “estimate”, “expect”, “goals”, “intend”, “may”, “objectives”, “outlook”,
“plan”, “probably”, “project”, “risks”, “schedule”, “seek”, “should”, “target”, “will” and similar terms
and phrases. There are a number of factors that could affect the future operations of Royal Dutch
Shell and could cause those results to differ materially from those expressed in the forward-
looking statements included in this prospectus, including (without limitation):
•  price fluctuations in crude oil and natural gas;
•  changes in demand for the Shell Group’s products;
•  currency fluctuations;
•  drilling and production results;
•  reserve estimates;
•  loss of market share and industry competition;
•  environmental and physical risks;
•  risks associated with the identification of suitable potential acquisition properties and
targets, and successful negotiation and completion of such transactions;
•  the risk of doing business in developing countries and countries subject to international
sanctions;
•  legislative, fiscal and regulatory developments including regulatory measures addressing
climate change;
•  economic and financial market conditions in various countries and regions;
•  political risks, including the risks of expropriation and renegotiation of the terms of
contracts with governmental entities, delays or advancements in the approval of projects
and delays in the reimbursement for shared costs; and
•  changes in trading conditions.
All forward-looking statements contained in this prospectus are expressly qualified in their
entirety by the cautionary statements contained or referred to in this section. You should not
place undue reliance on forward-looking statements. Each forward-looking statement speaks
only as of the date of the particular statement. Neither Royal Dutch Shell nor any of its
subsidiaries undertake any obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statement
as a result of new information, future events or other information. In light of these risks, results
could differ materially from those stated, implied or inferred from the forward-looking statements
contained in this prospectus.
7
Table of Contents
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
Royal Dutch Shell is subject to the information and periodic reporting requirements of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”) and, in accordance with
those requirements, files annual reports and other information with the SEC. However, as a
foreign private issuer, Royal Dutch Shell and its shareholders are exempt from some of the
Exchange Act reporting requirements. The reporting requirements that do not apply to Royal
Dutch Shell or its shareholders include proxy solicitations rules, the short-swing insider profit
disclosure rules of Section 16 of the Exchange Act with respect to Royal Dutch Shell’s shares
and the rules regarding the furnishing of quarterly reports to the SEC, which are required to be
furnished only if required or otherwise provided in our home country domicile.
The materials Royal Dutch Shell files with or furnishes to the SEC (and the materials Royal
Dutch and Shell Transport filed with or furnished to the SEC) may be inspected and copied at the
following location of the SEC:
Public Reference Room
100 F Street, N.E.
Washington, D.C. 20549
You may also obtain copies of this information by mail from the Public Reference Section of the
SEC, 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549, at prescribed rates. You may obtain
information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-
0330. All filings made by Royal Dutch Shell and its predecessors after December 15, 2002 are
also available online through the SEC’s EDGAR electronic filing system. Access to EDGAR can
be found on the SEC’s website, at http://www.sec.gov.
The SEC allows us to “incorporate by reference” information into this prospectus. This means
that we can disclose important information to you by referring you to other documents filed
separately with the SEC. The information incorporated by reference is considered to be a part of
this prospectus, except for any information that is superseded by information that is included
directly in this prospectus.
The information that we incorporate by reference is an important part of this prospectus. We
incorporate by reference the following documents:
•  Annual Report on Form 20-F of Royal Dutch Shell for the fiscal year ended December 31,
2013, as filed with the SEC on March 13, 2014 (File No. 001-32575) (the “2013 20-F”);
•  Reports on Form 6-K of Royal Dutch Shell filed with the SEC on October 30, 2014 (the
“Q3 Form 6-K”) and July 31, 2014, containing the unaudited condensed interim financial
report of Royal Dutch Shell and its consolidated subsidiaries for the nine- and six -month
periods ended September 30, 2014 and June 30, 2014 respectively (File No. 001-32575);
•  Reports on Form 6-K of Royal Dutch Shell filed with the SEC pursuant to Section 13(a) or
Section 15(d) of the Exchange Act since the end of the fiscal year covered by the 2013
20-F; and
•  the description of our share capital contained in the Report on Form 6-K of Royal Dutch
Shell furnished to the SEC on July 20, 2005 (File No. 333-125035) (the “Capital Stock
Form 6-K”) and any amendment or reports filed for the purpose of updating such
description.
We also incorporate by reference any future filings that we make with the SEC under
Section 13(a), 13(c) or 15(d) of the Exchange Act until we sell all of the securities. Our reports on
Form 6-K furnished to the SEC after the date of this prospectus (or portions thereof) are
incorporated by reference in this prospectus only to the extent that the forms expressly state that
we incorporate them (or such portions) by reference in this prospectus.
Information that we file with the SEC will automatically update and supersede information in
documents filed with the SEC at earlier dates. All information appearing in this prospectus is
qualified in its entirety by the information and financial statements, including the notes, contained
in the documents that we incorporate by reference in this prospectus.
Table of Contents
8
You can obtain any of the documents incorporated by reference in this prospectus through us, or
from the SEC. Documents incorporated by reference are available from us without charge,
excluding all exhibits unless an exhibit has been specifically incorporated by reference into this
prospectus, by requesting them in writing or by telephone from us at the following address and
telephone number:
Royal Dutch Shell plc
Carel van Bylandtlaan 30
2596 HR The Hague
the Netherlands
Tel. No.: (011 31 70) 377 9111
Royal Dutch Shell’s Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares are admitted to the
Official List of the U.K. Listing Authority and to trading on the market for listed securities of the
London Stock Exchange and listed on Euronext Amsterdam. Royal Dutch Shell’s Class A
ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares are admitted for trading in the form of ADSs on the
New York Stock Exchange. You can consult reports and other information about Royal Dutch
Shell that it files or makes public pursuant to the rules of the London Stock Exchange, Euronext
Amsterdam and the New York Stock Exchange at such exchanges.
Additional information regarding Royal Dutch Shell may be obtained on its website at
www.shell.com. Such information is not incorporated by reference into this prospectus.
Table of Contents
9
ENFORCEABILITY OF CERTAIN CIVIL LIABILITIES
Royal Dutch Shell is a public limited company incorporated under the laws of England and
Wales. Shell Finance is a private company with limited liability incorporated under the laws of the
Netherlands. A majority of our directors and officers and some of the experts named in this
document reside outside of the U.S. and a majority of our assets are located outside of the U.S.
As a result, it may not be possible for investors to effect service of process within the U.S. upon
us or these persons or to enforce against it or them, either in the U.S., the U.K. or the
Netherlands, judgments of U.S. courts predicated upon the civil liability provisions of the U.S.
federal or state securities laws.
The Articles provide that, subject to certain exceptions, all disputes (i) between a shareholder in
such capacity and Royal Dutch Shell and/or its directors, arising out of or in connection with the
Articles or otherwise; (ii) so far as permitted by law, between Royal Dutch Shell and any of its
directors in their capacities as such or as its employees, including all claims made by Royal
Dutch Shell or on its behalf against its directors; (iii) between a shareholder in such capacity and
Royal Dutch Shell’s professional service providers (which could include its auditors, legal
counsel, bankers and ADS depositaries); and (iv) between Royal Dutch Shell and its
professional service providers arising in connection with any claim within the scope of (iii) above,
shall be exclusively and finally resolved by arbitration in The Hague, the Netherlands under the
ICC Rules, as amended from time to time. See “Description of Royal Dutch Shell Ordinary
Shares — Disputes between a shareholder or ADS holder and Royal Dutch Shell, any
subsidiary, director or professional service provider”.
The following discussion with respect to the enforceability of certain U.S. court judgments in
England and Wales assumes a judgment is rendered in a U.S. court notwithstanding the charter
provision of Royal Dutch Shell described above and is based upon advice provided to us by our
English counsel, Slaughter and May. The U.S. and the U.K. do not have a treaty providing for the
reciprocal recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters (although
the U.S. and the U.K. are both parties to the 1958 Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards). Any judgment rendered by any federal or state court in
the U.S. based on civil liability, whether or not predicated solely upon U.S. federal securities law,
would not be directly enforceable in England and Wales. In order to enforce any such judgment
in England and Wales, proceedings must be initiated by way of fresh legal proceedings in
respect of the judgment debt before a court of competent jurisdiction in England and Wales. In
this type of action, an English court generally will not (subject to the matters identified below)
reinvestigate the merits of the original matter decided by a U.S. court and will treat the judgment
as conclusive. The matters which would cause an English court not to enforce a judgment debt
created by a U.S. judgment are that:
•  the relevant U.S. court did not have jurisdiction under English rules of private
international law to give the judgment;
•  the judgment was not final and conclusive on the merits. A foreign judgment which could
be abrogated or varied by the court which pronounced it is not a final judgment. However,
a judgment will be treated as final and conclusive even though it is subject to an appeal
or if an appeal is actually pending, although in such a case a stay of execution in England
and Wales may be ordered pending such an appeal. The foreign judgment will be treated
as non-final and thus non-enforceable in England and Wales if execution in the foreign
jurisdiction is stayed pending appeal. If the judgment is given by a court of a law district
forming part of a larger federal system such as in the U.S., the finality and conclusiveness
of the judgment in the law district where it was given alone are relevant in England and
Wales. Its finality and conclusiveness in other parts of the federal system are irrelevant;
•  the judgment is not for a definite sum of money or is for a sum payable in respect of taxes
or other charges of a like nature or in respect of a fine or other penalty or otherwise based
on a U.S. law that an English court considers to be a penal, revenue or other public law;
•  the enforcement of such judgment would contravene public policy in England and Wales;
10
Table of Contents
•  the enforcement of the judgment is prohibited by statute (for example, section 5 of the
U.K. Protection of Trading Interests Act 1980 prohibits the enforcement of foreign
judgments for multiple damages and other foreign judgments specified by statutory
instrument concerned with restrictive trade practices. A judgment for multiple damages is
defined as a judgment for an amount arrived at by doubling, trebling or otherwise
multiplying a sum assessed as compensation for the loss or damage sustained by the
judgment creditor);
•  the English proceedings were not commenced within the relevant limitation period;
•  before the date on which the U.S. court gave judgment, a judgment has been given in
proceedings between the same parties or their privies in a court in the U.K. or in an
overseas court which the English court will recognize;
•  the judgment has been obtained by fraud (on either the part of the party in whose favor
judgment was given or on the part of the court pronouncing the judgment) or in
proceedings in which the principles of natural justice were breached;
•  the bringing of proceedings in the relevant U.S. court was contrary to an agreement
under which the dispute in question was to be settled otherwise than by
proceedings in the U.S. courts (to whose jurisdiction the judgment debtor did not
submit by counterclaim or otherwise); or
•  an order has been made and remains effective under section 9 of the U.K. Foreign
Judgments (Reciprocal Enforcement) Act 1933 applying that section to U.S. courts
including the relevant U.S. court.
If an English court gives judgment for the sum payable under a U.S. judgment, the English
judgment will be enforceable by methods generally available for this purpose. The judgment
creditor is able to utilize any method or methods of enforcement available to him/her at the time.
In addition, it may not be possible to obtain an English judgment or to enforce that judgment if the
judgment debtor is subject to any insolvency or similar proceedings, or if the judgment debtor has
any set-off or counterclaim against the judgment creditor.
Subject to the foregoing, investors may be able to enforce in England and Wales judgments in
civil and commercial matters obtained from U.S. federal or state courts in the manner described
above using the methods available for enforcement of a judgment of an English court. It is,
however, uncertain whether an English court would impose liability on us or such persons in an
action predicated upon the U.S. federal or state securities law brought in England and Wales.
De Brauw Blackstone Westbroek London B.V. (“De Brauw”), our Dutch legal counsel, has
advised us that there is doubt as to the enforceability in the Netherlands, in original actions or in
actions for enforcement of judgments of U.S. courts, of civil liabilities solely based on the U.S.
federal securities laws. We have further been advised by De Brauw that the U.S. and the
Netherlands do not currently have a treaty providing for reciprocal recognition and enforcement of
judgments (other than arbitration awards) in civil and commercial matters. As a consequence, a
final judgment for the payment of money rendered by any federal or state court in the U.S. based
on civil liability, whether or not predicated solely upon the federal securities laws of the U.S.,
would not be directly enforceable in the Netherlands. However, a court in the Netherlands would
generally give binding effect to a final judgment that has been rendered in the U.S. if it finds that
the jurisdiction of the federal or state court in the U.S. has been based on grounds that are
internationally acceptable, that proper legal procedures have been observed and that it would not
contravene Dutch public policy to give binding effect to such final judgment.
Table of Contents
11
USE OF PROCEEDS
Unless otherwise indicated in an accompanying prospectus supplement, the net proceeds from
the sale of securities will be used for general corporate purposes.
Table of Contents
12
Street Name and Other Indirect Holders
LEGAL OWNERSHIP
We generally will not recognize investors who hold securities in accounts at banks or brokers as
legal holders of securities. When we refer to the holders of securities, we mean only the actual
legal and (if applicable) record holder of those securities. Holding securities in accounts at banks
or brokers is called holding in street name. If you hold securities in street name, we will recognize
only the bank or broker or the financial institution the bank or broker uses to hold its securities.
These intermediary banks, brokers and other financial institutions pass along principal, interest
and other payments on the securities, either because they agree to do so in their customer
agreements or because they are legally required. If you hold securities in street name, you
should check with your own institution to find out:
•  how it handles securities payments and notices;
•  whether it imposes fees or charges;
•  how it would handle voting if it were ever required;
•  whether and how you can instruct it to send you securities registered in your own name
so you can be a direct holder as described below; and
•  how it would pursue rights under the securities if there were a default or other event
triggering the need for holders to act to protect their interests.
Direct Holders
Our obligations, as well as the obligations of the trustee and those of any third parties employed
by us or the trustee, under the securities run only to persons who are registered as holders of
securities. As noted above, we do not have obligations to you if you hold in street name or other
indirect means, either because you choose to hold securities in that manner or because the
securities are issued in the form of global securities as described below. For example, once we
make payment to the registered holder, we have no further responsibility for the payment even if
that holder is legally required to pass the payment along to you as a street name customer but
does not do so.
Global Securities
What Is a Global Security?
A global security is a special type of indirectly held security, as described above under “— Street
Name and Other Indirect Holders”. If we choose to issue securities in the form of global
securities, the ultimate beneficial owners can only be indirect holders.
We require that the securities included in the global security not be transferred to the name of any
other direct holder unless the special circumstances described below occur. The financial
institution that acts as the sole direct holder of the global security is called the depositary. Any
person wishing to own a security must do so indirectly by virtue of an account with a broker, bank
or other financial institution that in turn has an account with the depositary. The prospectus
supplement relating to an offering of a series of securities will indicate whether the series will be
issued only in the form of global securities.
Special Investor Considerations for Global Securities
As an indirect holder, an investor’s rights relating to a global security will be governed by the
account rules of the investor’s financial institution and of the depositary, as well as general laws
relating to securities transfers. We do not recognize this type of investor as a holder of securities
and instead deal only with the depositary that holds the global security.
Table of Contents
13
If you are an investor in securities that are issued only in the form of global securities, you should
be aware that:
•  You cannot get securities registered in your own name.
•  You cannot receive physical certificates for your interest in the securities.
•  You will be a street name holder and must look to your own bank or broker for payments
on the securities and protection of your legal rights relating to the securities, as explained
above under “— Street Name and Other Indirect Holders”.
•  You may not be able to sell interests in the securities to some insurance companies and
other institutions that are required by law to own their securities in the form of physical
certificates.
•  The depositary’s policies will govern payments, transfers, exchange and other matters
relating to your interest in the global security. We and the trustee have no responsibility
for any aspect of the depositary’s actions or for its records of ownership interests in the
global security. We and the trustee also do not supervise the depositary in any way.
•  The depositary will require that interests in a global security be purchased or sold within
its system using same-day funds. By contrast, payment for purchases and sales in the
market for corporate bonds and other securities is generally made in next-day funds. The
difference could have some effect on how interests in global securities trade, but we do
not know what that effect will be.
Special Situations When the Global Security Will Be Terminated
In a few special situations described below, the global security will terminate and interests in it
will be exchanged for physical certificates representing securities. After that exchange, the
choice of whether to hold securities directly or in street name will be up to the investor; provided,
however, that the physical certificates are issued in a registered form for U.S. federal income tax
purposes. Investors must consult their own bank or brokers to find out how to have their interests
in securities transferred to their own name so that they will be direct holders. The rights of street
name investors and direct holders in the securities have been previously described in the
subsections entitled “— Street Name and Other Indirect Holders” and “— Direct Holders”.
The special situations for termination of a global security are:
•  When the depositary notifies us that it is unwilling, unable or no longer qualified to
continue as depositary.
•  When an event of default on the securities has occurred and has not been cured. Defaults
on debt securities are discussed below under “Description of Debt Securities —
Provisions Applicable to Each Indenture — Events of Default”.
•  If we determine not to have the securities represented by a global security.
The prospectus supplement may also list additional situations for terminating a global security
that would apply only to the particular series of securities covered by the prospectus supplement.
When a global security terminates, the depositary, and not we or the trustee, is responsible for
deciding the names of the institutions that will be the initial direct holders.
In the remainder of this description “you” means direct holders and not street name or
other indirect holders of securities. Indirect holders should read the previous subsection
entitled “— Street Name and Other Indirect Holders”.
Table of Contents
14
DESCRIPTION OF DEBT SECURITIES
The debt securities of Royal Dutch Shell and Shell Finance covered by this prospectus will be
Royal Dutch Shell’s and Shell Finance’s unsecured obligations. The debt securities of Shell
Finance will be fully and unconditionally guaranteed by Royal Dutch Shell. Royal Dutch Shell
will issue senior debt securities under an indenture between Royal Dutch Shell, as issuer, and
Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas, as trustee or another trustee identified in the
prospectus supplement. Shell Finance will issue senior debt securities fully and unconditionally
guaranteed by Royal Dutch Shell on a senior unsecured basis under an indenture, among Shell
Finance, as issuer, Royal Dutch Shell, as guarantor, and Deutsche Bank Trust Company
Americas, as trustee or another trustee identified in the prospectus supplement. We refer to these
indentures as the “senior indentures” and these securities as the “senior debt securities”.
Royal Dutch Shell will issue subordinated debt securities under an indenture between Royal
Dutch Shell, as issuer, and Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas, as trustee or another
trustee identified in the prospectus supplement. Shell Finance will issue subordinated debt
securities fully and unconditionally guaranteed by Royal Dutch Shell on a subordinated
unsecured basis under an indenture among Shell Finance, as issuer, Royal Dutch Shell, as
guarantor, and Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas, as trustee or another trustee identified
in the prospectus supplement. We refer to these indentures as the “subordinated indentures” and
these securities as the “subordinated debt securities”.
The indentures of Royal Dutch Shell and Shell Finance will be substantially identical except with
regards to the guarantees and for provisions relating to subordination and covenants. We refer to
the senior indentures and the subordinated indentures collectively as the “indentures”.
We have summarized material provisions of the indentures, the debt securities and the
guarantees below. This summary is not complete. We have filed the form of senior indentures
and the form of subordinated indentures with the SEC as exhibits to this registration statement,
and you should read the indentures for provisions that may be important to you.
In this summary description of the debt securities, unless we state otherwise or the context clearly
indicates otherwise, all references to “Royal Dutch Shell” mean Royal Dutch Shell only and all
references to “Shell Finance” mean Shell Finance only. We refer to the indentures of Shell
Finance as the “Shell Finance indentures”.
Provisions Applicable to Each Indenture
General. None of the indentures limits the amount of debt securities that may be issued under
that indenture, and none of the indentures limits the amount of other unsecured debt or securities
that Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance may issue. Royal Dutch Shell and Shell Finance may
issue debt securities under the indentures from time to time in one or more series, each in an
amount authorized prior to issuance.
Royal Dutch Shell conducts substantially all its operations through subsidiaries, and those
subsidiaries generate substantially all its operating income and cash flow. As a result,
distributions or advances from those subsidiaries, repayment or refinancing of intra-group lending
and interest flows are the principal source of funds necessary to meet the debt service
obligations of Royal Dutch Shell and Shell Finance. Contractual provisions or laws, as well as
the subsidiaries’ financial condition and operating requirements, may limit the ability of Royal
Dutch Shell to obtain cash from its subsidiaries that it requires to pay its debt service obligations,
including any payments required to be made under the debt securities and its guarantee of Shell
Finance’s debt securities. In addition, holders of the debt securities and Royal Dutch Shell’s
related guarantee will have a junior position to the claims of creditors of the subsidiaries of Royal
Dutch Shell on their assets and earnings. The Articles of Royal Dutch Shell also limit the
borrowings of the Shell Group to two times its adjusted capital and reserves, as such terms are
defined therein, and as such terms are calculated on the date of the then-latest audited balance
sheet of Royal Dutch Shell. Such limit can be exceeded with the approval of Royal Dutch Shell
shareholders.
Table of Contents
15
None of the indentures contains any covenants or other provisions designed to protect holders of
the debt securities in the event Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance participates in a highly
leveraged transaction or upon a change of control. The indentures also do not contain provisions
that give holders the right to require Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance to repurchase their
securities in the event of a decline in Royal Dutch Shell’s credit ratings for any reason, including
as a result of a takeover, recapitalization or similar restructuring or otherwise.
Terms. The prospectus supplement relating to any series of debt securities being offered will
include specific terms relating to the offering. These terms will include some or all of the
following:
•  whether the debt securities will be senior or subordinated debt securities;
•  whether Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance will be the issuer of the debt securities;
•  any stock exchange on which debt securities will be listed;
•  the title of the debt securities;
•  the total principal amount of the debt securities of the series offered and any limit on the
future issuance of additional securities of that series;
•  whether the debt securities will be issued in individual certificates to each holder or in the
form of temporary or permanent global securities held by a depositary on behalf of
holders;
•  the date or dates on which the principal of and any premium on the debt securities will be
payable;
•  any interest rate, which may be fixed or variable, the date from which interest will accrue,
interest payment dates and record dates for interest payments;
•  any right to extend or defer the interest payment periods and the duration of the extension;
•  any mandatory or optional sinking funds or analogous provisions or provisions for
redemption at the option of the holder;
•  whether and under what circumstances any additional amounts with respect to the debt
securities will be payable;
•  the place or places where payments on the debt securities will be payable;
•  any provisions for optional redemption or early repayment, including conditions precedent
for such optional redemption;
•  any provisions that would require the redemption, repurchase or repayment of debt
securities;
•  whether payments on the debt securities will be payable in currency or currency units or
another form and whether payments will be payable by reference to any index or formula;
•  the portion of the principal amount of debt securities that will be payable if the maturity is
accelerated, if other than the entire principal amount;
•  any additional means of defeasance of the debt securities, any additional conditions or
limitations to defeasance of the debt securities or any changes to those conditions or
limitations;
•  any changes or additions to the events of default or covenants described in this
prospectus;
•  any restrictions or other provisions relating to the transfer or exchange of debt securities;
•  any terms for the mandatory or optional conversion or exchange of the debt securities;
•  with respect to the subordinated indenture, any changes to the subordination provisions
for the subordinated debt securities described in this prospectus;
•  the currency of payment and the denominations in which the debt securities will be
issuable; and
•  any other terms of the debt securities not inconsistent with the applicable indenture.
Table of Contents
16
Royal Dutch Shell and Shell Finance may sell the debt securities at a discount, which may be
substantial, below their stated principal amount. These debt securities may bear no interest or
interest at a rate that at the time of issuance is below market rates.
If material to a particular series of securities and not already described in this prospectus, we will
describe in the prospectus supplement the restrictions, elections, tax consequences, specific
terms and other information relating to those debt securities.
Consolidation, Merger and Sale of Assets. The indentures generally permit a consolidation,
merger or similar transaction involving Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance. They also permit
Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance, as applicable, to transfer or dispose of all or substantially all
of their assets. Each of Royal Dutch Shell and Shell Finance has agreed, however, that it will not
consolidate with or merge into any entity (other than, with respect to Shell Finance, Royal Dutch
Shell) or transfer or dispose of all or substantially all of its assets to any entity (other than, with
respect to Shell Finance, Royal Dutch Shell) if, immediately after giving effect to such transaction
or transactions, an event of default, or an event that, after notice or lapse of time or both, would
become an event of default, has occurred and is continuing; and unless:
•  it is the continuing corporation; or
•  if it is not the continuing corporation, the resulting entity or transferee assumes the
performance of its covenants and obligations under the indentures and, in the case of
Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance as issuer, the due and punctual payments on the debt
securities or, in the case of Royal Dutch Shell with respect to the debt securities of Shell
Finance, the performance of the related guarantee.
Additionally, in the event that any entity shall become the owner of 100% of the voting stock of
Royal Dutch Shell, such entity may, but is not obligated to, assume the performance of Royal
Dutch Shell’s covenants and obligations under any or all of the indentures, either as issuer
and/or as guarantor for the debt securities of Shell Finance (a “Voluntary Assumption”). See
“Taxation — U.S. Taxation of Debt Securities — Merger and Consolidation/Substitution of Issuer”
for discussion of possible tax consequences.
Upon any such consolidation, merger or similar transaction or asset transfer or disposition
involving Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance, or any such Voluntary Assumption, the resulting
entity, transferee or assuming entity, as applicable, will be substituted for Royal Dutch Shell or
Shell Finance, as applicable, under the applicable indenture and debt securities. Royal Dutch
Shell or Shell Finance, as applicable, will thereupon be released from the applicable indenture.
Events of Default. Unless we inform you otherwise in the applicable prospectus supplement, the
following are events of default with respect to a series of debt securities:
•  failure to pay interest or any additional amounts on that series of debt securities for 30
days when due;
•  failure to pay principal of or any premium on that series of debt securities for 14 days
when due;
•  failure to redeem or purchase debt securities of that series for 14 days when required;
•  failure to comply with any covenant or agreement in that series of debt securities for 90
days after written notice by the trustee or by the holders of at least 25% in principal
amount of the outstanding debt securities issued under that indenture that are affected by
that failure;
•  specified events involving bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization of Royal Dutch Shell
and, with respect to Shell Finance’s debt securities, Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance;
and
•  any other event of default provided for that series of debt securities.
A default under one series of debt securities or any other agreement to which Royal Dutch Shell
or Shell Finance is a party will not be a default under another series of debt securities.
Table of Contents
17
If an event of default for any series of debt securities occurs and is continuing, the trustee or the
holders of at least 25% in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of the series
affected by the default may declare the principal of and all accrued and unpaid interest on those
debt securities to be due and payable. The holders of a majority in principal amount of the
outstanding debt securities of the series affected by the default may in some cases rescind this
accelerated payment requirement.
A holder of a debt security of any series issued under an indenture may pursue any remedy
under that indenture only if:
•  the holder gives the trustee written notice of a continuing event of default for that series;
•  the holders of at least 25% in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of that
series make a written request to the trustee to pursue the remedy;
•  the holders offer to the trustee indemnity satisfactory to the trustee;
•  the trustee fails to act for a period of 60 days after receipt of the request and offer of
indemnity; and
•  during that 60-day period, the holders of a majority in principal amount of the debt
securities of that series do not give the trustee a direction inconsistent with the request.
This provision does not, however, affect the right of a holder of a debt security to sue for
enforcement of any overdue payment.
In most cases, holders of a majority in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of a
series (or of all debt securities issued under the applicable indenture that are affected, voting as
one class) may direct the time, method and place of:
•  conducting any proceeding for any remedy available to the trustee; and
•  exercising any trust or power conferred on the trustee relating to or arising as a result of
an event of default.
The indentures of Royal Dutch Shell require Royal Dutch Shell, and the indentures of Shell
Finance require Shell Finance, to file each year with the trustee a written statement as to their
compliance with the covenants contained in the applicable indenture.
Modification and Waiver. Each indenture may be amended or supplemented if the holders of a
majority in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of all series issued under that
indenture that are affected by the amendment or supplement (acting as one class) consent to it.
Without the consent of the holder of each debt security affected, however, no modification may:
•  reduce the amount of debt securities whose holders must consent to an amendment,
supplement or waiver;
•  reduce the rate of or change the time for payment of interest on the debt security;
•  reduce the principal of the debt security or change its stated maturity;
•  reduce any premium payable on the redemption of the debt security or change the time at
which the debt security may or must be redeemed;
•  change any obligation to pay additional amounts on the debt security;
•  make payments on or with respect to the debt security payable in currency other than as
originally stated in the debt security, except as permitted under “Redenomination” below;
•  impair the holder’s right to institute suit for the enforcement of any payment on or with
respect to the debt security;
18
Table of Contents
•  make any change in the percentage of principal amount of debt securities necessary to
waive compliance with certain provisions of the indenture or to make any change in the
provision related to modification;
•  with respect to the subordinated indentures, modify the provisions relating to the
subordination of any subordinated debt security in a manner adverse to the rights of
holder of that security in any material respect; or
•  waive a continuing default or event of default regarding any payment on or with respect to
the debt securities.
Each indenture may be amended or supplemented or any provision of that indenture may be
waived without the consent of any holders of debt securities issued under that indenture in
certain circumstances, including:
•  to cure any ambiguity, omission, defect or inconsistency;
•  to comply with the sections of the indenture governing when Royal Dutch Shell or
Shell Finance may merge (or consummate a similar transaction), transfer their
assets or substitute obligors, including any assumption of the obligations of Shell
Finance under any series of debt securities by Royal Dutch Shell or any other
subsidiary of Royal Dutch Shell or any Voluntary Assumption;
•  to provide for uncertificated debt securities in addition to or in place of certificated
debt securities, provided, however, that the uncertificated debt securities are
issued in a registered form for purposes of Section 163(f) of the Code (as defined in
“Taxation — U.S. Taxation”) or in such a manner that such uncertificated debt
securities are described in Section 163(f)(2)(B) of the Code;
•  to provide any security for, any guarantees of or any additional obligors on any
series of debt securities or, with respect to the senior indenture, the related
guarantees;
•  to comply with any requirement to effect or maintain the qualification of that
indenture under the Trust Indenture Act of 1939;
•  to add covenants that would benefit the holders of any debt securities or to
surrender any rights Royal Dutch Shell or, with respect to the Shell Finance
indentures, Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance has under the indenture;
•  to add events of default with respect to any debt securities;
•  to establish the form or terms of securities of any series as permitted by the
indenture;
•  to supplement any of the provisions of the indenture to such extent as shall be
necessary to permit or facilitate the defeasance and discharge of any series of
securities pursuant to the indenture; provided, however, that any such action shall
not adversely affect the interest of the holders of securities of such series or any
other series of securities in any material respect;
•  to provide for the appointment of a successor trustee with respect of the securities
of one or more series or to provide for the administration of the trusts under the
indenture by more than one trustee; and
•  to make any change that does not adversely affect the rights of holders of any
outstanding debt securities of any series issued under that indenture.
The holders of a majority in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of any series (or,
in some cases, of all debt securities issued under the applicable indenture that are affected,
voting as one class) may waive any existing or past default or event of default with respect to
those debt securities. Those holders may not, however, waive any default or event of default in
any payment on any debt security or compliance with a provision that cannot be amended or
supplemented without the consent of each holder affected.
Defeasance. When we use the term “defeasance”, we mean discharge from some or all of our
obligations under the indentures. If any combination of funds or government securities are
deposited with the trustee under an
Table of Contents
19
indenture sufficient, in the opinion of an independent firm of certified public accountants, to make
payments on the debt securities of a series issued under that indenture on the dates those
payments are due and payable, then, at the option of Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance, as
applicable, either of the following will occur:
•  Royal Dutch Shell and, with respect to the Shell Finance indentures, Royal Dutch Shell
and Shell Finance will be discharged from its or their obligations with respect to the debt
securities of that series and, if applicable, the related guarantees (“legal defeasance”); or
•  Royal Dutch Shell and, with respect to the Shell Finance indentures, Royal Dutch Shell
and Shell Finance will no longer have any obligation to comply with the merger covenant
and other specified covenants under the applicable indenture, and the related events of
default will no longer apply (“covenant defeasance”).
If a series of debt securities is defeased, the holders of the debt securities of the series affected
will not be entitled to the benefits of the applicable indenture, except for obligations to register the
transfer or exchange of debt securities, replace stolen, lost or mutilated debt securities or
maintain paying agencies and hold moneys for payment in trust. In the case of covenant
defeasance, the obligation of Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance to pay principal, premium and
interest on the debt securities and, if applicable, Royal Dutch Shell guarantees of the payments
will also survive.
Unless we inform you otherwise in the prospectus supplement or unless such defeasance occurs
within one year of when the securities would be due and payable or called for redemption, we
will be required to deliver to the trustee an opinion of counsel that the deposit and related
defeasance would not cause the holders of the debt securities to recognize income, gain or loss
for U.S. federal income tax purposes. If we elect legal defeasance, that opinion of counsel must
be based upon a ruling from the U.S. Internal Revenue Service or a change in law to that effect.
Substitution of Shell Finance as Issuer. We may at our option at any time, without the consent
of any holders of debt securities, cause Royal Dutch Shell or any other subsidiary of Royal Dutch
Shell to assume the obligations of Shell Finance under any series of debt securities, provided
that the new obligor executes a supplemental indenture in which it agrees to be bound by the
terms of those debt securities and the relevant indenture. To the extent that Royal Dutch Shell is
not itself the new obligor, its guarantee shall remain in place after the substitution unless another
entity assumes the role of a guarantor in respect of the debt securities of Shell Finance following
a Voluntary Assumption. If the new obligor is not a U.S. or U.K. company, the country in which it
is incorporated must be a member of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (or any successor) and the new obligor must also agree in the supplemental
indenture to be bound by a covenant comparable to that described under “— Payment of
Additional Amounts” below with respect to taxes imposed in its jurisdiction of residence. In such
cases, the new obligor will benefit from any optional redemption provision for tax reasons as
described below under “— Optional Tax Redemption” or provided for in the prospectus
supplement. In the case of such a substitution, the relevant finance subsidiary will be relieved of
any further obligations under the assumed series of debt securities. See “Taxation — U.S.
Taxation of Debt Securities — Merger and Consolidation/Substitution of Issuer” for discussion of
possible tax consequences.
Governing Law. New York law will govern the indentures and the debt securities.
Trustee. Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas, or another trustee we identify in the
prospectus supplement, will be the trustee under the indentures. The address of Deutsche Bank
Trust Company Americas is 60 Wall Street, 16th Floor, New York, New York 10005, Attention:
Global Transaction Banking, Trust and Securities Services. Royal Dutch Shell and Shell
Finance, as applicable, may appoint another trustee or a substitute trustee under the indentures
or appoint an entity qualified under the Trust Indenture Act of 1939 to serve as trustee under the
indentures. Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas has served as trustee, paying agent,
auction agent, exchange agent and in similar capacities in transactions involving entities in the
Shell Group or relating to the debt or long term payment obligations of members of the Shell
Group. Additionally, Deutsche Bank Trust
20
Table of Contents
Company Americas and its affiliates perform certain commercial banking services for us for
which they receive customary fees and are lenders under various outstanding credit facilities of
subsidiaries of Royal Dutch Shell.
If an event of default occurs under an indenture and is continuing, the trustee under that indenture
will be required to use the degree of care and skill of a prudent person in the conduct of that
person’s own affairs. The trustee will become obligated to exercise any of its powers under that
indenture at the request of any of the holders of any debt securities issued under that indenture
only after those holders have offered the trustee indemnity satisfactory to it.
Each indenture contains limitations on the right of the trustee, if it becomes a creditor of Royal
Dutch Shell or, if applicable, Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance, to obtain payment of claims or
to realize on certain property received for any such claim, as security or otherwise. The trustee is
permitted to engage in other transactions with Royal Dutch Shell and, if applicable, Royal Dutch
Shell and Shell Finance. If, however, it acquires any conflicting interest, it must eliminate that
conflict or resign within 90 days after ascertaining that it has a conflicting interest and after the
occurrence of a default under the applicable indenture, unless the default has been cured,
waived or otherwise eliminated within the 90-day period.
Form, Exchange, Registration and Transfer. The debt securities will be issued in registered
form, without interest coupons. There will be no service charge for any registration of transfer or
exchange of the debt securities. However, payment of any transfer tax or similar governmental
charge payable for that registration may be required.
Debt securities of any series will be exchangeable for other debt securities of the same series,
the same total principal amount and the same terms but in different authorized denominations in
accordance with the applicable indenture. Holders may present debt securities for registration of
transfer at the office of the security registrar or any transfer agent Royal Dutch Shell or Shell
Finance, as applicable, designates. The security registrar or transfer agent will effect the transfer
or exchange if its requirements and the requirements of the applicable indenture are met.
The trustee will be appointed as security registrar for the debt securities. If a prospectus
supplement refers to any transfer agents Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance, as applicable,
initially designates, Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance, as applicable, may at any time rescind
that designation or approve a change in the location through which any transfer agent acts. Royal
Dutch Shell or Shell Finance, as applicable, is required to maintain an office or agency for
transfers and exchanges in each place of payment. Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance, as
applicable, may at any time designate additional transfer agents for any series of debt securities.
In the case of any redemption, Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance, as applicable, will not be
required to register the transfer or exchange of:
•  any debt security during a period beginning 15 business days prior to the mailing of the
relevant notice of redemption or repurchase and ending on the close of business on the
day of mailing of such notice; or
•  any debt security that has been called for redemption in whole or in part, except the
unredeemed portion of any debt security being redeemed in part.
For purposes of the indentures, unless we inform you otherwise in a prospectus supplement, a
“business day” is any day that is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a day on which banking institutions
in any of New York, New York; London, England; or a place of payment on the debt securities of
that series is authorized or obligated by law, regulation or executive order to remain closed.
Payment and Paying Agents. Unless we inform you otherwise in a prospectus supplement,
payments on the debt securities will be made in U.S. dollars at the office of the trustee and any
paying agent. At the option of Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance, as applicable, however,
payments may be made by wire transfer for global debt
Table of Contents
21
securities or by check mailed to the address of the person entitled to the payment as it appears in
the security register. Unless we inform you otherwise in a prospectus supplement, interest
payments may be made to the person in whose name the debt security is registered at the close
of business on the record date for the interest payment.
Unless we inform you otherwise in a prospectus supplement, the trustee will be designated as
the paying agent. Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance, as applicable, may at any time designate
additional paying agents or rescind the designation of any paying agent or approve a change in
the office through which any paying agent acts.
If the principal of or any premium or interest on or additional amounts with respect to debt
securities of a series is payable on a day that is not a business day, the payment will be made on
the following business day.
Subject to the requirements of any applicable abandoned property laws, the trustee and paying
agent will pay to us upon written request any money held by them for payments on the debt
securities that remains unclaimed for two years after the date upon which that payment has
become due. After payment to us, holders entitled to the money must look to us for payment. In
that case, all liability of the trustee or paying agent with respect to that money will cease.
Book-Entry Debt Securities. The debt securities of a series may be issued in the form of one or
more global debt securities that would be deposited with a depositary or its nominee identified in
the prospectus supplement. Global debt securities may be issued in either temporary or
permanent form. We will describe in the prospectus supplement the terms of any depositary
arrangement and the rights and limitations of owners of beneficial interests in any global debt
security.
Optional Tax Redemption. We may have the option to redeem the debt securities in the two
situations described below. The redemption price for the debt securities, other than original issue
discount debt securities, will be equal to the principal amount of the debt securities being
redeemed plus accrued (but unpaid) interest and any additional amounts due on the date fixed
for redemption. The redemption price for original issue discount debt securities will be specified
in the prospectus supplement for such securities. Furthermore, we must give you between 15 and
60 days’ notice before redeeming the debt securities.
The first situation is where, as a result of a change in, execution of or amendment to any laws or
treaties or the official application or interpretation of any laws or treaties, either:
•  Royal Dutch Shell, or in the case of debt securities issued by Shell Finance, Royal Dutch
Shell or Shell Finance, would be required to pay additional amounts as described later
under “Payment of Additional Amounts”; or
•  Royal Dutch Shell or any of its subsidiaries would have to deduct or withhold tax on any
payment to any of the issuers to enable them to make a payment of principal or interest on
a debt security.
This applies only in the case of changes, executions or amendments that occur on or after the
date specified in the prospectus supplement for the applicable series of debt securities.
We would not have the option to redeem in this case if we could have avoided the payment of
additional amounts or the deduction or withholding by using reasonable measures available to
us.
The second situation is where a person assumes the obligations of Royal Dutch Shell or, in the
case of debt securities issued by Shell Finance, Shell Finance, as described above under “—
Consolidation, Merger and Sale of Assets” and “— Substitution of Shell Finance as Issuer” and is
required to pay additional amounts. We would have the option to redeem the debt securities even
if we are required to pay additional amounts immediately after such assumption (except in the
case of a Voluntary Assumption). Additionally, we would not be required to use reasonable
measures to avoid the obligation to pay additional amounts in this situation. However, we would
have
Table of Contents
22
the option to redeem the securities in the circumstances described above only if a change in,
execution of or amendment to any laws or treaties or official application of any law or treaty
occurs after such assumption.
Payment of Additional Amounts. The government of any jurisdiction where Royal Dutch Shell
or, in the case of debt securities issued by Shell Finance, Shell Finance, is resident may require
Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance to withhold or deduct amounts from payments on the
principal or interest on a debt security or any amounts to be paid under the guarantees, as the
case may be, for taxes or any other governmental charges. If the jurisdiction requires a
withholding or deduction of this type, Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance, as the case may be,
may be required to pay you an additional amount so that the net amount you receive will be the
amount specified in the debt security to which you are entitled. However, in order for you to be
entitled to receive the additional amount, you must not be resident in the jurisdiction that requires
the withholding or deduction. Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance, as the case may be, will not
have to pay additional amounts under any of the following circumstances (including any
combination of the following):
(i) The U.S. government or any political subdivision of the U.S. government is the entity that
is imposing the tax or governmental charge.
(ii) The tax or governmental charge is imposed only because the holder, or a fiduciary,
settlor, beneficiary or member or shareholder of, or possessor of a power over, the holder,
if the holder is an estate, trust, partnership or corporation, was or is connected to the
taxing jurisdiction, other than by merely holding the debt security or guarantee or
receiving principal or interest in respect thereof. These connections include where the
holder or related party:
(a)
is or has been a citizen or resident of the jurisdiction;
(b)
is or has been engaged in trade or business in the jurisdiction; or
(c) has or had a permanent establishment in the jurisdiction.
(iii) The holder is a fiduciary, partnership or other entity that is not the sole beneficial owner of
the payment of the principal of, or any interest on, any debt security, and the laws of the
jurisdiction (or any political subdivision or taxing authority thereof or therein) require the
payment to be included in the income of a beneficiary or settlor for tax purposes with
respect to such fiduciary, a member of such partnership or other entity, or a beneficial
owner who would not have been entitled to such additional amounts had such
beneficiary, settlor, member or beneficial owner been the holder of such security. The
amount of the additional payments otherwise payable to such fiduciary, partnership or
other entity will be reduced in proportion to the interest that the ultimate beneficial owners
described in the previous sentence own in such holder.
(iv) The tax or governmental charge is imposed due to the presentation of a debt security, if
presentation is required, for payment on a date more than 30 days after the security
became due or after the payment was provided for.
(v) The tax or governmental charge is on account of an estate, inheritance, gift, sale, transfer,
personal property or similar tax or other governmental charge.
(vi) The tax or governmental charge is for a tax or governmental charge that is payable in a
manner that does not involve withholdings.
(vii) The tax or governmental charge is imposed or withheld because the holder or beneficial
owner failed to make a declaration (of non-residence or other similar claim for exemption)
or satisfy any information requirements that the statutes, treaties, regulations or
administrative practices of the taxing jurisdiction require as a precondition to exemption
from all or part of such tax or governmental charge.
(viii) The tax or governmental charge is imposed or withheld because the holder or beneficial
owner failed to comply with any request by Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance to provide
information about the nationality, residence or identity of the holder or beneficial owner.
23
Table of Contents
(ix) The withholding or deduction is required to be made pursuant to any law implementing or
complying with, or introduced in order to conform to European Council Directive
2003/48/EC or any other Directive implementing the conclusions of the Economic and
Financial Affairs Council (“ECOFIN”) meeting of November 26 and 27, 2000 on the
taxation of savings income.
(x) The withholding or deduction is imposed on a payment to a holder or beneficial owner
who could have avoided such withholding or deduction by presenting its debt securities
to another paying agent.
These provisions will also apply to any taxes or governmental charges imposed by any
jurisdiction in which a successor to Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance is resident. The
prospectus supplement relating to the debt securities may describe additional circumstances in
which Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance would not be required to pay additional amounts.
Redenomination. Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance, as applicable, may without your consent
elect that, on the “Redenomination Date” specified in a notice to the trustee, a series of debt
securities may be redenominated in euro.
The election will have effect as follows:
(i) each series of debt securities denominated in the specified currency will be deemed to be
denominated in such amount of euro as is equivalent to its denomination in the specified
currency at the “Established Rate”, subject to such provisions (if any) as to rounding (and
payments in respect of fractions consequent on rounding) as Royal Dutch Shell or Shell
Finance, as applicable, may decide with the approval of the trustee, and as shall be
specified in the notice;
(ii) after the Redenomination Date, all payments in respect of such series of debt securities
will be made solely in euro, including payments of interest before the Redenomination
Date, as though reference in the series of debt securities to the specified currency were to
euro; and
(iii) such changes may be made to the relevant indenture as Royal Dutch Shell or Shell
Finance may decide, with the approval of the trustee, as may be specified in the notice, to
conform it to conventions then applicable to instruments denominated in euro or to enable
the notes to be consolidated within one or more series of other notes, whether or not
originally denominated in the specified currency or euro.
“Established Rate” means the rate for the conversion of the specified currency into euro
established by the Council of the European Union pursuant to Article 1091(4) of the Treaty
establishing the European Community, as amended (the “Treaty”).
“Redenomination Date” means any date specified by Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance for
payment of interest on the debt securities if the country of the specified currency is one of the
countries then participating in the third stage of European economic and monetary union
pursuant to the Treaty. If the country of the specified currency is not so participating, then the
Redenomination Date means, with respect to such debt securities, any date for payment of
interest so specified that falls on or after the date that such country does so participate.
Provisions Applicable Solely to Senior Debt Securities
Ranking. The Senior Debt securities will constitute Senior Debt of Royal Dutch Shell or Shell
Finance, as applicable, and will rank equally with all of their unsecured and unsubordinated debt
from time to time outstanding.
Guarantee of Shell Finance Senior Debt Securities. Royal Dutch Shell will fully and
unconditionally guarantee on a senior unsecured basis the full and prompt payment of the
principal of, any premium and interest on, and any additional amounts which may be payable by
Shell Finance in respect of the Senior Debt securities issued by Shell Finance when and as the
payment becomes due and payable, whether at maturity or otherwise. The
Table of Contents
24
guarantees provide that in the event of a default in the payment of principal of, any premium and
interest on, and any additional amounts which may be payable by Shell Finance in respect of a
Senior Debt security, the holder of that debt security may institute legal proceedings directly
against Royal Dutch Shell to enforce the guarantees without first proceeding against Shell
Finance. The guarantees will rank equally with all of Royal Dutch Shell’s other unsecured and
unsubordinated debt from time to time outstanding.
Provisions Applicable Solely to Subordinated Debt Securities
Ranking. The subordinated debt securities will rank junior to all Senior Debt of Royal Dutch
Shell or Shell Finance, as applicable, and may rank equally with or senior to other subordinated
debt of Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance, as applicable, that may be outstanding from time to
time.
Guarantee of Shell Finance Subordinated Debt Securities. Royal Dutch Shell will fully and
unconditionally guarantee on a subordinated unsecured basis the full and prompt payment of the
principal of, any premium and interest on, and any additional amounts which may be payable by
Shell Finance in respect of the subordinated debt securities issued by Shell Finance when and
as the payment becomes due and payable, whether at maturity or otherwise. The guarantee will
provide that in the event of a default in the payment of principal of, any premium and interest on,
and any additional amounts which may be payable by Shell Finance in respect of a subordinated
debt security, the holder of that debt security may institute legal proceedings directly against
Royal Dutch Shell to enforce the guarantees without first proceeding against Shell Finance. The
guarantee will rank junior to all Senior Debt of Royal Dutch Shell and may rank equally with or
senior to other subordinated debt of Royal Dutch Shell that may be outstanding from time to time.
Subordination. Under the subordinated indenture, payment of the principal of and any premium
and interest on and any additional amounts with respect to the subordinated debt securities will
generally be subordinated and junior in right of payment to the prior payment in full of all Senior
Debt. Unless we inform you otherwise in the prospectus supplement, Royal Dutch Shell or Shell
Finance, as applicable, may not make any payment of principal of or any premium or interest on
the subordinated debt securities if it fails to pay the principal, interest, premium or any other
amounts on any Senior Debt when due.
The subordination does not affect the obligation of Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance, as
applicable, which is absolute and unconditional, to pay, when due, the principal of and any
premium and interest on or additional amounts respect to the subordinated debt securities. In
addition, the subordination does not prevent the occurrence of any default under the
subordinated indenture.
The subordinated indenture does not limit the amount of Senior Debt that Royal Dutch Shell or
Shell Finance, as applicable, may incur. As a result of the subordination of the subordinated debt
securities, if Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance, as applicable, becomes insolvent, holders of
subordinated debt securities may receive less on a proportionate basis than other creditors, or
may receive nothing.
Unless we inform you otherwise in the prospectus supplement, “Senior Debt” will mean all debt,
including guarantees, of Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance, as applicable, unless the debt
states that it is not senior to the subordinated debt securities or other junior debt of Royal Dutch
Shell or Shell Finance, as applicable. Senior Debt with respect to a series of subordinated debt
securities could include other series of debt securities issued under the subordinated indenture.
Table of Contents
25
DESCRIPTION OF ROYAL DUTCH SHELL WARRANTS
Royal Dutch Shell may issue warrants to purchase debt securities of Royal Dutch Shell or Shell
Finance or equity securities of Royal Dutch Shell. Warrants may be issued independently or
together with any securities and may be attached to or separate from those securities. Each
series of warrants will be issued under a separate warrant agreement to be entered into by Royal
Dutch Shell and a bank or trust company, as warrant agent, all as will be set forth in the
applicable prospectus supplement. It is expected that at the time of any warrant offering, the
offering would be structured so as to comply with the requirements of the U.K. Financial Conduct
Authority and any other pertinent regulations, including being made by an appropriately
authorized person, as necessary.
Subject to applicable law and the Articles, any warrants in respect of ordinary shares (or
preference shares where the preference shares have the right to participate beyond a specified
amount in a dividend or capital distribution) which are issued by us for cash must first be offered
to existing shareholders in proportion to their existing holdings. See “Description of Royal Dutch
Shell Ordinary Shares” for further information on shareholders’ pre-emption rights.
Debt Warrants
Royal Dutch Shell may issue warrants for the purchase of debt securities issued by Royal Dutch
Shell or Shell Finance. Each debt warrant will entitle its holder to purchase debt securities at an
exercise price set forth in, or to be determined as set forth in, the applicable prospectus
supplement. Debt warrants may be issued separately or together with any other securities.
The debt warrants are to be issued under debt warrant agreements to be entered into by Royal
Dutch Shell and one or more banks or trust companies, as debt warrant agent, all as will be set
forth in the applicable prospectus supplement. At or around the time of an offering of debt
warrants, a form of debt warrant agreement, including a form of debt warrant certificate
representing the debt warrants, reflecting the alternative provisions that may be included in the
debt warrant agreements to be entered into with respect to particular offerings of debt warrants,
will be added as an exhibit to the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part by
an amendment or incorporation by reference to a subsequent filing.
The particular terms of each issue of debt warrants, the debt warrant agreement relating to such
debt warrants and such debt warrant certificates representing debt warrants will be described in
the applicable prospectus supplement. This description will include:
•  the initial offering price;
•  the currency, currency unit or composite currency in which the exercise price for the debt
warrants is payable;
•  the title, aggregate principal amount, issuer and terms of the debt securities that can be
purchased upon exercise of the debt warrants;
•  the title, aggregate principal amount, issuer and terms of any related debt securities with
which the debt warrants are issued and the number of the debt warrants issued with each
debt security;
•  if applicable, whether and when the debt warrants and the related debt securities will be
separately transferable;
•  the principal amount of debt securities that can be purchased upon exercise of each debt
warrant and the exercise price;
•  any provisions for changes or adjustments in the exercise price;
•  if applicable, the number of such debt warrants already outstanding;
•  the date on or after which the debt warrants may be exercised and any date or dates on
which this right will expire in whole or in part;
26
Table of Contents
•  if applicable, a discussion of material Dutch, U.K. and U.S. federal income tax,
accounting or other considerations applicable to the debt warrants;
•  whether the debt warrants will be issued in registered or bearer form, and, if registered,
where they may be transferred and registered; and
•  any other terms of the debt warrants.
Equity Warrants
Royal Dutch Shell may issue warrants for the purchase of equity securities of Royal Dutch Shell
(including its ordinary shares). As explained below, each equity warrant will entitle its holder to
purchase equity securities at an exercise price set forth in, or to be determined as set forth in, the
applicable prospectus supplement. Equity warrants may be issued separately or together with
any other securities.
The equity warrants are to be issued under equity warrant agreements to be entered into by
Royal Dutch Shell and one or more banks or trust companies, as equity warrant agent, all as will
be set forth in the applicable prospectus supplement. At or around the time of an offering of equity
warrants, a form of equity warrant agreement, including a form of equity warrant certificate
representing the equity warrants, reflecting the alternative provisions that may be included in the
equity warrant agreements to be entered into with respect to particular offerings of equity
warrants, will be added as an exhibit to the registration statement of which this prospectus forms
a part by an amendment or incorporation by reference to a subsequent filing.
The particular terms of each issue of equity warrants, the equity warrant agreement relating to
such equity warrants and the equity warrant certificates representing such equity warrants will be
described in the applicable prospectus supplement. This description will include:
•  the title and aggregate number of such equity warrants;
•  if applicable, the number of such equity warrants already outstanding;
•  the initial offering price;
•  the currency, currency unit or composite currency in which the initial price for the equity
warrants is payable;
•  the currency, currency unit or composite currency in which the exercise price for the
equity warrants is payable;
•  the designation and terms of the equity securities (for example, ordinary shares or
preference shares) that can be purchased upon exercise of such equity warrants;
•  the total number of equity securities that can be purchased upon exercise of each such
equity warrant and the exercise price;
•  any provisions for changes or adjustments in the exercise price;
•  the date or dates on or after which the equity warrants may be exercised and any date or
dates on which this right will expire in whole or in part;
•  the designation and terms of any related equity securities with which such equity warrants
are issued and the number of such equity warrants issued with each equity share;
•  if applicable, whether and when the equity warrants and the related equity securities will
be separately transferable;
•  if applicable, a discussion of material Dutch, U.K. and U.S. federal income tax,
accounting or other considerations applicable to such equity warrants; and
•  any other terms of the equity warrants, including terms, procedures and limitations
relating to the exchange and exercise of such equity warrants.
27
Table of Contents
DESCRIPTION OF ROYAL DUTCH SHELL ORDINARY SHARES
The following is a summary of the material terms of Royal Dutch Shell’s ordinary shares,
including brief descriptions of the provisions contained in the Articles and applicable laws of
England and Wales in effect on the date of this document. This summary does not purport to
include complete statements of these provisions. References to the provisions of the Articles are
qualified in their entirety by reference to our full Articles which are exhibits to the registration
statement on Form F-3 of which this prospectus is a part. See the “Description of Royal Dutch
Shell American Depositary Shares” section below for more information about the rights of holders
of our ADSs. For the purposes of the discussion below, references to “we”, “us” and “our” refer to
Royal Dutch Shell.
Share Capital
For information about our share capital as of September 30, 2014, see “Capitalization and
Indebtedness” in the Appendix to Exhibit 99.2 of the Q3 Form 6-K, which is incorporated by
reference in this prospectus, and any future descriptions of our share capital filed in our reports
under the Exchange Act. For information about our share capital history for the last three fiscal
years, see the consolidated statement of changes in equity included in the Consolidated
Financial Statements on page 103 in the 2013 20-F, which is incorporated by reference in this
prospectus.
Shareholders Meetings
Under the applicable laws of England and Wales, Royal Dutch Shell is required to hold a
general meeting of shareholders as its annual general meeting (“AGM”) in the period of six
months beginning with the day following its accounting reference date (in addition to any other
general meetings held during that period). Shareholders may submit resolutions in accordance
with section 338 of the Companies Act 2006, and may request that matters be included in the
business of the AGM in accordance with section 338A of the Companies Act 2006.
Our board of directors has the power to convene a general meeting of shareholders at any time.
In addition, our board of directors must convene a meeting upon the request of shareholders
holding not less than 5% of Royal Dutch Shell’s paid-up capital carrying voting rights at general
meetings of shareholders pursuant to section 303 of the Companies Act 2006. A request for a
general meeting of shareholders must state the general nature of the business to be dealt with at
the meeting, and must be authenticated by the requesting shareholders. If our board of directors
fails to call such a meeting within 21 days from receipt of the relevant notice, the shareholders
that requested the general meeting, or any of them representing more than one-half of the total
voting rights of all shareholders that requested the meeting, may themselves convene a meeting
which must be called within three months after the date on which our board of directors became
subject to the requirement to call the meeting. Any such meeting must be convened in the same
manner, as nearly as possible, as that in which meetings are required to be convened by our
board of directors.
We are required pursuant to the Companies Act 2006 to give at least 21 clear days’ notice of any
AGM or any other general meeting of Royal Dutch Shell. However, under the U.K. Corporate
Governance Code, we should give at least 20 working-days notice for the AGM.
The Articles require that in addition to any requirements under the legislation, the notice for any
general meeting must state where the meeting is to be held (the principal meeting place) and the
location of any satellite meeting place, which shall be identified as such in the notice. At the
same time that notice is given for any general meeting, an announcement of the date, time and
place of that meeting will, if practicable, be published in a national newspaper in the
Netherlands. The listing rules of the U.K. Listing Authority (the “Listing Rules”), the Euronext
Amsterdam rules and the rules of the New York Stock Exchange require us to inform holders of
our securities of the holding of meetings which they are entitled to attend.
Table of Contents
28
A shareholder is entitled to appoint a proxy (who is not required to be another shareholder) to
represent and vote on behalf of the shareholder at any general meeting of shareholders,
including the AGM.
Business may not be transacted at any general meeting, including the AGM, unless a quorum is
present. A quorum is two people who are entitled to vote at that general meeting. They can be
shareholders who are personally present or proxies for shareholders entitled to vote at that
general meeting or a combination of both.
If a quorum is not present within five minutes of the time fixed for a general meeting to start or
within any longer period not exceeding one hour which the chairman of the meeting can decide,
then: (i) if the meeting was called by shareholders, it will be canceled; and (ii) any other meeting
will be adjourned to a day (being not less than 10 days later, excluding the day on which it is
adjourned and the day for which it is reconvened), time and place decided upon by the chairman
of the meeting. One shareholder present in person or by proxy and entitled to vote will constitute
a quorum at any adjourned general meeting.
Record dates
Entitlement to attend and vote at the AGM is determined by reference to our Register of Members.
In order to attend and vote at the AGM, a member must be entered on the Register of Members or
the register of the Royal Dutch Shell Corporate Nominee no later than the record date. The
record date will not be more than 48 hours before the meeting, not taking account of any part of a
day that is not a working day.
Voting rights
The Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares have identical voting rights and vote
together as a single class on all matters including the election of directors unless a matter affects
the rights of one class as a separate class. If a resolution affects the rights attached to either class
of shares as a separate class, it must be approved either in writing by shareholders holding at
least three-quarters of the issued shares of that class by amount, excluding any shares of that
class held as treasury shares, or by special resolution passed at a separate meeting of the
registered holders of the relevant class of shares.
It is the intention that all voting at general meetings will take place on a poll. A poll is voting by
means of a ballot where the number of shares held by each voting shareholder is counted, as
opposed to voting by way of a show of hands where the actual number of shares held by voting
shareholders is not taken into account. Under the Companies Act 2006, if a poll is demanded, the
resolution conducted on a poll must be approved by holders of at least a majority of the votes
cast at the meeting. Special resolutions require the affirmative vote of at least 75% of the votes
cast at the meeting to be approved.
On a poll, every holder of Class A ordinary shares or Class B ordinary shares present in person
or by proxy has one vote for every share he or she holds. This is subject to any rights or
restrictions which are given to any class of shares in accordance with the Articles. No
shareholder is entitled to vote if he or she has been served with a restriction order after failure to
provide us with information concerning interests in his or her shares required to be provided
under section 793 of the Companies Act 2006.
Major shareholders have no differing voting rights.
Dividend rights and rights to share in our profit
Under the applicable laws of England and Wales, dividends are payable on Class A ordinary
shares and Class B ordinary shares only out of profits available for distribution, as determined in
accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and under International Financial Reporting
Standards.
Table of Contents
29
Subject to the Companies Act 2006, if our board of directors considers that our financial position
justifies the declaration of a dividend, we can pay an interim dividend. Our shareholders can
declare dividends by passing an ordinary resolution. Dividends cannot exceed the amount
recommended by our board of directors.
It is the intention that dividends will be declared and paid quarterly. Dividends are payable to
persons registered as shareholders on the record date relating to the relevant dividend. All
dividends will be divided and paid in proportions based on the amounts paid up on our shares
during any period for which that dividend is paid.
Dividends are declared in U.S. dollars and we announce the euro and sterling equivalent
amounts at a later date using a market exchange rate. Dividends declared on Class A ordinary
shares are paid by default in euros, although holders of Class A ordinary shares are able to elect
to receive dividends in sterling. Dividends declared on Class B ordinary shares are paid by
default in sterling, although holders of Class B ordinary shares are able to elect to receive
dividends in euros. Dividends declared on ADSs are paid in U.S. dollars.
Any dividend or other money payable in cash relating to a share can be paid by sending a check,
warrant or similar financial instrument payable to the shareholder entitled to the dividend by post
addressed to the shareholder’s registered address. Alternatively, it can be made payable to
someone else named in a written instruction from the shareholder (or all joint shareholders) and
sent by post to the address specified in that instruction.
A dividend can also be paid by inter-bank transfer or by other electronic means (including
payment through CREST) directly to an account with a bank or other financial institution (or
another organization operating deposit accounts if allowed by us) named in a written instruction
from the person entitled to receive the payment under article 121 of the Articles. Such an account
is to be an account in the U.K. unless the share on which the payment is to be made is held by
Euroclear Nederland and is subject to the Dutch Securities Giro Act. Alternatively, a dividend can
be paid in some other way requested in writing by a shareholder (or all joint shareholders) and
agreed to by us. We will not be responsible for a payment which is lost or delayed.
Where any dividends or other amounts payable on a share have not been claimed, our board of
directors can invest them or use them in any other way for our benefit until they are claimed. We
will not be a trustee of the money and will not be liable to pay interest on it. If a dividend or other
money has not been claimed for 12 years after being declared or becoming due for payment, it
will be forfeited and returned to us, unless the board of directors decides otherwise.
We expect that dividends on outstanding Class B ordinary shares will be paid under the dividend
access mechanism described below. The Articles provide that if any amount is paid by the issuer
of the dividend access share by way of dividend on the dividend access share and paid by the
Dividend Access Trustee to any holder of Class B ordinary shares, the dividend that we would
otherwise pay to such holder of Class B ordinary shares will be reduced by an amount equal to
the amount paid to such holder of Class B ordinary shares by the Dividend Access Trustee.
Issuance of additional shares; other changes in share capital
Subject to applicable law and the Articles, we can issue shares with any rights or restrictions
attached to them as long as this is not restricted by any rights attached to existing shares. These
rights or restrictions can be decided either by an ordinary resolution passed by our shareholders,
or by the board of directors as long as there is no conflict with any resolution passed by our
shareholders. Accordingly, without further shareholder approval but subject to the limitations
described above, including pre-emption rights, the board of directors could issue one or more
series of preferred shares and establish the rights, preferences, redemption terms and other
provisions of those shares.
Table of Contents
30
Subject to applicable law and the provisions of the Articles, shareholders can pass an ordinary
resolution to do any of the following:
(i) consolidate and divide, all or any of our share capital into shares of a larger nominal
amount than the existing shares; and
(ii) sub-divide some or all of our shares into shares of a smaller nominal amount than the
existing shares.
The resolution can provide that holders of the divided shares will have different rights and
restrictions if those rights or restrictions are of a kind which Royal Dutch Shell can apply to new
shares.
Subject to applicable law and the provisions of the Articles, shareholders can pass a special
resolution to reduce our share capital, any capital redemption reserve, any share premium
account or any other undistributable reserve in any way.
We may, subject to applicable law and existing shareholder rights, and to any requirements
imposed by any relevant listing authority in respect of securities admitted to listing, purchase our
own shares including redeemable shares.
The board of directors can decide the terms and conditions on which any shares in Royal Dutch
Shell are issued. The board of directors is free to decide with whom it deals, when it deals with
the shares and the terms on which it deals with the shares. However, it must take account of the
provisions of applicable legislation relating to authority, pre-emption rights and other matters, the
provisions of the Articles, any resolution passed by the shareholders and any rights attached to
existing shares.
Under the Companies Act 2006, our board of directors may not allot shares in Royal Dutch Shell
or grant rights to subscribe for or to convert any securities into shares in Royal Dutch Shell
unless they are authorised to do so by the Articles or by a shareholder resolution. Any such
authorisation must state the maximum amount of shares that may be allotted under it and must
specify the date on which it will expire (not to exceed five years from the date on which the
authorisation is given). At our 2014 AGM, shareholders passed a resolution authorizing the board
of directors to allot ordinary shares or grant rights to subscribe for or convert any securities into
ordinary shares, up to an aggregate nominal amount of €147 million. This authority was passed
in compliance with institutional investor guidelines, and will apply until the earlier of the end of
our AGM in 2015 or the close of business on August 20, 2015 (unless previously renewed,
revoked, or varied by Royal Dutch Shell in a general meeting).
Rights in a winding up
If Royal Dutch Shell is wound up (whether voluntarily or compulsorily) the liquidator can
distribute to shareholders any assets remaining after the liquidator’s fees and expenses have
been paid and all sums due to prior ranking creditors (as defined under the laws of England and
Wales) have been paid.
Under the Articles, the holders of the sterling deferred shares would be entitled (such entitlement
ranking in priority to the rights of holders of ordinary shares) to receive an amount equal to the
aggregate of the capital paid up or credited as paid up on each sterling deferred share but would
not otherwise be entitled to participate further in the profits or assets of Royal Dutch Shell. Any
assets remaining after the entitlements of the holders of sterling deferred shares are satisfied
would be distributed to the holders of Class A and Class B ordinary shares pro rata according to
their shareholdings.
Redemption provisions
Ordinary shares are not subject to any redemption provisions.
31
Table of Contents
Sinking fund provisions
Ordinary shares are not subject to any sinking fund provision under the Articles or as a matter of
the laws of England and Wales.
Liability to further calls
No holder of our ordinary shares will be required to make additional contributions of capital in
respect of our ordinary shares in the future.
Discriminating provisions
There are no provisions in the Articles discriminating against a shareholder because of his/her
ownership of a particular number of shares.
Variation of Rights
The Companies Act 2006 provides that the Articles can be amended by a special resolution of
our shareholders.
The Articles provide that, if permitted by legislation, the rights attached to any class of shares can
be changed if this is approved either in writing by shareholders holding at least three-quarters of
the issued shares of that class by amount (excluding any shares of that class held as treasury
shares) or by a special resolution passed at a separate meeting of the holders of the relevant
class of shares. At each such separate meeting, all of the provisions of the Articles relating to
proceedings at a general meeting apply, except that: (i) a quorum will be present if at least one
shareholder who is entitled to vote is present in person or by proxy who owns at least one-third in
amount of the issued shares of the relevant class (excluding any shares of that class held as
treasury shares); (ii) any shareholder who is present in person or by proxy and entitled to vote
can demand a poll; and (iii) at an adjourned meeting, one person entitled to vote and who holds
shares of the class, or his or her proxy, will be a quorum. These provisions are not more
restrictive than required by the laws of England and Wales.
Limitations on rights to own shares
There are no limitations imposed by the applicable laws of England and Wales or the Articles on
the rights to own shares, including the right of non-residents or foreign persons to hold or vote our
shares, other than limitations that would generally apply to all of our shareholders.
Transfer of shares
Unless the Articles provide otherwise, a shareholder may transfer some or all of his/her shares in
certificated form to another person. A transfer of certificated shares must be either in the usual
standard form or in any other form approved by the board of directors. The share transfer form for
certificated shares must be signed or made effective in some other way by or on behalf of the
person making the transfer.
In the case of a transfer of a certificated share, where the share is not fully paid, the share transfer
form must also be signed or made effective in some other way by or on behalf of the person to
whom the share is being transferred.
Unless the Articles provide otherwise, a shareholder may transfer some or all of his/her shares in
uncertificated form through CREST (the computerized settlement system to facilitate the transfer
of title to shares in uncertificated form operated by Euroclear U.K. & Ireland Limited). Provisions
of the Articles do not apply to any uncertificated shares to the extent that those provisions are
inconsistent with the holding of shares in uncertificated form or with the transfer of shares through
CREST.
Table of Contents
32
The person making a transfer will continue to be treated as a shareholder until the name of the
person to whom the share is being transferred is put on the register for that share.
Our board of directors may, without giving any reasons, refuse to register the transfer of any
shares which are not fully paid. Our board of directors may also refuse to register the transfer of
any shares in the following circumstances:
Certificated shares
(i) A share transfer form cannot be used to transfer more than one class of shares. Each
class needs a separate form;
(ii) Transfers may not be in favor of more than four joint holders; and
(iii) The share transfer form must be properly stamped or certified or otherwise shown to our
board of directors to be exempt from stamp duty and must be accompanied by the
relevant share certificate and such other evidence of the right to transfer as our board of
directors may reasonably require.
Uncertificated shares
(i) Registration of a transfer of uncertificated shares can be refused in the circumstances set
out in the Uncertificated Securities Regulations 2001 (SI 2001 No. 3755), as amended
from time to time; and
(ii) Transfers may not be in favor of more than four joint holders.
Title to certificated shares will be evidenced by entry in the register of our members and title to
uncertificated shares will be evidenced by entry in the operator register maintained by Euroclear
U.K. & Ireland (which forms part of the register of our members).
Our board of directors may refuse to register a transfer of any certificated shares by a person with
a 0.25% or greater holding of the existing capital (calculated excluding any shares held as
treasury shares) if such a person has received a restriction notice (as defined in the Articles) after
failure to provide us with information concerning interests in these shares required to be provided
under the legislation unless our board of directors is satisfied that they have been sold outright to
an independent third party. Under section 771 of the Companies Act 2006, when a transfer of
shares has been lodged with Royal Dutch Shell, Royal Dutch Shell must either: (i) register the
transfer; or (ii) give the transferee notice of refusal to register, together with its reasons for such
refusal, in each case as soon as practicable, and in any event within two months after the date on
which the transfer was lodged with it.
Dividend Access Mechanism for Class B ordinary shares
General
Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares are identical, except for the dividend
access mechanism, which will only apply to the Class B ordinary shares.
Dividends paid on Class A ordinary shares have a Dutch source for tax purposes and are subject
to Dutch withholding tax.
It is the expectation and the intention, although there can be no certainties that holders of Class B
ordinary shares will receive dividends through the dividend access mechanism. Any dividends
paid on the dividend access share will have a U.K. source for U.K. and Dutch tax purposes.
There will be no Dutch withholding tax on such dividends and certain holders (not including U.S.
holders of Class B ordinary shares or Class B ADSs) will be entitled to a U.K. tax credit in
respect of their proportional shares of such dividends. For further details regarding the tax
treatment of dividends paid on the Class A and Class B ordinary shares and ADSs, please refer
to “Taxation”.
Table of Contents
33
Description of Dividend Access Mechanism
A dividend access share has been issued by Shell Transport to Computershare Trustees
(Jersey) Limited (formerly EES Trustees International Limited) as Dividend Access Trustee (the
“Dividend Access Trustee”). EES Trustees International Limited replaced Lloyds TSB Offshore
Trust Company Limited as Trustee on January 26, 2012. Pursuant to a declaration of trust, the
Dividend Access Trustee will hold any dividends paid in respect of the dividend access share on
trust (the “Dividend Access Trust”) for the holders of Class B ordinary shares from time to time
and will arrange for prompt disbursement of such dividends to holders of Class B ordinary
shares. Interest and other income earned on unclaimed dividends will be for the account of Shell
Transport and any dividends which are unclaimed after 12 years will revert to Shell Transport.
Holders of Class B ordinary shares will not have any interest in the dividend access share and
will not have any rights against Shell Transport as issuer of the dividend access share. The only
assets held on trust for the benefit of the holders of Class B ordinary shares will be dividends
paid to the Dividend Access Trustee in respect of the dividend access share.
The declaration and payment of dividends on the dividend access share will require board action
by Shell Transport and will be subject to any applicable limitations in law or in the Shell
Transport articles of association in effect from time to time. In no event will the aggregate amount
of the dividend paid by Shell Transport under the dividend access mechanism for a particular
period exceed the aggregate of the dividend declared by our board on the Class B ordinary
shares in respect of the same period.
Operation of the Dividend Access Mechanism
If, in connection with the declaration of dividends by Royal Dutch Shell on the Class B ordinary
shares, the board of Shell Transport elects to declare and pay a dividend on the dividend access
share to the Dividend Access Trustee, the holders of the Class B ordinary shares will be
beneficially entitled to receive their share of that dividend pursuant to the declaration of trust (and
arrangements will be made to ensure that the dividend is paid in the same currency in which they
would have received a dividend from us).
If any amount is paid by Shell Transport by way of a dividend on the dividend access share and
paid by the Dividend Access Trustee to any holder of Class B ordinary shares, the dividend
which we would otherwise pay on the Class B ordinary shares will be reduced by an amount
equal to the amount paid to such holders of Class B ordinary shares by the Dividend Access
Trustee.
We will have a full and unconditional obligation, in the event that the Dividend Access Trustee
does not pay an amount to holders of Class B ordinary shares on a cash dividend payment date
(even if that amount has been paid to the Dividend Access Trustee), to pay immediately the
dividend declared on the Class B ordinary shares. The right of holders of Class B ordinary
shares to receive distributions from the Dividend Access Trustee will be reduced by an amount
equal to the amount of any payment actually made by us on account of any dividend on Class B
ordinary shares.
Any payment by us will be subject to Dutch withholding tax (unless in any particular case an
exemption is obtained under Dutch law or the provisions of an applicable tax treaty). If for any
reason no dividend is paid on the dividend access share, holders of Class B ordinary shares will
only receive dividends from us directly.
The dividend access mechanism may be suspended or terminated at any time by our board of
directors or the board of directors of Shell Transport, for any reason and without financial
recompense. This might, for instance, occur in response to changes in relevant tax legislation.
The dividend access mechanism has been approved by the Dutch Revenue Service pursuant to
an agreement (vaststellingsovereenkomst) with us and Royal Dutch Petroleum dated October 26,
2004 as supplemented and amended by an agreement between the same parties dated April 25,
2005. The agreement states, among other
Table of Contents
34
things, that dividend distributions on the dividend access share by Shell Transport will not be
subject to Dutch dividend withholding tax provided that the dividend access mechanism is
structured and operated substantially as set out above. We may not extend the dividend access
mechanism to any future issuances of Class B ordinary shares without the approval of the Dutch
Revenue Service. Accordingly, we would not expect to issue additional Class B ordinary shares
unless we obtained that approval or determined that the continued operation of the dividend
access mechanism was unnecessary. Any further issue of Class B ordinary shares is subject to
advance consultation with the Dutch Revenue Service.
The daily operations of the Dividend Access Trust are administered on behalf of Royal Dutch
Shell by the Dividend Access Trustee. Material financial information of the Dividend Access
Trust is included in the Consolidated Financial Statements of Royal Dutch Shell and is therefore
subject to the same disclosure controls and procedures as Royal Dutch Shell.
Manner of holding shares
There are several ways in which our registered shares or an interest in these shares can be held,
including:
•  directly as registered shares in uncertificated form or in certificated form in a
shareholder’s name;
•  indirectly through Euroclear Nederland (in respect of which the Dutch Securities Giro Act
is applicable);
•  through our Corporate Nominee Service (as defined below); and
•  as a direct or indirect holder of either a Class A or Class B ADS (see the “Description of
Royal Dutch Shell American Depositary Shares” section of this prospectus).
Holdings through Euroclear Nederland
We expect that the Intermediary or, if applicable, other bank or financial institution where a
person who holds interests in our shares through Euroclear Nederland maintains a relevant
securities account will send such person a statement detailing the interests in our shares such
person holds through Euroclear Nederland. However, whether and, if so, how they do so, will
depend on the individual arrangements between such Intermediary or other bank or financial
institution and that person.
Euroclear Nederland has indicated that each person who holds interests in our shares through it
will be able to exercise rights relating to those shares such that he/she will (subject to the
individual arrangements between that person and the Intermediary or other bank or financial
institution where that person maintains a relevant securities account):
•  be able to attend and speak at, all of our general meetings;
•  be able to give directions as to voting at all of our general meetings; and
•  be able to receive dividends via Euroclear Nederland and participate in capital events,
in each case, so far as is possible in accordance with the Dutch Securities Giro Act, other
applicable law and the Euroclear Nederland rules and regulations issued pursuant to the Dutch
Securities Giro Act and further subject to compliance by all concerned with any applicable
policies and procedures.
Holdings through the Corporate Nominee Service
In order to allow the persons who hold our shares through the corporate nominee service
provided by Equiniti Financial Services Limited (the “Corporate Nominee Service”) to exercise
rights relating to those shares, we
Table of Contents
35
have entered into an agreement with Equiniti Financial Services Limited (the “Corporate
Nominee”) requiring it to ensure that persons holding our shares through the Corporate Nominee
Service will:
•  receive notices of, and be able to attend and speak at, all of our general meetings;
•  be able to give directions as to voting at all of our general meetings;
•  have made available to them and be sent, on request, copies of our annual report and
accounts and all the other documents issued to shareholders by us;
•  be able to receive dividends via the Corporate Nominee Service;
•  be able to participate in capital events in the same manner as registered holders of the
same class of our shares; and
•  be treated in the same manner as registered holders of the same class of our shares in
respect of all other rights attaching to those shares,
in each case, so far as is possible in accordance with the Uncertificated Securities Regulations
2001 and other applicable law. In particular, residents in, or citizens of, jurisdictions outside the
U.K. should be aware that they will not be able to participate in capital events as registered
holders of our shares unless the Corporate Nominee is satisfied that such participation or
treatment would not breach any applicable laws or regulations in those jurisdictions.
It is the responsibility of persons resident in, or citizens of jurisdiction outside the U.K. to inform
themselves of, and to satisfy themselves as to the full observance of, the laws of the relevant
jurisdiction in connection with any applicable legal requirements in respect of holding our shares
through the Corporate Nominee Service, including the obtaining of any governmental, exchange
control or other consents which may be required, or the compliance with other necessary
formalities that are required to be observed. If, due to applicable legal requirements, it is not
permissible or practical to hold our shares through the Corporate Nominee Service, persons
resident in, or citizens of, that jurisdiction should request that they be sent a share certificate for
the our ordinary shares to which they are entitled.
For so long as a person holds our shares through the Corporate Nominee Service, we will
ensure that the Corporate Nominee sends each such person a statement of his/her holding of our
shares at least once a year.
Change in the manner of holding our shares
Holders of our shares may, subject as set out below, change the manner in which they hold such
shares. The ability to change the manner of holding our shares is subject to, in each case,
compliance with any relevant regulatory requirements and, in respect of holdings through the
Corporate Nominee Service, the agreement of the Corporate Nominee and acceptance by the
holder of our shares of the terms and conditions of the Corporate Nominee Service.
Holders of our shares who wish to change the manner in which they hold such shares are urged
to consult their own legal, tax and financial advisers with respect to the legal, tax and cost
consequences of any such change.
Repurchase of shares
Subject to applicable law and the Articles, we may purchase our own shares if: (i) in the case of
an open-market purchase, authority to make the market purchase has been given by an ordinary
resolution of our shareholders; or (ii) in the case of an off-market purchase, authority has been
given by a special resolution. However, the guidance from the Investment Management
Association is that authority to repurchase shares on market should be given by special
resolution. We can only repurchase our own shares out of distributable reserves or the proceeds
of a new issuance of shares made for the purposes of funding the repurchase.
Table of Contents
36
Our share buy-back program was renewed in 2014 in accordance with the authority granted to us
by a special resolution passed by our shareholders at our 2014 AGM to authorize us to
repurchase, subject to certain limitations, up to 633 million ordinary shares.
In 2004 we entered into agreements with the Dutch Revenue Service regarding certain Dutch
dividend withholding tax consequences of the repurchase of both Class A ordinary shares and
Class B ordinary shares. We must consider Dutch tax consequences whenever we decide to
repurchase ordinary shares. See “Taxation —Dutch Taxation — Dutch taxation of Ordinary
Shares and ADSs — Withholding tax on dividend payments.” In connection with our share buy-
back program, we expect to repurchase only A ordinary shares, which will be cancelled upon
such repurchase, because we believe it is currently more economic for us to repurchase A
ordinary shares under such Dutch tax rules. However, in the future, we may decide to repurchase
Class B ordinary shares if we determine that it becomes equally as or more economic than
purchasing Class A ordinary shares under such Dutch tax rules.
Shareholders’ pre-emption rights
Under the Companies Act 2006, any equity shares issued by us for cash must first be offered to
existing shareholders in proportion to their existing holdings (the shareholders’ pre-emption
rights). Both the Companies Act 2006 and the Listing Rules allow for the disapplication of the
shareholders’ pre-emption rights. The pre-emption rights may be waived by a special resolution
of the shareholders, either generally or specifically, for a maximum period not exceeding five
years.
At our 2014 AGM, shareholders passed a special resolution giving our board of directors the
authority to allot ordinary shares (or to sell treasury shares), up to an aggregate nominal amount
of €22 million (in the case of the allotment of shares in Royal Dutch Shell, such amount to form
part of the total €147 million aggregate nominal amount authorized by shareholders at the 2014
AGM in relation to the allotment by the board of directors of ordinary shares or the granting of
rights by the board of directors to subscribe for or convert any securities into ordinary shares),
without first offering them to existing shareholders in proportion to their existing shareholdings.
This authority was passed in compliance with institutional investor guidelines, and will apply until
the earlier of the end of our AGM in 2015 or the close of business on August 20, 2015.
Ability to pay commission on shares and to issue shares at a discount
In connection with any share issued, we can use all the powers given by applicable law to pay
commissions or brokerage. Subject to the provisions of applicable laws and the Articles, we can
pay the commission in cash or by allotting fully or partially-paid shares or other securities or by a
combination of both. The Listing Rules limit the maximum discount under which shares may be
issued in an open offer, placing, vendor consideration placing, offer for subscription of equity
shares or an issue out of treasury to 10% of the middle market price of those shares at the time of
announcing the terms of the offer or at the time of agreeing the placing (as the case may be).
Furthermore, shares may not be allotted at less than their par value.
Disputes between a shareholder or ADS holder and Royal Dutch Shell, any subsidiary,
director or professional service provider
The Articles provide that, subject to certain exceptions, all disputes (i) between a shareholder in
such capacity and Royal Dutch Shell and/or its directors, arising out of or in connection with the
Articles or otherwise; (ii) so far as permitted by law, between Royal Dutch Shell and any of its
directors in their capacities as such or as its employees, including all claims made by Royal
Dutch Shell or on its behalf against its directors; (iii) between a shareholder in such capacity and
Royal Dutch Shell’s professional service providers (which could include its auditors, legal
counsel, bankers and ADS depositaries); and (iv) between Royal Dutch Shell and its
professional service providers arising in connection with any claim within the scope of (iii) above,
shall be exclusively and finally resolved by arbitration in The Hague, the Netherlands under the
ICC Rules, as amended from time to
Table of Contents
37
time. This would include all disputes arising under U.K., Dutch or U.S. law (including securities
laws), or under any other law, between parties covered by the arbitration provision. Accordingly,
the ability of shareholders to obtain monetary or other relief, including in respect of securities law
claims, may be determined in accordance with these provisions, and the ability of shareholders
to obtain monetary or other relief may therefore be limited and their cost of seeking and obtaining
recoveries in a dispute may be higher than otherwise would be the case.
The tribunal shall consist of three arbitrators to be appointed in accordance with the ICC Rules.
The chairman of the tribunal must have at least 20 years’ experience as a lawyer qualified to
practice in a common law jurisdiction which is within the Commonwealth (as constituted on
May 12, 2005) and each other arbitrator must have at least 20 years’ experience as a qualified
lawyer.
Pursuant to the exclusive jurisdiction provision in the Articles, if a court or other competent
authority in any jurisdiction determines that the arbitration requirement described above is invalid
or unenforceable in relation to any particular dispute in that jurisdiction, then that dispute may
only be brought in the courts of England and Wales, as is the case with any derivative claim
brought under the Companies Act 2006. The governing law of the Articles is the substantive law
of England and Wales.
Disputes relating to Royal Dutch Shell’s failure or alleged failure to pay all or part of a dividend
which has been declared and which has fallen due for payment will not be subject to the
arbitration and exclusive jurisdiction provisions of the Articles. Any derivative claim brought
under the Companies Act 2006 will not be subject to the arbitration provisions of the Articles.
The governing law of the Articles is the substantive law of England and Wales.
We have incorporated arbitration clauses into all indemnities granted by us to our directors and
into all service contracts between directors and our subsidiaries. We have incorporated an
arbitration clause into the deposit agreements relating to the Class A ADSs and Class B ADSs
which applies as between us and holders of the Class A ADSs and Class B ADSs (but not the
depositaries).
Pursuant to the relevant depositary agreement, as summarized under “Description of Royal
Dutch Shell American Depositary Shares”, each holder of ADSs is bound by the arbitration and
exclusive jurisdiction provisions of the Articles as described in that section as if that holder were
a shareholder.
Summary of Certain Provisions of Royal Dutch Shell’s Articles
For a description of certain provisions contained in the Articles, see “Change of Control”,
“Threshold for Disclosure of Share Ownership” and “Capital Changes”, each respectively
included in “Corporate Governance — Articles” on page 73 in the 2013 20-F and which are
incorporated by reference into this prospectus, and subsequent filings incorporated by reference
into this prospectus.
Table of Contents
38
DESCRIPTION OF ROYAL DUTCH SHELL AMERICAN DEPOSITARY SHARES
General
The Bank of New York Mellon as depositary for our ADSs, will execute and deliver the Class A
ADSs and Class B ADSs. Each Class A ADS and Class B ADS is a certificate evidencing a
specific number of Class A or Class B American depositary shares (“Class A ADSs” and “Class
B ADSs” and, collectively, “ADSs”), respectively. Each Class A ADS will represent two of our
Class A ordinary shares (or a right to receive two shares) deposited with the custodian for the
depositary. Each Class B ADS will represent two of our Class B ordinary shares (or a right to
receive two shares) deposited with the custodian for the depositary. Each ADS will also
represent any other securities, cash or other property which may be held by the depositary. The
shares and any other securities, cash or other property held under the relevant deposit
agreement are referred to as the relevant deposited securities. The depositary’s office at which
the ADSs will be administered is located at 101 Barclay Street, New York, New York 10286.
You may hold ADSs either (A) directly (i) by having an ADS registered in your name; or (ii) by
having ADSs registered in your name in the Direct Registration System, or (B) indirectly by
holding a security entitlement in ADSs through your broker or other financial institution. If you
hold ADSs directly, whether certificated or uncertificated, you are a registered ADS holder, also
referred to as an ADS holder. This description assumes you are an ADS holder. If you hold the
ADSs indirectly, you must rely on the procedures of your broker or other financial institution to
assert the rights of ADS holders described in this section. You should consult with your broker or
financial institution to find out what those procedures are.
The Direct Registration System (“DRS”) is a system administered by the Depository Trust
Company (“DTC”), pursuant to which the depositary may register the ownership of uncertificated
ADSs, which ownership shall be evidenced by periodic statements sent by the depositary to the
registered holders of uncertificated ADSs.
As an ADS holder, we will not treat you as one of our shareholders and you will not have
shareholder rights. English law generally governs shareholder rights. The depositary or its
nominee will be the holder of the shares underlying your ADSs. As a holder of ADSs, you will
have ADS holder rights. A deposit agreement for each class of ADSs among us, the depositary
and you, as an ADS holder, and the beneficial owners of ADSs sets out ADS holder rights as
well as the rights and obligations of the depositary. As of the date of this registration statement
the two deposit agreements are identical, except that each relates to a different class of ordinary
shares and the relevant class of ADSs issuable under it. New York law governs the deposit
agreements and the ADSs except that the arbitration and exclusive jurisdiction provisions are
governed by English law.
The following is a summary of the material provisions of the deposit agreements. For more
complete information, you should read the entire relevant deposit agreement and the form of
ADSs. The deposit agreement relating to the Class A ADSs and the form of Class A ADS relating
thereto, and the deposit agreement relating to the Class B ADSs and the form of Class B ADS
relating thereto, are also attached as exhibits to the Capital Stock Form 6-K and incorporated
herein by reference. See “Taxation — U.S. Taxation — U.S. Taxation of Ordinary Shares and
ADSs” for a description of the material U.S. federal income tax consequences to U.S. holders of
holding our ADSs.
Dividends and Other Distributions
How will you receive dividends and other distributions on the shares?
The depositary has agreed to pay to you the cash dividends or other distributions it or the
custodian receives on the relevant deposited securities, after deducting its fees and expenses.
You will receive these distributions in proportion to the number of shares your ADSs represent.
•  Cash. While the depositary may receive cash dividends and other distributions from us in
U.S. dollars (in which case no conversion will be required) to the extent the depositary
receives a cash dividend or
39
Table of Contents
other cash distribution in a currency other than U.S. dollars, the depositary will convert
such cash dividend or other distribution we pay on the shares into U.S. dollars, if it can do
so on a reasonable basis and can transfer the U.S. dollars to the U.S. If that is not
possible or if any government approval is needed and cannot be obtained, the deposit
agreement allows the depositary to distribute the foreign currency only to those ADS
holders to whom it is possible to do so. It will hold the foreign currency it does not
distribute for the account of the ADS holders who have not been paid. It will not invest the
foreign currency and it will not be liable for any interest.
•  Before making a distribution, the depositary will deduct any withholding taxes that must
be paid. It will distribute only whole U.S. dollars and cents and will round fractional cents
to the nearest whole cent. If the exchange rates fluctuate during a time when the
depositary cannot convert the foreign currency, you may lose some or all of the value of
the distribution.
•  Ordinary shares. The depositary may distribute additional ADSs representing any
shares we distribute as a dividend or free distribution on the relevant deposited securities.
The depositary will only distribute whole ADSs. It will use its reasonable efforts to sell
shares which would require it to deliver a fractional ADS and distribute the net proceeds
in the same way as it does with cash. If the depositary does not distribute additional
ADSs, the outstanding ADSs will also represent the new shares.
•  Rights to purchase additional shares. If we offer holders of the relevant deposited
securities any rights to subscribe for additional shares or any other rights, the depositary
may make these rights available to you. If the depositary decides it is not legal or feasible
to make the rights available but that it is practical to sell the rights, the depositary may sell
the rights and distribute the proceeds in the same way as it does with cash. The
depositary will allow rights that are not distributed or sold to lapse. In that case, you will
receive no value for them.
If the depositary makes rights available to you, and you elect to exercise such rights, it will
exercise the rights and purchase the shares on your behalf. The depositary will then deposit the
shares and deliver ADSs to you. It will only exercise rights if you pay it the exercise price and any
other charges the rights require you to pay.
U.S. securities laws may restrict transfers and cancellation of the ADSs represented by shares
purchased upon exercise of rights. For example, you may not be able to trade these ADSs freely
in the U.S. In this case, the depositary may deliver restricted depositary shares that have the
same terms as the ADSs described in this section except for changes needed to put the
necessary restrictions in place.
•  Other Distributions. The depositary will send to you anything else we distribute on the
relevant deposited securities by any means it thinks is equitable and practical. If it cannot
make the distribution in that way, the depositary has a choice, after consulting with us. It
may decide to sell what we distributed and distribute the net proceeds, in the same way
as it does with cash. However, the depositary is not required to distribute any securities
(other than ADSs) to you unless it receives satisfactory assurance from us that it is legal
to make that distribution.
The depositary is not responsible if it decides that it is unlawful or impractical to make a
distribution available to any ADS holders. We have no obligation to register ADSs, shares, rights
or other securities under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). We also
have no obligation to take any other action to permit the distribution of ADSs, shares, rights or
anything else to ADS holders. This means that you may not receive the distributions we make on
our shares or any value for them if it is deemed illegal or impractical for us to make them
available to you.
Deposit and Withdrawal
How are ADSs issued?
The depositary will deliver ADSs if you or your broker deposits shares or evidence of rights to
receive shares with the relevant custodian. Upon payment of its fees and expenses and of any
taxes or charges, such as stamp
Table of Contents
40
taxes or stock transfer taxes or fees, the depositary will register the appropriate number of ADSs
in the names you request and will deliver the ADSs at its office to the persons you request.
How do ADS holders cancel an ADS and obtain shares?
You may surrender your ADSs at the depositary’s office. Upon payment of its fees and expenses
and of any taxes or charges, such as stamp taxes or stock transfer taxes or fees, the depositary
will deliver (i) shares to you or to an account designated by you which (in the case of Class A
ordinary shares) may be an account designated by such owner with Euroclear Nederland or an
Intermediary; and (ii) any other deposited securities underlying the ADS to you or a person you
designate at the office of the respective custodian. Or, in the case of certificated shares, at your
request, risk and expense, the depositary will deliver the deposited securities at its office, if
feasible.
Voting Rights
How do you vote?
Under the deposit agreements, upon the written request of an ADS holder, the depositary will
endeavor to cause the appointment of such holder as its proxy with power to vote the number of
shares its ADSs represent. This means that, subject to the procedures described below, if you
are a registered holder of ADSs, you will have a right to attend and vote directly at shareholders’
meetings. You also have a right to instruct the depositary how to vote the number of shares your
ADSs represent. The depositary will notify you of shareholders’ meetings and arrange to deliver
our voting materials to you if we ask it to. Those materials will describe the matters to be voted on
and explain how you may vote directly or instruct the depositary how to vote. For instructions to
be valid, they must reach the depositary by a date set by the depositary. In order for you to vote,
the depositary must receive your request to be a proxy prior to the date specified for each
meeting.
The depositary will try, as far as practical, subject to English law and the provisions of the
Articles, to vote the number of shares or other relevant deposited securities represented by your
ADSs as you instruct. The depositary will only vote or attempt to vote as you instruct.
We cannot ensure that you will receive voting materials or otherwise learn of an upcoming
shareholders’ meeting in time to ensure that you can become appointed as a proxy to vote or
instruct the depositary to vote your shares.
The depositary and its agents are not responsible for failing to carry out voting instructions or for
the manner of carrying out voting instructions. This means that you may not be able to vote and
there may be nothing you can do if your shares are not voted as you requested.
Table of Contents
Fees and Expenses
41
Persons depositing shares or ADS holders must pay:   For:
$5.00 (or less) per 100 ADSs (or portion of 100 ADSs)
Registration or transfer fees
•       Issuance of ADSs, including
issuances resulting from a distribution
of shares or rights or other property
•       Cancellation of ADSs for the
purpose of withdrawal, including if the
relevant deposit agreement
terminates
•       Distribution of securities
distributed to holders of deposited
securities which are distributed by the
respective depositaries to ADS
holders
•       Transfer and registration of
shares on our share register to or from
the name of the respective depositary
Expenses of the depositary
Taxes and other governmental charges payable on any
ADS or share underlying an ADS, for example, stock
transfer taxes, stamp duty or withholding taxes
Payment of Taxes
or its agent when you deposit or
withdraw shares
•       Cable, telex and facsimile
transmissions (when expressly
provided in the deposit agreement);
Converting foreign currency to U.S.
dollars
•       As necessary
The depositary may deduct the amount of any taxes owed from any payments to you. It may also
sell deposited securities, by public or private sale, to pay any taxes owed. You will remain liable
if the proceeds of the sale are not enough to pay the taxes. If the depositary sells deposited
securities, it will, if appropriate, reduce the number of ADSs to reflect the sale and pay to you any
proceeds, or send to you any property, remaining after it has paid the taxes.
Reclassifications, Recapitalizations and Mergers
If we:
•       Change the nominal or par value of our
shares
•       Reclassify, split up or consolidate any of the
relevant deposited securities
•       Distribute securities on the relevant
deposited securities that are not distributed to
you
•       Recapitalize, reorganize, merge, liquidate,
sell all or substantially all of our assets, or take
any similar action
Then:
The cash, shares or other securities received
for the account of the depositary will become
deposited securities.
Each ADS will automatically represent its
equal share of the new relevant deposited
securities.
The depositary may distribute some or all of
the securities it received. It may also deliver
new ADSs or ask you to surrender your
outstanding ADSs in exchange for new
ADSs identifying the new deposited
securities.
One of the above, as applicable.
42
Table of Contents
Amendment and Termination
How may the deposit agreement be amended?
We may agree with the depositary to amend the deposit agreements and the ADSs without your
consent for any reason. If an amendment adds or increases fees or charges, except for taxes and
other governmental charges or expenses of the depositary for registration fees, facsimile costs,
delivery charges or similar items, or prejudices a substantial right of ADS holders, it will not
become effective for outstanding ADSs until 30 days after the depositary notifies ADS holders of
the amendment. At the time an amendment becomes effective, you are considered, by continuing
to hold your ADSs, to agree to the amendment and to be bound by the ADSs and the relevant
deposit agreement as amended.
How may the deposit agreement be terminated?
The depositary will terminate the deposit agreements if we ask it to do so. The depositary may
also terminate the deposit agreements if it has told us that it would like to resign and we have not
appointed a new depositary bank within 60 days. In either case, the depositary must notify you at
least 30 days before termination.
After termination, the depositary and its agents will do the following under the relevant deposit
agreement but nothing else: (1) advise you that the deposit agreement is terminated, (2) collect
distributions on the deposited securities, (3) sell rights and other property, and (4) deliver shares
and other deposited securities upon surrender of ADSs. Six months or more after termination, the
depositary may sell any remaining relevant deposited securities by public or private sale. After
that, the depositary will hold the money it received on the sale, as well as any other cash it is
holding under the relevant deposit agreement for the pro rata benefit of the ADS holders that
have not surrendered their ADSs. It will invest the money in direct obligations of the federal
government of the U.S. and has no liability for interest. The depositary’s only obligations will be
to account for the money and other cash. After termination our only obligations will be to
indemnify the depositary and to pay fees and expenses of the depositary that we agreed to pay.
Limitations on Obligations and Liability
Limits on our Obligations and the Obligations of the Depositary; Limits on Liability to
Holders of ADSs
The deposit agreements expressly limit our obligations and the obligations of the depositary.
They also limit our liability and the liability of the depositary. We and the depositary:
•  are only obligated to take the actions specifically set forth in the relevant deposit
agreement without negligence or bad faith;
•  are not liable if either of us is prevented or delayed by law or circumstances beyond our
control from performing our obligations under the relevant deposit agreement;
•  are not liable if either of us exercises discretion permitted under the relevant deposit
agreement;
•  have no obligation to become involved in a lawsuit or other proceeding related to the
ADSs or the deposit agreements on your behalf or on behalf of any other person;
•  may rely upon any documents we believe in good faith to be genuine and to have been
signed or presented by the proper party; and
•  are not liable for the depositary’s or any of its agents’ reliance upon the authority of any
information in, or for the depositary’s or any of its agents’ compliance with directions from,
any DTC participants in connection with the Direct Registration System.
By holding an ADS or an interest therein you will be agreeing that the depositary and its agents
may fully respond to any and all demands or requests for information maintained by or on its
behalf to the extent such
Table of Contents
43
information is requested or required by or pursuant to any lawful authority, including without
limitation laws, rules, regulations, administrative or judicial process, banking, securities or other
regulators.
Neither we nor the depositary nor any of our or its respective agents shall be liable to registered
or other holders of ADSs or any other third party or parties for any indirect, special, punitive or
consequential damages.
In the deposit agreements, we agree to indemnify the depositary for acting as depositary, except
for losses caused by the depositary’s own negligence or bad faith, and the depositary agrees to
indemnify us for losses resulting from its negligence or bad faith and in connection with issuance
of pre-released ADSs.
Requirements for Depositary Actions
Before the depositary will deliver or register a transfer of an ADS, make a distribution on an ADS,
or permit withdrawal of shares or other property, the depositary may require:
•  payment of stock transfer or other taxes or other governmental charges and transfer or
registration fees charged by third parties for the transfer of any shares or other relevant
deposited securities;
•  satisfactory proof of the identity and genuineness of any signature or other information it
deems necessary; and
•  compliance with regulations it may establish, from time to time, consistent with the
relevant deposit agreement, including presentation of transfer documents.
The depositary may refuse to deliver ADSs or register transfers of ADSs generally when the
transfer books of the depositary or our transfer books are closed or at any time if the depositary or
we think it advisable to do so.
Your Right to Receive the Ordinary Shares Underlying your ADSs
You have the right to cancel your ADSs and withdraw the underlying shares or (in the case of
Class A ordinary shares) have shares credited to an account with Euroclear Nederland (in the
case of shares held by admitted institutions (aangesloten instellingen) only, as defined in the
Dutch Securities Giro Act) or an Intermediary at any time except:
(i) When temporary delays arise because: (a) the depositary has closed its transfer books or
we have closed our transfer books; (b) the transfer of shares is blocked to permit voting at
a shareholders’ meeting; or (c) we are paying a dividend on our shares.
(ii) When you or other ADS holders seeking to withdraw shares owe money to pay fees,
taxes and similar charges.
(iii) When it is necessary to prohibit withdrawals in order to comply with any laws or
governmental regulations that apply to relevant class of ADSs or to the withdrawal of
shares or other deposited securities.
This right of withdrawal may not be limited by any other provision of the deposit agreements.
Pre-release of ADSs
The deposit agreements permit the depositary to deliver ADSs before deposit of the underlying
shares. This is called a pre-release of the ADSs. Subject to the terms and conditions of the
deposit agreements, the pre-release of ADSs may occur only if (i) pre-released ADSs are fully
collateralized (marked to market daily) with cash or U.S. government securities in an amount
equal to not less than 100% of the market value of the pre-released ADSs held by the depositary
for the benefit of owners of the applicable shares (but such collateral shall not constitute
deposited securities), (ii) each recipient of pre-released ADSs agrees in writing with the
respective depositary
44
Table of Contents
that such recipient (a) owns such shares, (b) assigns all beneficial right, title and interest therein
to the respective depositary, (c) holds such shares for the account of the respective depositary
and (d) will deliver such shares to the respective custodian as soon as practicable and promptly
upon demand therefor; and (iii) all pre-released ADSs of the relevant class evidence not more
than 20% of all ADSs of that class (excluding those evidenced by pre-released ADSs) or such
other percentage as we and the respective depositary may from time to time agree in writing, of
the total number of shares of that class represented by ADSs except to the extent, if any, that
such limitation is exceeded solely because of the surrender of ADSs subsequent to the execution
and delivery of pre-released ADSs in compliance with such limitation. As discussed in “Taxation
— U.S. Taxation — U.S. Taxation of Ordinary Shares and ADSs — Deposits, withdrawals, and
Pre-Releases”, the U.S. Treasury has expressed concerns regarding certain transactions
involving the pre-release of ADSs.
Arbitration
Under the deposit agreements, each holder of ADSs is bound by the arbitration and exclusive
jurisdiction provisions of the Articles as if the applicable ADS holder was our shareholder. For a
description of the arbitration and exclusive jurisdiction provisions of the Articles see “Description
of Royal Dutch Shell Ordinary Shares — Disputes between a shareholder or ADS holder and
Royal Dutch Shell, any subsidiary, director or professional service provider”.
Direct Registration System
In the deposit agreements, all parties to the deposit agreements acknowledge that the DRS and
Profile Modification System (“Profile”) will apply to uncertificated ADSs upon acceptance thereof
to DRS by DTC. DRS is the system administered by DTC pursuant to which the depositary may
register the ownership of uncertificated ADSs, which ownership shall be evidenced by periodic
statements sent by the depositary to the registered holders of uncertificated ADSs. Profile is a
required feature of DRS which allows a DTC participant, claiming to act on behalf of a registered
holder of ADSs, to direct the depositary to register a transfer of those ADSs to DTC or its
nominee and to deliver those ADSs to the DTC account of that DTC participant without receipt by
the depositary of prior authorization from the ADS holder to register the transfer.
In connection with and in accordance with the arrangements and procedures relating to
DRS/Profile, the parties to the deposit agreements understand that the depositary will not verify,
determine or otherwise ascertain that the DTC participant which is claiming to be acting on
behalf of an ADS holder in requesting registration of transfer and delivery described in the
paragraph above has the actual authority to act on behalf of the ADS holder (notwithstanding any
requirements under the Uniform Commercial Code).
Shareholder communications; inspection of register of holders of ADSs
The depositary will make available for your inspection at its office all communications that it
receives from us as a holder of relevant deposited securities that we make generally available to
holders of relevant deposited securities. The depositary will send you copies of those
communications if we ask it to. You have a right to inspect the register of holders of ADSs of the
relevant class, but not for the purpose of contacting those holders about a matter unrelated to our
business or the ADSs.
Table of Contents
45
CLEARANCE AND SETTLEMENT
Securities we issue may be held through one or more international and domestic clearing
systems. The principal clearing systems we will use are the book-entry systems operated by
DTC in the U.S., Clearstream Banking, société anonyme (“Clearstream, Luxembourg”), in
Luxembourg and Euroclear Bank S.A./N.V. (“Euroclear”), in Brussels, Belgium. These systems
have established electronic securities and payment transfer, processing, depositary and
custodial links among themselves and others, either directly or through custodians and
depositaries. These links allow securities to be issued, held and transferred among the clearing
systems without the physical transfer of certificates.
Special procedures to facilitate clearance and settlement have been established among these
clearing systems to trade securities across borders in the secondary market. Where payments for
securities we issue in global form will be made in U.S. dollars, these procedures can be used for
cross-market transfers and the securities will be cleared and settled on a delivery against
payment basis.
Cross-market transfers of securities that are not in global form may be cleared and settled in
accordance with other procedures that may be established among the clearing systems for these
securities. Investors in securities that are issued outside of the U.S., its territories and
possessions must initially hold their interests through Euroclear, Clearstream, Luxembourg or the
clearance system that is described in the applicable prospectus supplement.
The policies of DTC, Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg will govern payments, transfers,
exchange and other matters relating to the investor’s interest in securities held by them. This is
also true for any other clearance system that may be named in a prospectus supplement.
We have no responsibility for any aspect of the actions of DTC, Euroclear or Clearstream,
Luxembourg or any of their direct or indirect participants. We have no responsibility for any
aspect of the records kept by DTC, Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg or any of their direct or
indirect participants. We also do not supervise these systems in any way. This is also true for any
other clearing system indicated in a prospectus supplement.
DTC, Euroclear, Clearstream, Luxembourg, and their participants perform these clearance and
settlement functions under agreements they have made with one another or with their customers.
You should be aware that they are not obligated to perform these procedures and may modify
them or discontinue them at any time.
The description of the clearing systems in this section reflects our understanding of the rules and
procedures of DTC, Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg as they are currently in effect.
Those systems could change their rules and procedures at any time.
The Clearing Systems
DTC
DTC has advised us as follows:
(i) DTC is:
(a) a limited purpose trust company organized under the laws of the State of New York;
(b) a “banking organization” within the meaning of the New York Banking Law;
(c) a member of the Federal Reserve System;
(d) a “clearing corporation” within the meaning of the New York Uniform Commercial
Code; and
(e) a “clearing agency” registered pursuant to the provisions of Section 17A of the
Exchange Act.
46
Table of Contents
(ii) DTC was created to hold securities for its participants and to facilitate the clearance and
settlement of securities transactions between participants through electronic book-entry
changes to accounts of its participants. This eliminates the need for physical movement
of certificates.
(iii) Participants in DTC include securities brokers and dealers, banks, trust companies and
clearing corporations and may include certain other organizations. DTC is partially
owned by some of these participants or their representatives.
(iv) Indirect access to the DTC system is also available to banks, brokers, dealers and trust
companies that have relationships with participants.
(v) The rules applicable to DTC and DTC participants are on file with the SEC.
Clearstream, Luxembourg
Clearstream, Luxembourg has advised us as follows:
(i) Clearstream, Luxembourg is a duly licensed bank organized as a société anonyme
incorporated under the laws of Luxembourg and is subject to regulation by the
Luxembourg Commission for the Supervision of the Financial Sector (Commission de
Surveillance du Secteur Financier).
(ii) Clearstream, Luxembourg holds securities for its customers and facilitates the clearance
and settlement of securities transactions among them. It does so through electronic book-
entry changes to the accounts of its customers. This eliminates the need for physical
movement of certificates.
(iii) Clearstream, Luxembourg provides other services to its participants, including
safekeeping, administration, clearance and settlement of internationally traded securities
and lending and borrowing of securities. It interfaces with the domestic markets in over 30
countries through established depositary and custodial relationships.
(iv) Clearstream, Luxembourg’s customers include worldwide securities brokers and dealers,
banks, trust companies and clearing corporations and may include professional financial
intermediaries. Its U.S. customers are limited to securities brokers and dealers and
banks.
(v) Indirect access to the Clearstream, Luxembourg system is also available to others that
clear through Clearstream, Luxembourg customers or that have custodial relationships
with its customers, such as banks, brokers, dealers and trust companies.
Euroclear
Euroclear is the international central securities depositary of the Euroclear group. Euroclear has
advised us as follows:
(i) Euroclear is incorporated under the laws of Belgium as a bank and is subject to
regulation by the Belgian Banking and Finance Commission (Commission Bancaire et
Financiére) and the National Bank of Belgium (Banque Nationale de Belgique).
(ii) Euroclear holds securities for its customers and facilitates the clearance and settlement of
securities transactions among them. It does so through simultaneous electronic book-
entry delivery against payment, thereby eliminating the need for physical movement of
certificates.
(iii) Euroclear provides other services to its customers, including credit custody, lending and
borrowing of securities and tri-party collateral management. It interfaces with the domestic
markets of several other countries.
(iv) Euroclear customers include banks, including central banks, securities brokers and
dealers, trust companies and clearing corporations and may include certain other
professional financial intermediaries.
47
Table of Contents
(v) Indirect access to the Euroclear system is also available to others that clear through
Euroclear customers or that have relationships with Euroclear customers.
(vi) All securities in Euroclear are held on a fungible basis. This means that specific
certificates are not matched to specific securities clearance accounts.
(vii)Royal Dutch Shell Class B ordinary shares listed on the London Stock Exchange are
settled on the CREST system, which is operated by Euroclear U.K. & Ireland, a U.K.
subsidiary of Euroclear. The settlement procedures for this system are described in the
CREST reference manual, which can be found on Euroclear U.K. & Ireland’s website at
www.euroclear.com.
(viii) Royal Dutch Shell Class A ordinary shares listed on Euronext Amsterdam are settled
through Euroclear Nederland, a Dutch subsidiary of Euroclear. The settlement
procedures for this system are described on the Euroclear Nederland website at
www.euroclear.com.
It should be noted that Euroclear is not involved in the settlement of Class A ordinary shares and
Class B ordinary shares between CREST and Euroclear Nederland.
Other Clearing Systems
We may choose any other clearing system for a particular series of securities. The clearance and
settlement procedures for the clearing system we choose will be described in the applicable
prospectus supplement.
Primary Distribution
The distribution of the securities will be cleared through one or more of the clearing systems that
we have described above or any other clearing system that is specified in the applicable
prospectus supplement. Payment for securities will be made on a delivery versus payment or free
delivery basis. These payment procedures will be more fully described in the applicable
prospectus supplement.
Clearance and settlement procedures may vary from one series of securities to another
according to the currency that is chosen for the specific series of securities. Customary clearance
and settlement procedures are described below.
We will submit applications to the relevant system or systems for the securities to be accepted for
clearance. The clearance numbers that are applicable to each clearance system will be specified
in the prospectus supplement.
Clearance and Settlement Procedures — DTC
DTC participants that hold securities through DTC on behalf of investors will follow the
settlement practices applicable to U.S. corporate debt obligations in DTC’s Same-Day Funds
Settlement System, or such other procedures as are applicable for other securities.
Securities will be credited to the securities custody accounts of these DTC participants against
payment in same-day funds, for payments in U.S. dollars, on the settlement date. For payments in
a currency other than U.S. dollars, securities will be credited free of payment on the settlement
date.
Clearance and Settlement Procedures — Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg
We understand that investors that hold their securities through Euroclear or Clearstream,
Luxembourg accounts will follow the settlement procedures that are applicable for such
securities in their respective settlement systems.
Securities will be credited to the securities custody accounts of Euroclear and Clearstream,
Luxembourg participants on the business day following the settlement date, for value on the
settlement date. They will be credited either free of payment or against payment for value on the
settlement date.
48
Table of Contents
Secondary Market Trading
Trading Between DTC Participants
We understand that secondary market trading between DTC participants will occur in the
ordinary way in accordance with DTC’s rules. Secondary market trading will be settled using
procedures applicable to U.S. corporate debt obligations in DTC’s Same-Day Funds Settlement
System for debt securities, or such other procedures as are applicable for other securities.
If payment is made in U.S. dollars, settlement will be in same-day funds. If payment is made in a
currency other than U.S. dollars, securities settlement at DTC will be free of payment. If payment
is made other than in U.S. Dollars, separate payment arrangements outside of the DTC system
must be made between the DTC participants involved.
Trading Between Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg Participants
We understand that secondary market trading between Euroclear and/or Clearstream,
Luxembourg participants will occur in the ordinary way following the applicable rules and
operating procedures of Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg. Secondary market trading will
be settled using procedures applicable for such securities in their respective settlement systems.
Trading between a DTC Seller and a Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg Purchaser
A purchaser of securities that are held in the account of a DTC participant must send instructions
to Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg at least one business day prior to settlement. The
instructions will provide for the transfer of the securities from the selling DTC participant’s
account to the account of the purchasing Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg participant.
Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be, will then instruct the common
depositary for Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg to receive the securities either against
payment or free of payment.
The interests in the securities will be credited to the respective clearing system. The clearing
system will then credit the account of the participant, following its usual procedures. Credit for the
securities will appear on the next day, European time. Cash debit will be back-valued to, and the
interest on the securities will accrue from, the value date, which would be the preceding day,
when settlement occurs in New York. If the trade fails and settlement is not completed on the
intended date, the Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg cash debit will be valued as of the
actual settlement date instead.
Euroclear participants or Clearstream, Luxembourg participants will need the funds necessary to
process same-day funds settlement. The most direct means of doing this is to preposition funds
for settlement, either from cash or from existing lines of credit, as for any settlement occurring
within Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg. Under this approach, participants may take on
credit exposure to Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg until the securities are credited to their
accounts one business day later.
As an alternative, if Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg has extended a line of credit to them,
participants can choose not to preposition funds and will allow that credit line to be drawn upon
to finance settlement. Under this procedure, Euroclear participants or Clearstream, Luxembourg
participants purchasing securities would incur overdraft charges for one business day, (assuming
they cleared the overdraft as soon as the securities were credited to their accounts). However,
interest on the securities would accrue from the value date. Therefore, in many cases, the
investment income on securities that is earned during that one business day period may
substantially reduce or offset the amount of the overdraft charges. This result will, however,
depend on each participant’s particular cost of funds.
Table of Contents
49
Because the settlement will take place during New York business hours, DTC participants will
use their usual procedures to deliver securities to the depositary on behalf of Euroclear
participants or Clearstream, Luxembourg participants. The sale proceeds will be available to the
DTC seller on the settlement date. For the DTC participants, then, a cross-market transaction will
settle no differently than a trade between two DTC participants.
Special Timing Considerations
You should be aware that investors will only be able to make and receive deliveries, payments
and other communications involving securities through Clearstream, Luxembourg and Euroclear
on days when those systems are open for business. Those systems may not be open for
business on days when banks, brokers and other institutions are open for business in the U.S.
In addition, because of time-zone differences, there may be problems with completing
transactions involving Clearstream, Luxembourg and Euroclear on the same business day as in
the U.S. U.S. investors who wish to transfer their interests in the securities, or to receive or make
a payment or delivery of securities, on a particular day, may find that the transactions will not be
performed until the next business day in Luxembourg or Brussels, depending on whether
Clearstream, Luxembourg or Euroclear is used.
Table of Contents
U.S. Taxation
50
TAXATION
This section describes the material U.S. federal income tax consequences of acquiring, owning
and disposing of securities we may offer pursuant to this prospectus. It applies to you only if you
acquire the offered securities in an offering or offerings contemplated by this prospectus and you
hold the offered securities as capital assets for tax purposes. This section is the opinion of
Cravath, Swaine & Moore LLP, U.S. counsel to the issuer.
This section applies to you only if you are a U.S. holder. You are a U.S. holder if you are a
beneficial owner of an offered security and you are for U.S. federal income tax purposes:
•  a citizen or resident of the U.S.;
•  a corporation, or entity taxable as a corporation, that was created or organized under the
laws of the U.S. or any of its political subdivisions;
•  an estate whose income is subject to U.S. federal income tax regardless of its source; or
•  a trust if (i) a U.S. court can exercise primary supervision over the trust’s administration
and one or more U.S. persons are authorized to control all substantial decisions of the
trust; or (ii) the trust has made a valid election under applicable U.S. Treasury regulations
to be treated as a U.S. person.
This section does not apply to you if you are a member of a special class of holders subject to
special rules, including:
•  a dealer in securities or currencies;
•  a trader in securities that elects to use a mark-to-market method of accounting for its
securities holdings;
•  a regulated investment company;
•  a real estate investment trust;
•  a tax-exempt organization;
•  an insurance company;
•  a bank;
•  in the case of warrants, ordinary shares or ADSs, a person that actually or constructively
owns 10% or more of the voting stock of Royal Dutch Shell;
•  a person that holds offered securities as part of a straddle or a hedging or conversion
transaction (including, in the case of debt securities, debt securities owned as a hedge, or
that are hedged, against interest rate or currency risks);
•  a person who is an investor in a pass through entity (such as a partnership);
•  a person who acquires shares through the exercise of options, or otherwise as
compensation, or through a tax-qualified retirement plan;
•  holders of options granted under any benefit plan;
•  a person liable for alternative minimum tax; or
•  a person whose functional currency is not the U.S. dollar.
This section is based on the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), its
legislative history, existing and proposed regulations, published rulings and court decisions, all
as currently in effect. These laws are subject to change, possibly on a retroactive basis.
Table of Contents
51
If a partnership holds the offered securities, the tax treatment of a partner generally will depend
upon the status of the partner and the activities of the partnership. If you are a partner of a
partnership holding the offered securities, you should consult your tax advisor.
This summary does not address the alternative minimum tax, any non-income tax (such as estate
or gift taxes or the Medicare tax on certain investment income) or any state, local or non-U.S. tax
consequences of the acquisition, ownership or disposition of our securities.
You are urged to consult your own tax advisor regarding the U.S. federal, state and local and
other tax consequences of acquiring, owning and disposing of offered securities in your particular
circumstances.
U.S. Taxation of Ordinary Shares and ADSs
Taxation of Cash Distributions. The gross amount of any cash distribution (other than in
liquidation) that a U.S. holder receives with respect to Royal Dutch Shell’s ordinary shares or
ADSs (before reduction for Dutch tax, if any, withheld from such distributions) generally will be
includible in such U.S. holder’s gross income on the day on which, in the case of a holder of our
ordinary shares, such holder receives such distribution or, in the case of a holder of our ADSs,
the depositary receives such distribution on behalf of the holder of the applicable ADSs.
Depending on the amount of the distribution and the amount of the U.S. holder’s adjusted tax
basis in the applicable ordinary shares or ADSs, distributions will be taxed in the following
manner:
To the extent that distributions paid by Royal Dutch Shell with respect to the underlying ordinary
shares do not exceed Royal Dutch Shell’s current or accumulated earnings and profits (“E&P”),
as calculated for U.S. federal income tax purposes, such distributions will be taxed as dividends.
The current maximum rate of tax imposed on certain dividends received by U.S. holders that are
individuals is 20% (the “Reduced Rate”), so long as certain holding period requirements are met.
In order for dividends paid by a non-U.S. corporation to be eligible for the Reduced Rate and
therefore be qualified dividends, the non-U.S. corporation must be a Qualified Foreign
Corporation (“QFC”) and must not be a passive foreign investment company (a “PFIC”) in either
the taxable year of the distribution or the preceding taxable year. We believe that Royal Dutch
Shell will be a QFC and will not be a PFIC. As a result, dividends received by individual U.S.
holders will generally constitute qualified dividend income for U.S. federal income tax purposes
(see “—Taxation of Sale or Other Disposition”). There can be no assurance, however, that Royal
Dutch Shell will continue to be considered a QFC or that Royal Dutch Shell will not be classified
as a PFIC in the future. Thus, there can be no assurance that Royal Dutch Shell’s dividends will
continue to be eligible for the Reduced Rate. Special rules apply for purposes of determining the
recipient’s investment income (which limits deductions for investment interest) and non-U.S.
source income (which may affect the amount of foreign tax credit) and to certain extraordinary
dividends.
Because Royal Dutch Shell is not a U.S. corporation, dividends Royal Dutch Shell pays
generally will not be eligible for the dividends received deduction allowable to corporations
under the Code.
To the extent that distributions by Royal Dutch Shell exceed its current or accumulated E&P,
such distributions will be treated as a tax-free return of capital, to both individual and corporate
U.S. holders, to the extent of each such U.S. holder’s adjusted tax basis in Royal Dutch Shell’s
ordinary shares or ADSs, and will reduce such U.S. holder’s adjusted tax basis in the ordinary
shares or ADSs on a dollar-for-dollar basis (thereby increasing any gain or decreasing any loss
on a disposition of the ordinary shares or ADSs). To the extent that the distributions exceed the
U.S. holder’s adjusted tax basis in the ordinary shares or ADSs, such U.S. holder will be taxed
as having recognized gain on the sale or disposition of the ordinary shares or ADSs (see “—
Taxation of Sale or Other Disposition”).
It is anticipated that any distributions on our ordinary shares will be made in euros or pounds
sterling; any dividends so paid generally will be includible in a U.S. holder’s gross income in a
U.S. dollar amount calculated by reference to the exchange rate in effect on the day the U.S.
holder receives the dividend.
Table of Contents
52
Holders of our ADSs will receive dividend payments in U.S. dollars from the depositary. It is
anticipated that we will pay to the depositary a U.S. dollar amount calculated by reference to the
exchange rate in effect on the day that the dividend is declared, notwithstanding that the dividend
will have been declared in euros. In this case, the U.S. holder would include in gross income as
a dividend the U.S. dollar amount received by the depositary. Though not anticipated, it is
possible that we will pay to the depositary an amount in a currency other than U.S. dollars. In
such a case, any dividends so paid generally will be includible in a U.S. holder’s gross income in
a U.S. dollar amount calculated by reference to the exchange rate in effect on the day the
depositary receives the dividend. In such a case, the U.S. holder may recognize foreign
exchange gain or loss, taxable as ordinary income or loss, if the depositary does not convert
such currency into U.S. dollars before the U.S. holder is required to take the distribution into
gross income for U.S. federal income tax purposes. The gain or loss recognized will generally be
based upon the difference between the exchange rate in effect when such currency is actually
converted and the “spot” exchange rate in effect at the time the distribution is taken into account
and any gain realized generally will be treated as U.S.-source income for U.S. foreign tax credit
limitation purposes.
Dividends paid by Royal Dutch Shell generally will be treated as foreign source income for U.S.
foreign tax credit limitation purposes. Subject to certain limitations, U.S. holders may elect to
claim a foreign tax credit against their U.S. federal income tax liability for non-U.S. tax withheld (if
any) from dividends received in respect of the ordinary shares or ADSs. (See “— Dutch Taxation
— Dutch Taxation of Ordinary Shares and ADSs — Withholding tax on dividend payments” for a
discussion of Dutch withholding taxes and applicable treaty exemptions.) The limitation on non-
U.S. taxes eligible for credit is calculated separately with respect to specific classes of income.
For this purpose, dividends paid in respect of Royal Dutch Shell’s ordinary shares or ADSs
generally will be “passive category income” and therefore any U.S. federal income tax imposed
on these dividends cannot be offset by excess foreign tax credits that such U.S. holders may
have from non-U.S. source income not qualifying as passive income. In the case of certain types
of U.S. holders, any such dividends may be treated as “general category income” for purposes of
calculating the U.S. foreign tax credit limitations. U.S. holders that do not elect to claim a foreign
tax credit may instead claim a deduction for non-U.S. tax withheld (if any).
We understand that although dividends paid through the dividend access mechanism generally
will bear a U.K. tax credit available to individual taxpayers in the U.K., under the current U.S.-
U.K. income tax treaty (which came into force on March 31, 2003) that tax credit will not be
available to U.S. holders, and no offsetting withholding will be imposed by the U.K. As a result,
the cash amount of the dividend will be the gross dividend for U.S. federal income tax purposes,
and there will not be any U.K. tax in respect of which to claim a credit against any U.S. federal
income tax liability.
Taxation of Sale or Other Disposition. A U.S. holder generally will recognize capital gain or loss
upon a sale or other disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs in an amount equal to the difference
between the amount realized on their disposition and such U.S. holder’s adjusted tax basis in the
ordinary shares or ADSs.
A U.S. holder that sells ordinary shares to Royal Dutch Shell pursuant to the share buy-back
program will generally recognize capital gain or loss, provided that the sale results in a
“meaningful reduction” in the U.S. holder’s interest in the Company or meets certain other
conditions. In general, a sale by a small, noncontrolling shareholder will be a “meaningful
reduction” if the shareholder’s percentage ownership interest in Royal Dutch Shell is reduced as
a result of the sale (taking into account the reduced number of Royal Dutch Shell shares
outstanding after the share buy-back program and any other contemporaneous acquisitions or
dispositions of Royal Dutch Shell ordinary shares). If a sale of ordinary shares to Royal Dutch
Shell by a U.S. holder does not meet the conditions necessary for capital gain treatment, the full
purchase price paid by Royal Dutch Shell to that holder will be taxed as a distribution (see
“Taxation of Cash Distributions”). Each U.S. holder’s treatment will depend on his or her facts
and circumstances and therefore U.S. holders are urged to consult their own tax advisor
regarding the U.S. federal income tax consequences of participating in the share buy-back
program.
Table of Contents
53
Under current law, capital gains realized by corporate and individual taxpayers generally are
subject to U.S. federal income taxes at the same rate as ordinary income, except that long-term
capital gains realized by non-corporate U.S. holders are currently subject to U.S. federal income
taxes at a maximum rate of 20%. Certain limitations exist on the deductibility of capital losses by
both corporate and individual taxpayers. Capital gains and losses on the sale or other disposition
by a U.S. holder of ordinary shares or ADSs generally should constitute gains or losses from
sources within the U.S.
For cash basis U.S. holders who receive foreign currency in connection with a sale or other
taxable disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs, the amount realized will be based on the U.S.
dollar value of the foreign currency received with respect to such ordinary shares or ADSs as
determined on the settlement date of such sale or other taxable disposition.
Accrual basis U.S. holders may elect the same treatment required of cash basis taxpayers with
respect to a sale or other taxable disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs, provided that the
election is applied consistently from year to year. Such election may not be changed without the
consent of the U.S. Internal Revenue Service. Accrual basis U.S. holders who or which do not
elect to be treated as cash basis taxpayers (pursuant to the U.S. Treasury regulations applicable
to foreign currency transactions) for this purpose may have a foreign currency gain or loss for
U.S. federal income tax purposes because of differences between the U.S. dollar value of the
foreign currency received prevailing on the date of the sale or other taxable disposition of
ordinary shares or ADSs and the date of payment. Any such foreign currency gain or loss
generally will constitute gain or loss from sources within the U.S. and generally will be treated as
ordinary income or loss and would be in addition to gain or loss, if any, recognized on the sale or
other taxable disposition of ordinary shares or ADSs.
Deposits, Withdrawals and Pre-Releases. Deposits and withdrawals by U.S. holders of ordinary
shares in exchange for ADSs and of ADSs in exchange for ordinary shares will not be subject to
any U.S. federal income tax. The U.S. Treasury Department, however, has expressed concerns
that parties involved in transactions where depositary shares are pre-released may be taking
actions that are not consistent with the claiming of foreign tax credits by the holders of the
applicable ADSs. Accordingly, the analysis of the creditability of non-U.S. withholding taxes
described above could be affected by future actions that may be taken by the U.S. Treasury
Department.
U.S. Backup Withholding and Information Reporting. In general, information reporting
requirements will apply to payments of dividends on ordinary shares or ADSs and the proceeds
of certain sales of ordinary shares or ADSs in respect of U.S. holders other than certain exempt
persons (such as corporations). A backup withholding tax (at a rate of 28%) will apply to such
payments if the U.S. holder fails to provide a correct taxpayer identification number or other
certification of exempt status or, with respect to certain payments, the U.S. holder fails to report in
full all dividend and interest income and the U.S. Internal Revenue Service notifies the payer of
such under-reporting. Amounts withheld under the backup withholding rules may be credited
against a holder’s U.S. federal tax liability, and a refund of any excess amounts withheld under
the backup withholding rules may be obtained by filing the appropriate claim form with the U.S.
Internal Revenue Service.
U.S. Taxation of Warrants
A prospectus supplement will describe, if applicable, the U.S. federal income tax consequences
of your ownership of warrants and any equity or debt securities issued together with them.
U.S. Taxation of Debt Securities
This discussion deals only with debt securities that are treated as indebtedness for U.S. federal
income tax purposes. The U.S. federal income tax consequences of owning debt securities that
are not so treated will be discussed in an applicable prospectus supplement.
Table of Contents
54
Merger and Consolidation/Substitution of Issuer
If we engage in the activities described under “Description of Debt Securities — Provisions
Applicable to Each Indenture — Consolidation, Merger and Sale of Assets” or “Description of
Debt Securities — Provisions Applicable to Each Indenture — Substitution of Shell Finance as
Issuer”, a U.S. holder could be treated for U.S. federal income tax purposes as having
constructively exchanged its debt securities for new debt securities in a taxable transaction,
resulting in realization of gain or loss. U.S. holders are urged to consult their tax advisors with
regard to whether our engaging in such activities results in a constructive exchange and, if so,
the U.S. federal income tax consequences of such constructive exchange and of holding the new
debt securities such holder is deemed to receive.
Additional Amounts
All references to principal, interest or other amounts payable on the debt securities include any
additional amounts payable by Royal Dutch Shell as described in “Description of Debt Securities
— Provisions Applicable to Each Indenture — Payment of Additional Amounts”.
Interest
The tax treatment of interest paid on the debt securities depends upon whether the interest is
“Qualified Stated Interest”. A debt security may have some interest that is Qualified Stated
Interest and some that is not.
“Qualified Stated Interest” is any interest that meets all the following conditions:
•  It is payable at least once each year in cash or property (other than additional debt
securities).
•  It is payable over the entire term of the debt security.
•  It is payable at a single fixed rate or under a single formula.
•  The debt security has a maturity of more than one year from its issue date.
If any interest on a debt security is Qualified Stated Interest, then
•  If the U.S. holder is a cash method taxpayer (including most individual holders), such U.S.
holder must report that interest in income when received.
•  If the U.S. holder is an accrual method taxpayer, such U.S. holder must report that interest
in income as it accrues.
If any interest on a debt security is not Qualified Stated Interest, it is subject to the rules for
original issue discount (“OID”) described below.
Subject to certain limitations, U.S. holders may elect to claim a foreign tax credit against their
U.S. federal income tax liability for non-U.S. tax withheld (if any) from interest received in respect
of debt securities. Interest paid on, and OID, if any, accrued with respect to the debt securities that
are issued by Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance will constitute income from sources outside the
U.S., and generally will be “passive category income”, and therefore any U.S. federal income tax
imposed with respect to such interest and OID, if any, cannot be offset by excess foreign tax
credits from non-U.S. source income not qualifying as passive income. In the case of certain
types of U.S. holders, any such interest or OID may be treated as “general category income” for
purposes of calculating the U.S. foreign tax credit limitations. If the U.S. holder does not elect to
claim a foreign tax credit, such U.S. holder may instead claim a deduction for non-U.S. tax
withheld (if any).
55
Table of Contents
Determining Amount of OID
Debt securities that have OID are subject to additional tax rules. The amount of OID on a debt
security is determined as follows:
•  The amount of OID on a debt security is the “stated redemption price at maturity” of the
debt security minus the “issue price” of the debt security. If this amount is zero or negative,
there is no OID.
•  The “stated redemption price at maturity” of a debt security is the total amount of all
principal and interest payments to be made on the debt security, other than Qualified
Stated Interest. In a typical case where all interest is Qualified Stated Interest, the stated
redemption price at maturity is the same as the principal amount.
•  The “issue price” of a debt security is the first price at which a substantial amount of the
debt securities are sold to the public.
•  Under a special rule, if the OID determined under the general formula is very small, it is
disregarded and not treated as OID. This disregarded OID is called “de minimis OID”. If all
the interest on a debt security is Qualified Stated Interest, this rule applies if the amount of
OID is less than the following items multiplied together: (a) .25% (that is, 1/4 of 1%), (b)
the number of full years from the issue date to the maturity date of the debt security, and
(c) the principal amount.
Accrual of OID into Income
If a debt security has OID, the following consequences arise:
•  U.S. holders must include the total amount of OID as ordinary income over the life of the
debt security.
•  U.S. holders must include OID in income as the OID accrues on the debt securities, even
if such holders are on the cash method of accounting. This means that such holders are
required to report OID income, and in some cases pay tax on that income, before
receiving the cash that corresponds to that income.
•  OID accrues on a debt security on a “constant yield” method. This method takes into
account the compounding of interest. Under this method, the accrual of OID on a debt
security, combined with the inclusion into income of any Qualified Stated Interest on the
debt security, will result in the U.S. holder being taxable at approximately a constant
percentage of such U.S. holder’s unrecovered investment in the debt security.
•  The accruals of OID on a debt security generally will be less in the early years and more
in the later years.
•  If any of the interest paid on the debt security is not Qualified Stated Interest, that interest
is taxed solely as OID. It is not separately taxed when it is paid.
•  Tax basis in the debt security is initially its cost to the U.S. holder. It increases by any OID
(not including Qualified Stated Interest) reported as income. It decreases by any principal
payments received on the debt security and by any interest payments received that are
not Qualified Stated Interest.
Debt Securities Subject to Additional Tax Rules
Additional or different tax rules apply to several types of debt securities that we may issue.
Short-Term Debt Securities: We may issue debt securities with a maturity of one year or less.
These are referred to as “short-term debt securities”.
•  No interest on these debt securities is Qualified Stated Interest. Otherwise, the amount of
OID is calculated in the same manner as described above.
56
Table of Contents
•  U.S. holders may make certain elections concerning the method of accrual of OID on
short-term debt securities over the life of the debt securities.
•  If the U.S. holder is an accrual method taxpayer, a bank, a securities dealer, or in certain
other categories, OID must be included in income as it accrues (determined on a ratable
basis, unless the holder elects to use a constant yield method).
•  If the U.S. holder is a cash method taxpayer not subject to the accrual rule described
above, OID will not be included in income until payments on the debt security are actually
received. Alternatively, the U.S. holder can elect to include OID in income as it accrues
(determined on a ratable basis, unless the holder elects to use a constant yield method).
•  Two special rules apply if the U.S. holder is a cash method taxpayer and does not include
OID in income as it accrues. First, if the debt security is sold or it is paid at maturity,
producing a taxable gain, then the gain is ordinary income to the extent of the accrued
OID on the debt security at the time of the sale that has not yet been taken into income.
Second, if the U.S. holder borrows money (or does not repay outstanding debt) to acquire
or hold the debt security, then while the debt security is held, any interest on the
borrowing that corresponds to accrued OID on the debt security cannot be deducted until
OID is included in income.
Floating Rate Debt Securities: Floating rate debt securities are subject to special OID rules.
•  If the interest rate is determined using a single fixed formula and is based on objective
financial information (which may include a fixed interest rate for the initial period) or if it
reflects variations in the cost of newly borrowed funds, all the interest will be Qualified
Stated Interest. The amount of OID (if any), and the method of accrual of OID, will then be
calculated by converting the debt security’s initial floating rate into a fixed rate and by
applying the general OID rules described above.
•  If the debt security has more than one formula for interest rates, it is possible that the
combination of interest rates might create OID. We suggest that you consult your tax
advisor concerning the OID accruals on such a debt security.
Foreign Currency Debt Securities: A “foreign currency debt security” is a debt security
denominated in a currency other than U.S. dollars. Special tax rules apply to these debt
securities:
•  If the U.S. holder is a cash method taxpayer, such holder will be taxed on the U.S. dollar
value of any foreign currency received as interest. The dollar value will be determined as
of the date when payments are received.
•  If the U.S. holder is an accrual method taxpayer, such holder must report interest income
as it accrues. The U.S. holder can use the average foreign currency exchange rate during
the relevant interest accrual period (or, if that period spans two taxable years, during the
portion of the interest accrual period in the relevant taxable year). In this case, such
holder will recognize foreign exchange gain or loss upon receipt of the foreign currency to
reflect actual exchange rates at that time. Certain alternative elections also may be
available.
•  Any OID on foreign currency debt securities as well as the amortization of any bond
premium will be determined in the relevant foreign currency. OID must be accrued in the
same manner that an accrual basis holder accrues interest income.
•  The initial tax basis in a foreign currency debt security is the amount of U.S. dollars paid
for the debt security (or, if paid in foreign currency, the value of that foreign currency on
the purchase date). Adjustments are made to reflect OID and other items as described
above.
•  If foreign currency is collected upon the maturity of the debt security, or if the debt security
is sold for foreign currency, gain or loss will be based on the U.S. dollar value of the
foreign currency received. For a publicly traded foreign currency debt security, this value
is determined for cash basis taxpayers
57
Table of Contents
on the settlement date for the sale of the debt security, and for accrual basis taxpayers on
the trade date for the sale (although such taxpayers can also elect the settlement date).
The tax basis in the foreign currency will then be equal to the value reported on the sale.
•  Any gain or loss on the sale or retirement of a debt security will be ordinary income or
loss and sourced to the U.S. to the extent it arises from currency fluctuations between the
purchase date and sale date. Any gain or loss on the sale of foreign currency will also be
ordinary income or loss.
Other Categories of Debt Securities: Additional rules may apply to certain other categories of
debt securities. The Prospectus Supplement for these debt securities may describe these rules.
In addition, we suggest that you consult your tax advisor in these situations. These categories of
debt securities include:
•  debt securities with contingent payments;
•  debt securities that can be put to us before their maturity;
•  debt securities that are callable by us before their maturity, other than typical calls at a
premium;
•  indexed debt securities with an index tied to currencies; and
•  debt securities the maturity of which is extendable at the U.S. holder’s option or at our
option.
Premium and Discount
Additional special rules apply in the following situations involving premium or discount:
•  If a debt security is bought in the initial offering for more than its stated redemption price at
maturity — disregarding that part of the purchase price allocated to accrued interest — the
excess amount paid will be “bond premium”. The U.S. holder can elect to use bond
premium to reduce taxable interest income from the debt security. Under the election, the
total premium will be allocated to interest periods, as an offset to interest income, on a
“constant yield” basis over the life of the debt security — that is, with a smaller offset in the
early periods and a larger offset in the later periods. This election is made on the U.S.
holder’s tax return for the year in which the debt security is acquired. However, if the
election is made, it automatically applies to all debt instruments with bond premium that
the U.S. holder owns during that year or that are acquired at any time thereafter, unless
the U.S. Internal Revenue Service permits such holder to revoke the election. A U.S.
holder that does not elect to amortize bond premium and that holds a debt security to
maturity generally will be required to treat the premium as a capital loss when the debt
security matures.
•  Similarly, if a debt security has OID and it is bought in the initial offering for more than the
issue price (but less than the stated redemption price at maturity), the excess is called
“acquisition premium”. The amount of OID the U.S. holder is required to include in income
will be reduced by this amount over the life of the debt security.
•  If a debt security is bought in the initial offering for less than the initial offering price to the
public, special rules concerning “market discount” may apply.
Appropriate adjustments to tax basis are made in these situations. We suggest that you consult
your tax advisor if you are in one of these situations.
Accrual Election
The U.S. holder can elect to be taxed on the income from the debt security in a different manner
than described above. Under the election:
•  No interest is Qualified Stated Interest.
58
Table of Contents
•  Amounts are included in income as they economically accrue. The accrual of income is in
accordance with the constant yield method, based on the compounding of interest. The
accrual of income takes into account stated interest, OID (including de minimis OID),
market discount and premium.
•  Tax basis is increased by all accruals of income and decreased by all payments received
on the debt security.
Sale or Retirement of Debt Securities
On sale or retirement of the debt security:
•  The U.S. holder will have taxable gain or loss equal to the difference between the amount
received and such holder’s tax basis in the debt security. Such gain or loss will be U.S.
source. The tax basis in the debt security is such holder’s cost, subject to certain
adjustments.
•  The U.S. holder’s gain or loss will generally be capital gain or loss, and will be long term
capital gain or loss if the debt security was held for more than one year. For an individual,
the maximum tax rate on long term capital gains is currently 20%.
•  If (a) the debt security was purchased with de minimis OID, (b) no election to accrue all
OID into income was made, and (c) the principal amount of the debt security is received
by the U.S. holder upon the sale or retirement, then such holder will generally have
capital gain equal to the amount of the de minimis OID.
•  If the debt security is sold between interest payment dates, a portion of the amount
received reflects interest that has accrued on the debt security but has not yet been paid
by the sale date. That amount is treated as ordinary interest income and not as sale
proceeds.
•  All or part of the gain may be ordinary income rather than capital gain in certain cases,
including sales of short-term debt securities, debt securities with market discount, debt
securities with contingent payments and foreign currency debt securities.
Disclosure Requirements
U.S. Treasury regulations meant to require reporting of certain tax shelter transactions
(“Reportable Transactions”) could be interpreted to cover transactions generally not regarded as
tax shelters, including certain foreign currency transactions. Under U.S. Treasury regulations,
certain transactions may be characterized as Reportable Transactions including, in certain
circumstances, a sale, exchange, retirement or other taxable disposition of debt denominated in a
foreign currency, which results in a foreign currency loss exceeding certain thresholds. Persons
considering the purchase of debt denominated in a foreign currency should consult with their
own tax advisers to determine the tax return disclosure obligations, if any, with respect to an
investment in debt denominated in a foreign currency, including any requirement to file IRS Form
8886 (Reportable Transaction Disclosure Statement).
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding
Under the tax rules concerning information reporting to the IRS:
•  Assuming the debt securities are held through a broker or other securities intermediary,
the intermediary must provide information to the IRS and to the U.S. holder on IRS Form
1099 concerning interest, OID and retirement proceeds on the debt securities, unless an
exemption applies. As discussed above under “Premium and Discount”, if the debt
securities have OID, the amount reported to such holder may have to be adjusted to
reflect the amount that must be reported in such holder’s tax return.
•  Similarly, unless an exemption applies, the U.S. holder must provide the intermediary
with such holder’s Taxpayer Identification Number for its use in reporting information to
the IRS. If the U.S.
Table of Contents
59
holder is an individual, this is such holder’s social security number. The U.S. holder is
also required to comply with other IRS requirements concerning information reporting.
•  If the U.S. holder is subject to these requirements but does not comply, the intermediary
must withhold (at a rate of 28%) of all amounts payable on the debt securities (including
principal payments). This is called “backup withholding”. If the intermediary withholds
payments, the U.S. holder may credit the withheld amount against its federal income tax
liability.
•  All individuals are subject to these requirements. Some holders, including all
corporations, tax-exempt organizations and individual retirement accounts, are exempt
from these requirements, but may have to establish their entitlement to an exemption.
Tax Reporting
U.S. individuals that hold certain “specified foreign financial assets” (which include stock or
securities issued by a foreign corporation) are generally required to file information reports with
respect to such assets with their U.S. federal income tax returns. U.S. holders are urged to
consult with their own tax advisors regarding the possible implications of this legislation on their
investment in our securities.
U.K. Taxation
The following is a summary of the material U.K. tax consequences for a U.S. holder of the
ownership and disposal of securities we may offer pursuant to this prospectus. This summary is
the opinion of our U.K. tax counsel, Slaughter and May, as to the matters of law set out in this
section headed “U.K. Taxation”. It is based on current U.K. law and on what is understood to be
the current practice of Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs (“HMRC”) in the U.K., either of which
is subject to change, possibly with retroactive effect. Any change in applicable laws or the current
practice of HMRC, or any inaccuracy in the documents upon which Slaughter and May have
relied, may affect the continuing validity of their opinion. Slaughter and May assume no
responsibility to inform you of any such change or inaccuracy that may occur or come to their
attention. The opinion of Slaughter and May is being provided to Royal Dutch Shell solely for its
benefit in connection with this registration statement and may not be transmitted to anyone else,
reproduced, quoted, summarized or relied upon by anyone else or for any other purpose, or
quoted or referred to in any public document or filed with anyone without the express written
consent of Slaughter and May. This summary applies only to U.S. holders who hold their
securities as an investment and are the absolute beneficial owners of them, who are not resident
for tax purposes in the U.K. or carrying on a trade (or profession or vocation) in the U.K. and who
are not (and have not in the previous seven years been) employees of Royal Dutch Shell or of
any person connected with Royal Dutch Shell. It assumes that holders of Royal Dutch Shell
ADSs will in practice be treated for the purposes of U.K. tax as the beneficial owners of the Royal
Dutch Shell ordinary shares represented by such Royal Dutch Shell ADSs.
The paragraphs below do not attempt to describe all possible U.K. tax considerations that may
be relevant to a U.S. holder. Any U.S. holders who are in any doubt about any aspect of their
particular tax position should consult appropriate independent tax advisers.
For the purposes of this section a person is a U.S. holder at any time if, at that time, he/she is
regarded as a resident of the U.S. for U.S. tax purposes.
U.K. Taxation of Ordinary Shares and ADSs
U.K. Tax on Income and Chargeable Gains
U.S. holders who satisfy the criteria set out in the first paragraph above under the heading “U.K.
Taxation” will not be subject to U.K. tax on income or chargeable gains in respect of the
ownership and disposal of Royal Dutch Shell ordinary shares or Royal Dutch Shell ADSs or the
receipt of any dividends that are paid on them.
Table of Contents
60
There is however an exception to this rule in the case of a U.S. holder who is an individual, who
has ceased to be resident for tax purposes in the U.K. or is regarded as non resident for the
purposes of a relevant double taxation treaty (“Treaty Non Resident”) but then resumes residence
in the U.K. or, as the case may be, ceases to be regarded as Treaty Non Resident, before five
complete tax years have passed (or, for departures before April 6, 2013, ceases to be resident or
ordinarily resident for U.K. tax purposes or becomes Treaty Non Resident for a period of less
than five tax years). Such a holder may be liable to U.K. capital gains tax (subject to any
available exemption or relief) on a disposal of Royal Dutch Shell ordinary shares or Royal Dutch
Shell ADSs made whilst not resident for tax purposes in the U.K. or whilst Treaty Non Resident.
U.K. Inheritance Tax
A U.S. holder who is an individual domiciled in the U.S. for the purposes of the U.K./U.S. Estate
and Gift Tax Treaty and who is not a national of the U.K. for the purposes of the U.K./U.S. Estate
and Gift Tax Treaty will not be subject to U.K. inheritance tax in respect of Royal Dutch Shell
ordinary shares or Royal Dutch Shell ADSs on the individual’s death or on a gift of such Royal
Dutch Shell ordinary shares or the Royal Dutch Shell ADSs made during the individual’s lifetime
unless, inter alia, they are part of the business property of the individual’s permanent
establishment situated in the U.K. or pertain to the individual’s U.K. fixed base used for the
performance of independent personal services. In the exceptional case where Royal Dutch Shell
ordinary shares or Royal Dutch Shell ADSs are subject to both U.K. inheritance tax and U.S.
federal estate or gift tax, the U.K./U.S. Estate and Gift Tax Treaty generally provides for tax paid
in the U.K. to be credited against tax payable in the U.S., based on priority rules set out in that
treaty.
U.K. Stamp Duty and Stamp Duty Reserve Tax (“SDRT”)
A conveyance or transfer on sale of Royal Dutch Shell ordinary shares other than to a depositary
or clearance service or the nominee or agent of a depositary or clearance service will usually be
subject to ad valorem stamp duty, although not where the amount or value of the consideration of
the transfer is £1,000 or under and the transfer instrument is certified at £1,000 (a “Low Value
Transaction”), and generally at the rate of 0.5% of the amount or value of the consideration for the
transfer (rounded up to the nearest £5). An unconditional agreement for such transfer, or a
conditional agreement which subsequently becomes unconditional, will be liable to SDRT,
unless the transfer is a Low Value Transaction, generally at the rate of 0.5% of the consideration
for the transfer; but such liability will be cancelled if the agreement is completed by a duly
stamped instrument of transfer within six years of the date of the agreement or, if the agreement
was conditional, the date the agreement became unconditional. Where the stamp duty is paid,
any SDRT previously paid will be repaid on the making of an appropriate claim. Stamp duty and
SDRT are normally paid by the purchaser.
Subject to certain exemptions, UK legislation does currently provide for a charge to SDRT (or in
the case of transfer, stamp duty) on the issue or transfer of Royal Dutch Shell ordinary shares to
particular persons providing a clearance service, their nominees or agents, or to an issuer of
depositary receipts, or to its nominee or agent. The rate of stamp duty or SDRT, as the case may
be, is generally 1.5% of either (i) in the case of an issue of Royal Dutch Shell ordinary shares, the
issue price of the Royal Dutch Shell ordinary shares concerned; or (ii) in the case of a transfer of
Royal Dutch Shell ordinary shares, the amount or value of the consideration for the transfer or, in
some circumstances, the value of the Royal Dutch Shell ordinary shares concerned, in the case
of stamp duty rounded up if necessary to the nearest multiple of £5.
However, following litigation, HMRC has confirmed that it will no longer seek to apply 1.5%
SDRT on an issue of shares into a clearance service or depository receipt arrangement on the
basis that the charge is not compatible with EU law. HMRC’s view is that the 1.5% SDRT or
stamp duty charge will continue to apply to transfers of shares into a clearance service or
depository receipt arrangement unless they are an integral part of an issue of share capital. This
view is currently being challenged in further litigation. Accordingly, specific professional advice
should be sought before effecting such a transaction.
Table of Contents
61
No stamp duty need be paid on the acquisition or transfer of Royal Dutch Shell ADSs, provided
that any instrument of transfer or contract of sale is executed, and remains at all times, outside the
U.K. Based on our understanding of HMRC’s application of the exemption from SDRT for
depositary receipts, an agreement for the transfer of Royal Dutch Shell ADSs will not, in practice,
give rise to a liability to SDRT.
No stamp duty need be paid on the acquisition or transfer of interests in Royal Dutch Shell
ordinary shares held within a clearance service, provided that any instrument of transfer or
contract of sale is executed, and remains at all times, outside the U.K. An agreement for the
transfer of interests in Royal Dutch Shell ordinary shares held within a clearance service will not
give rise to a liability to SDRT provided that, at the time the agreement is made, the clearance
service satisfies various conditions laid down in the relevant U.K. legislation.
U.K. Taxation of Warrants
A prospectus supplement will describe, if applicable, the U.K. tax consequences of your
ownership of warrants of Royal Dutch Shell and any equity or debt securities issued together
with the warrants.
U.K. Taxation of Debt Securities
Payments and Disposal (including Redemption)
U.S. holders who satisfy the criteria set out in the first paragraph above under the heading “U.K.
Taxation” will not be directly assessed to U.K. tax on income or chargeable gains in respect of
interest on, or the disposal (including redemption) of, debt securities issued by Royal Dutch Shell
or Shell Finance.
Payments of principal and interest on debt securities issued by Shell Finance, and payments of
principal on debt securities issued by Royal Dutch Shell, will not be subject to withholding or
deduction for or on account of U.K. tax.
Provided that interest payments on debt securities issued by Royal Dutch Shell do not have a
U.K. source, such payments will also not be subject to withholding or deduction for or on account
of U.K. tax.
Even if such payments have a U.K. source, they will not be subject to withholding or deduction
for or on account of U.K. tax if:
•  such debt securities carry a right to interest and are listed on a recognized stock
exchange as defined in Section 1005 of the Income Tax Act 2007. Securities which are
included on the Official List of the U.K., along with securities which are officially listed, in
a country outside the U.K. in which there is a recognized stock exchange, in accordance
with provisions corresponding to those generally applicable in European Economic Area
states, will satisfy this requirement if they are admitted to trading on a recognized stock
exchange. The London Stock Exchange and the New York Stock Exchange, inter alia,
are recognized stock exchanges for these purposes; or
•  the maturity of the relevant debt security is less than one year from the date of issue and
the debt security is not issued under arrangements the effect of which is to render such
debt security part of a borrowing with a total term of one year or more.
In all other cases, if payments of interest on debt securities issued by Royal Dutch Shell have a
U.K. source, such payments would in principle be made to U.S. holders after deduction of tax at
the basic rate, which is currently 20%. However, no such deduction need be made if an
appropriate claim relating to that payment has been validly made and accepted by HMRC under
the U.K./U.S. Tax Treaty in respect of income and capital gains and Royal Dutch Shell has
received from HMRC a direction under that treaty allowing the payment to be made without the
deduction of U.K. tax.
Table of Contents
Guarantee Payments
62
Neither U.S. holders who satisfy the criteria set out in the first paragraph above headed “U.K.
Taxation” nor Shell Finance will be directly assessed to U.K. tax on income or chargeable gains
in respect of any payments made by Royal Dutch Shell under the guarantee.
Depending on the legal analysis of any payment made by Royal Dutch Shell under the
guarantee to the persons mentioned above it is possible that such payment could be subject to
withholding or deduction for or on account of U.K. tax if it is regarded as having a U.K. source.
However, no such withholding need be made nor tax deducted if an appropriate claim relating to
that payment has been validly made and accepted by HMRC under the U.K./U.S. Tax Treaty in
respect of income and capital gains and Royal Dutch Shell has received from HMRC a direction
under that treaty allowing the payment to be made without the deduction of U.K. tax.
U.K. Inheritance Tax
A U.S. holder who is an individual domiciled in the U.S. for the purposes of the U.K./U.S. Estate
and Gift Tax Treaty and who is not a national of the U.K. for the purposes of the U.K./U.S. Estate
and Gift Tax Treaty will not be subject to U.K. inheritance tax in respect of debt securities issued
by Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance on the individual’s death or on a gift of such debt
securities made during the individual’s lifetime unless, inter alia, they are part of the business
property of the individual’s permanent establishment situated in the U.K. or pertain to the
individual’s U.K. fixed base used for the performance of independent personal services. In the
exceptional case where debt securities are subject to both U.K. inheritance tax and U.S. federal
estate or gift tax, the U.K./U.S. Estate and Gift Tax Treaty generally provides for tax paid in the
U.K. to be credited against tax payable in the U.S., based on priority rules set out in that treaty.
U.K. Stamp Duty and SDRT
No U.K. stamp duty or SDRT will generally be payable by a holder of debt securities on the
creation, issue or redemption of debt securities by Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance.
No liability for U.K. stamp duty or SDRT will arise on a transfer of, or an agreement to transfer,
debt securities issued by Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance unless such securities carry a right
(exercisable then or later) at the time that the instrument of transfer is executed of conversion into
shares or other securities or to the acquisition of shares or other securities, or at that or any
earlier time such securities carry or have carried:
•  a right to interest the amount of which falls, or has fallen to be, determined to any extent
by reference to the results of, or of any part of, a business or to the value of any property
(other than where (i) the right reduces in the event of the results of, or of any part of, a
business improving, or the value of any property increasing; or (ii) the right increases in
the event of the results of, or of any part of, a business deteriorating, or the value of any
property diminishing);
•  a right to interest the amount of which exceeds a reasonable commercial return on their
nominal amount; or
•  a right on repayment to an amount which exceeds their nominal amount and is not
reasonably comparable with what is generally repayable (in respect of debt securities
with a similar nominal amount) under the terms of issue of debt securities listed on the
Official List of the London Stock Exchange.
Dutch Taxation
The following describes the material Dutch tax consequences for a U.S. holder of securities
which may be offered under this prospectus who is neither resident nor deemed to be resident in
the Netherlands for Dutch tax purposes and, in the event such holder is an individual, has not
opted to be treated as a resident in the Netherlands
Table of Contents
63
for the purposes of the Dutch Income Tax Act 2001, in respect of the ownership and disposal of
his/her securities. This summary is the opinion of our Dutch tax counsel, De Brauw, and is limited
as described in this section. This description is not intended to be applicable in all respects and
to all categories of U.S. holders.
For the purpose of this section, “Dutch Taxes” shall mean taxes of whatever nature levied by or
on behalf of the Netherlands or any of its subdivisions or taxing authorities. The Netherlands
means the part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands located in Europe.
This section is intended as general information only and it does not describe all possible Dutch
tax considerations or consequences that may be relevant to a U.S. holder. For Dutch tax
purposes, a holder of securities may include an individual who or an entity that does not have the
legal title of the securities, but to whom nevertheless the securities are attributed based either on
such individual or entity holding a beneficial interest in the securities or based on specific
statutory provisions, including statutory provisions pursuant to which the securities are attributed
to an individual who is, or who has directly or indirectly inherited from a person who was, the
settlor, grantor or similar originator of a trust, foundation or similar entity that holds the securities.
Any holder of securities is advised to consult with his/her tax advisors with regard to the tax
consequences of ownership and disposal of securities in his/her particular circumstances.
This section does not describe the possible Dutch tax considerations or consequences that may
be relevant to a U.S. holder of securities who receives or has received any benefits from these
securities as employment income, deemed employment income or otherwise as compensation.
Neither does this section describe the possible Dutch tax considerations or consequences that
may be relevant to a U.S. holder of securities who has a (fictitious) substantial interest in Royal
Dutch Shell.
Generally, a holder has a substantial interest (aanmerkelijk belang) in Royal Dutch Shell if such
holder, alone or together with his/her partner, directly or indirectly:
(i) owns, or holds certain rights on, shares representing, directly or indirectly, 5% or more of
the total issued and outstanding capital of Royal Dutch Shell or of the issued and
outstanding capital of any class of shares of Royal Dutch Shell;
(ii) holds rights to acquire shares, whether or not already issued, representing, directly or
indirectly, 5% or more of the total issued and outstanding capital of Royal Dutch Shell, or
of the issued and outstanding capital of any class of shares of Royal Dutch Shell; or
(iii) owns, or holds certain rights on, profit participating certificates that relate to 5% or more of
the annual profit of Royal Dutch Shell or to 5% or more of the liquidation proceeds of
Royal Dutch Shell.
A holder will also have a substantial interest if his/her partner or one of certain relatives of the
holder or of his/her partner has a (fictitious) substantial interest.
Generally, a holder has a fictitious substantial interest (fictief aanmerkelijk belang) if, without
having an actual substantial interest in Royal Dutch Shell:
(i) an enterprise has been contributed in exchange for shares of Royal Dutch Shell on an
elective non-recognition basis;
(ii) the shares have been obtained under inheritance law or matrimonial law, on a non-
recognition basis, while the disposing holder had a substantial interest in Royal Dutch
Shell;
(iii) the shares have been acquired pursuant to a share merger, legal merger or legal
demerger, on an elective non-recognition basis, while the holder prior to this transaction
had a substantial interest in an entity that was party thereto; or
(iv) the shares held by the holder, prior to dilution, qualified as a substantial interest and, by
election, no gain was recognized upon disqualification of these shares.
64
Table of Contents
Except as otherwise indicated, this section only addresses Dutch tax legislation and regulations,
as in effect on the date hereof and as interpreted in published case law on the date hereof and is
subject to change after such date, including changes that could have retroactive effect. A change
in legislation or regulations may thus invalidate all or part of this section.
Unless otherwise specifically stated herein, this section does not express any opinion on Dutch
international tax law or on the rules promulgated under or by any treaty or treaty organization and
does not express any opinion on any Dutch legal matter other than Dutch tax law.
Dutch Taxation of Ordinary Shares and ADSs
Withholding tax on dividend payments
Dividends distributed by us, Royal Dutch Shell, to a U.S. holder of an ordinary share or ADS are
generally subject to withholding tax imposed by the Netherlands at a rate of 15%. Generally, we
are responsible for the withholding of such dividend withholding tax at source; the dividend
withholding tax is for the account of the U.S. holder. Dividends paid through the dividend access
mechanism to holders of Class B ordinary shares will not be subject to any Dutch withholding
tax. Dividends distributed by us include, but are not limited to:
a) distributions of profits in cash or in kind, whatever they may be named or in whatever
form, including, for the avoidance of doubt, (i) distributions of profits on new Class A
ordinary shares or, as the case may be, on new Class A ADSs received under the
Programme, and (ii) any distribution of cash received under the Programme;
b) proceeds from our liquidation or, as a rule, proceeds from the repurchase of shares by us,
in excess of the average paid-in capital recognized for Dutch dividend withholding tax
purposes;
c)
the par value of shares issued to a holder of shares or an increase in the par value of
shares, to the extent that no contribution, recognized for Dutch dividend withholding tax
purposes, has been made or will be made (however, under this rule, new Class A
ordinary Shares or, as the case may be, new Class A ADSs received under the
Programme are not subject to Dutch withholding tax); and
d) partial repayment of paid-in capital that is:
(i)
not recognized for Dutch dividend withholding tax purposes; or
(ii)
recognized for Dutch dividend withholding tax purposes, to the extent that we have
net profits (zuivere winst), unless (I) the general meeting of our shareholders has
resolved in advance to make such repayment; and (II) the par value of the shares
concerned has been reduced with an equal amount by way of an amendment to the
Articles.
As stated above under (b), Dutch tax law treats share buy-backs for cancellation as being subject
to withholding tax, however an exemption applies by virtue of their being carried out within
certain annual quantitative limits. Buy-backs of Class A ordinary shares (including Class A
ADSs) within these limits will not be subject to Dutch withholding tax. It has been confirmed by
the Dutch Revenue Service that a repurchase of Class B ordinary shares will be exempt from
Dutch withholding tax if the repurchase price does not exceed the average paid-in capital
recognized for Dutch dividend withholding tax purposes on the Class B ordinary shares.
In any event, any withholding tax arising on a share buy-back would be borne by us and not the
selling U.S. holder.
A U.S. holder who is entitled to the benefits of the 1992 Double Taxation Convention between
the U.S. and the Netherlands, as amended most recently by the Protocol signed March 8, 2004
(the “Convention”), will be entitled to a reduction in the Dutch withholding tax, either by way of a
full or partial exemption at source or by way of a full or partial refund, as follows:
•  if the U.S. holder is an exempt pension trust as described in article 35 of the Convention,
or an exempt organization as described in article 36 of the Convention, the U.S. holder
will be exempt from Dutch dividend withholding tax; and
65
Table of Contents
•  if the U.S. holder is a company which holds directly at least 10% of the voting power in us,
the U.S. holder will be subject to Dutch dividend withholding tax at a rate not exceeding
5%.
According to Dutch domestic anti-dividend stripping rules, no credit against Dutch (corporate)
income tax, exemption from, reduction in or refund of, Dutch dividend withholding tax will be
granted if the recipient of the dividend paid by us is not considered to be the beneficial owner
(uiteindelijk gerechtigde) of such dividends as meant in these rules.
Dutch Taxes on Income and Capital Gains
A U.S. holder will not be subject to Dutch taxes on income or on capital gains in respect of the
ownership and disposal of ordinary shares or ADSs, other than Dutch dividend withholding tax
as described above, in each case, except if:
(i)
the holder derives profits from an enterprise, whether as entrepreneur (ondernemer) or
pursuant to a co-entitlement to the net worth of such enterprise, other than as an
entrepreneur or a shareholder, which enterprise is, in whole or in part, carried on through
a permanent establishment (vaste inrichting) or a permanent representative (vaste
vertegenwoordiger) in the Netherlands, to which the ordinary shares or ADSs are
attributable;
(ii) the holder is an individual and derives benefits from miscellaneous activities (resultaat uit
overige werkzaamheden) carried out in the Netherlands in respect of the ordinary shares
or ADSs, including, without limitation, activities which are beyond the scope of active
portfolio investment activities;
(iii) the holder is not an individual and is entitled to a share in the profits of an enterprise or a
co-entitlement to the net worth of an enterprise which is effectively managed in the
Netherlands, other than by way of the holding of securities and to which enterprise the
ordinary shares or ADSs are attributable; or
(iv) the holder is an individual and is entitled to a share in the profits of an enterprise that is
effectively managed in the Netherlands, other than by way of securities, and to which
enterprise the ordinary shares or ADSs are attributable.
Dutch Gift and Inheritance Tax
No Dutch gift or inheritance tax is due in respect of any gift of ordinary shares or ADSs by, or
inheritance of ordinary shares or ADSs on the death of, a U.S. holder of ordinary shares or ADSs,
except if:
(i) at the time of the gift or death of the holder, the holder is resident, or is deemed to be
resident, in the Netherlands;
(ii) the holder passes away within 180 days after the date of the gift of the ordinary shares or
ADSs and is not, or not deemed to be, at the time of the gift, but is, or deemed to be, at the
time of his death, resident in the Netherlands; or
(iii) the gift of the ordinary shares or ADSs is made under a condition precedent and the
holder is resident, or is deemed to be resident, in the Netherlands at the time the
condition is fulfilled.
Dutch Taxation of Warrants
A prospectus supplement will describe, if applicable, the Dutch income tax consequences of your
ownership of warrants and any equity or Debt Securities issued together with the warrants.
66
Table of Contents
Dutch Taxation of Debt Securities
Dutch Withholding Tax
All payments made under debt securities issued by Royal Dutch Shell or Shell Finance (the
“Issuer”) will not be subject to any withholding tax, except if the debt securities function as equity
for the Issuer, in which case any payment under the debt securities, other than a repayment of
principal, will generally be subject to 15% Dutch dividend withholding tax. As determined by
case law, debt securities function as equity if:
(i)
the debt securities are subordinated to senior debt of the Issuer;
(ii) the debt securities do not have a final maturity or have a term of more than 50 years; and
(iii) any amount whatsoever to be paid under the debt securities is, either wholly or mainly
dependant on the amount of profits realized or distributed by the Issuer.
Dutch Individual and Corporate Income Tax
A U.S holder of debt securities (“Debt Holder”) will not be subject to any Dutch taxes on any
payment made to the Debt Holder under the debt securities or on any capital gain made by the
Debt Holder from the disposal, or deemed disposal, or redemption of, the debt securities, other
than Dutch dividend withholding tax as described above, except if:
(i)
the Debt Holder derives profits from an enterprise, whether as entrepreneur (ondernemer)
or pursuant to a co-entitlement to the net worth of the enterprise, other than as an
entrepreneur or a shareholder, which enterprise is, in whole or in part, carried on through
a permanent establishment (vaste inrichting) or a permanent representative (vaste
vertegenwoordiger) in the Netherlands, to which the debt securities are attributable; or
(ii) the Debt Holder is an individual and derives benefits from miscellaneous activities
(overige werkzaamheden) carried out in the Netherlands in respect of the debt securities,
including without limitation activities which are beyond the scope of active portfolio
investment activities;
(iii) the Debt Holder is not an individual and is entitled to a share in the profits of an enterprise
or a co-entitlement to the net worth of enterprise, other than by way of securities, that is
effectively managed in the Netherlands and to which enterprise the debt securities are
attributable; or
(iv) if the Debt Holder is an individual and is entitled to a share in the profits of an enterprise,
other than by way of securities that is effectively managed in the Netherlands, and to
which enterprise the debt securities are attributable.
Dutch Gift and Inheritance Taxes
No Dutch gift tax or inheritance tax is due in respect of any gift of debt securities by, or
inheritance of debt securities on the death of, a Debt Holder, except if:
(i) at the time of the gift or death of the Debt Holder, the Debt Holder is resident, or is
deemed to be resident, in the Netherlands;
(ii) the Debt Holder passes away within 180 days after the date of the gift of the debt
securities and is not, or not deemed to be, at the time of the gift, but is, or deemed to be, at
the time of his death, resident in the Netherlands; or
(iii) the gift of the debt securities is made under a condition precedent and the Debt Holder is
resident, or is deemed to be resident, in the Netherlands at the time the condition is
fulfilled.
Table of Contents
Other Taxes and Duties
67
No other Dutch taxes, including turnover tax and taxes of a documentary nature, such as capital
tax, stamp or registration tax or duty, are payable in the Netherlands by or on behalf of a holder of
debt securities and a holder of ordinary shares or ADSs by reason only of the purchase,
ownership and disposal of the debt securities, ordinary shares and ADSs.
European Directive on the Taxation of Savings
Based on Directive 2003/48/EC (the “Directive”), the tax authorities of the EU Member States
provide each other with details of payments of interest and similar income made to individuals
who are the beneficial owner of those payments, but the Directive permits Austria and
Luxembourg instead to impose a withholding tax on the payments concerned for a “transitional
period”. The Directive also provides that no such withholding tax should be levied where the
beneficial owner of the payment authorizes an exchange of information and/or where the
beneficial owner presents a certificate from the tax authority of the EU Member State in which the
beneficial owner is resident. In April 2013, the Luxembourg Government announced its intention
to abolish the withholding tax system with effect from January 1, 2015, in favour of automatic
information exchange under the Directive.
A number of non-EU countries and certain dependent or associated territories have agreed to
adopt similar measures (in certain cases on a reciprocal basis). The Directive does not preclude
EU Member States from levying other types of withholding tax.
Amendments to the Directive adopted by the Council of the European Union on March 24, 2014
will, when implemented, expand the circumstances in which payments that indirectly benefit an
individual resident in another EU Member State must be reported, including where the payment
is made to, or secured for, certain trusts or certain other legal arrangements. The amendments
will also expand the range of payments covered by the Directive, in particular to include
additional types of income payable on securities. EU Member States are required to apply these
new requirements from January 1, 2017 onwards. Once these amendments are implemented,
withholding in the relevant EU Member State(s) may occur in a wider range of circumstances
than at present.
Table of Contents
68
We may sell the securities offered by this prospectus in and outside the U.S. through
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
underwriters or dealers, directly to purchasers or through agents.
The prospectus supplement relating to any offering will include the following information:
•  the terms of the offering;
•  the names of any underwriters or agents;
•  the purchase price of the securities from us and, if the purchase price is not payable in
U.S. dollars, the currency or composite currency in which the purchase price is payable;
•  the net proceeds to us from the sale of the securities;
•  any delayed delivery arrangements;
•  any underwriting discounts, commissions and other items constituting underwriters’
compensation;
•  the initial public offering price;
•  any discounts or concessions allowed or reallowed or paid to dealers; and
•  any commissions paid to agents.
Sale Through Underwriters or Dealers
If we use underwriters in the sale of securities, they will acquire the securities for their own
account. The underwriters may resell the securities from time to time in one or more transactions,
including negotiated transactions, at a fixed public offering price or at varying prices determined
at the time of sale. Underwriters may offer securities to the public either through underwriting
syndicates represented by one or more managing underwriters or directly by one or more firms
acting as underwriters. Unless we inform you otherwise in the prospectus supplement, the
obligations of the underwriters to purchase the securities will be subject to conditions, and the
underwriters will be obligated to purchase all the securities if they purchase any of them. The
underwriters may change from time to time any initial public offering price and any discounts or
concessions allowed or reallowed or paid to dealers.
During and after an offering through underwriters, the underwriters may purchase and sell the
securities in the open market. These transactions may include over allotment and stabilizing
transactions and purchases to cover syndicate short positions created in connection with the
offering. The underwriters may also impose a penalty bid, whereby selling concessions allowed
to syndicate members or other broker-dealers for the offered securities sold for their account may
be reclaimed by the syndicate if such offered securities are repurchased by the syndicate in
stabilizing or covering transactions. These activities may stabilize, maintain or otherwise affect
the market price of the offered securities, which may be higher than the price that might otherwise
prevail in the open market. If commenced, these activities may be discontinued at any time.
If we use dealers in the sale of securities, we will sell the securities to them as principals. They
may then resell those securities to the public at varying prices determined by the dealers at the
time of resale. The dealers participating in any sale of the securities may be deemed to be
underwriters within the meaning of the Securities Act with respect to any sale of those securities.
We will include in the prospectus supplement the names of the dealers and the terms of the
transaction.
Direct Sales and Sales Through Agents
We may sell the securities directly. In that event, no underwriters or agents would be involved.
We may also sell the securities through agents we designate from time to time. In the prospectus
supplement, we will name any
Table of Contents
69
agent involved in the offer or sale of the securities, and we will describe any commissions
payable by us to the agent. Unless we inform you otherwise in the prospectus supplement, any
agent will agree to use its reasonable best efforts to solicit purchases for the period of its
appointment.
We may sell the securities directly to institutional investors or others who may be deemed to be
underwriters within the meaning of the Securities Act with respect to any sale of those securities.
We will describe the terms of any such sales in the prospectus supplement.
Delayed Delivery Contracts
If we so indicate in the prospectus supplement, we may authorize agents, underwriters or dealers
to solicit offers from certain types of institutions to purchase securities from us at the public
offering price under delayed delivery contracts. These contracts would provide for payment and
delivery on a specified date in the future. The contracts would be subject only to those conditions
described in the prospectus supplement. The prospectus supplement will describe the
commission payable for solicitation of those contracts.
General Information
We may have agreements with the agents, dealers and underwriters to indemnify them against
civil liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act, or to contribute with respect to
payments that the agents, dealers or underwriters may be required to make. Agents, dealers and
underwriters may engage in transactions with us or perform services for us in the ordinary course
of their businesses.
Table of Contents
70
EXCHANGE CONTROLS
There is no legislative or other legal provision relating to exchange controls currently in force in
England or the Netherlands or arising under the Articles or Shell Finance’s articles of association
restricting remittances to non-resident holders of our securities or affecting the import or export of
capital for use by us.
LIMITATIONS ON RIGHTS TO OWN SECURITIES
There are no limitations imposed by English law or the Articles on the right to own our debt
securities, warrants or ordinary shares, including the rights of non-residents or foreign persons to
hold or vote our ordinary shares (other than would generally apply to our shareholders) or to hold
its debt securities or warrants. There are no limitations imposed by Dutch law or Shell Finance’s
articles of association on the rights to own its debt securities, including the rights of non-resident
or foreign persons to hold the debt securities.
LEGAL MATTERS
Cravath, Swaine & Moore LLP, U.S. counsel for us and Shell Finance, and Morrison & Foerster
LLP, U.S. counsel for any underwriters, will pass upon the validity of the debt securities, debt
warrants and guarantees as to certain matters of New York law. Slaughter and May, our English
solicitors, will pass upon the validity of the debt securities of Royal Dutch Shell, the guarantees,
warrants and ordinary shares as to certain matters of English law. De Brauw, our Dutch counsel,
will pass upon the validity of the debt securities of Shell International Finance as to certain
matters of Dutch law.
EXPERTS
The consolidated financial statements of Royal Dutch Shell as of December 31, 2013 and 2012
and for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2013, and management’s
assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting (which is included in
management’s report on internal control over financial reporting), incorporated in this prospectus
by reference to the 2013 20-F, have been so incorporated in reliance on the report of
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, given on the
authority of said firm as experts in auditing and accounting.
Table of Contents
71
$
Shell International Finance B.V.
$                     % Guaranteed Notes due 2019
$                     % Guaranteed Notes due 2021
$                     % Guaranteed Notes due 2026
$                     % Guaranteed Notes due 2046
$             Floating Rate Guaranteed Notes due 2019
Guaranteed as to the Payment of Principal and Interest by
Royal Dutch Shell plc
PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
Citigroup
Goldman, Sachs & Co.
J.P. Morgan
September     , 2016
