
EX-99.4 5 exhibit99-4.htm EXHIBIT 99.4 Platinum Group Metals Ltd.: Exhibit 99.4 - Filed by
newsfilecorp.com
News Release
788 – 550 Burrard Street 
 Vancouver, BC V6C 2B5 
P: 604-899-5450 
F: 604-484-4710
No. 15-306
September 4, 2015
Platinum Group Metals Files Waterberg Project Technical Report
(Vancouver,  British  Columbia) Platinum  Group  Metals  Ltd.  (PTM-TSX;  PLG-NYSE  MKT)
(“Platinum Group Metals” or the “Company”) reports that further to its news release dated July 22,
2015 announcing an updated independent resource estimate on the Company’s 58.62% interest
in the Waterberg Project located in the Bushveld Igneous Complex, South Africa, it has today
filed the associated National Instrument 43-101 technical report. The report is on a 100% Project
basis resource estimate. The report, entitled “An Independent Technical Report on the Waterberg
Project located in the Bushveld Igneous Complex, South Africa” is dated effective July 20, 2015
and was prepared by Charles J Muller (B. Sc. (Hons) Geology) Pri. Sci. Nat., of CJM Consulting
(Pty) Ltd., supporting the disclosure of the independent mineral resource estimate. A copy of the
report can be found at www.sedar.com and on the Company’s website.
About Platinum Group Metals
Platinum Group Metals Ltd., based in Johannesburg, South Africa and Vancouver, Canada, has
a team with a successful track record of more than 20 years of experience in exploration, mine
discovery,  mine  construction  and  mine  operations.  Formed  in  2000,  Platinum  Group  holds
significant mineral rights in the Bushveld Igneous Complex of South Africa, which is host to over
70% of the world's primary platinum production. The Company is currently focused on moving its
first  mine,  the  high-grade,  near-surface  Western  Bushveld  Joint  Venture  (WBJV)  Project  1
platinum deposit, to production in the calendar fourth quarter of 2015.
The Toronto Stock Exchange and the NYSE MKT LLC have not reviewed and do not accept
responsibility for the accuracy or adequacy of this news release, which has been prepared by
management.
On behalf of the Board of 
Platinum Group Metals Ltd. 
“R. Michael Jones” 
President and CEO 
For further information contact: 
R. Michael Jones, President 
or Kris Begic, VP, Corporate Development 
Platinum Group Metals Ltd., Vancouver 
Tel: (604) 899-5450 / Toll Free: (866) 899-5450 
www.platinumgroupmetals.net
Forward-Looking Statements
This  press  release  contains  forward-looking  information  within  the  meaning  of  Canadian
securities  laws  and  forward-looking  statements  within  the  meaning  of  U.S.  securities  laws
("forward-looking statements"). Forward-looking statements are typically identified by words such
as: believe, expect, anticipate, intend, estimate, plans, postulate and similar expressions, or are
those,  which,  by  their  nature,  refer  to  future  events.  All  statements  that  are  not  statements  of
historical fact are forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements in this press release
include,  without  limitation,  statements  regarding  the  technical  details  of  the  updated  Mineral
Resources  and  Mineral  Reserves.  A  shortage  of  working  capital  may  materially  affect  the
Company  ability  to  complete  its  plans.  Although  the  Company  believes  the  forward-looking
statements in this press release are reasonable, it can give no assurance that the expectations
and assumptions in such statements will prove to be correct. The Company cautions investors
that  any  forward-looking  statements  by  the  Company  are  not  guarantees  of  future  results  or
performance,  and  that  actual  results  may  differ  materially  from  those  in  forward  looking
statements  as  a  result  of  various  factors,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  variations  in  market
conditions; the nature, quality and quantity of any mineral deposits that may be located; metal
prices;  other  prices  and  costs;  currency  exchange  rates;  the  Company's  ability  to  obtain  any
necessary permits, consents or authorizations required for its activities; the Company's ability to
access  further  funding  and  produce  minerals  from  its  properties  successfully  or  profitably,  to
continue its projected growth, or to be fully able to implement its business strategies and other
risk factors described in the Company's Form 40-F annual report, annual information form and
other  filings  with  the  SEC  and  Canadian  securities  regulators,  which  may  be  viewed  at
www.sec.gov and www.sedar.com, respectively.
788 – 550 Burrard Street 
 Vancouver, BC V6C 2B5 
P: 604-899-5450 
F: 604-484-4710
Cautionary Note to U.S. Investors
Estimates of mineralization and other technical information included or referenced in this press
release  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  NI  43-101.  The  definitions  of  proven  and
probable reserves used in NI 43-101 differ from the definitions in SEC Industry Guide 7. Under
SEC  Industry  Guide  7  standards,  a  “final”  or  “bankable”  feasibility  study  is  required  to  report
reserves, the three-year historical average price is used in any reserve or cash flow analysis to
designate  reserves  and  the  primary  environmental  analysis  or  report  must  be  filed  with  the
appropriate  governmental  authority.  As  a  result,  the  reserves  reported  by  the  Company  in
accordance with NI 43-101 may not qualify as “reserves” under SEC standards. In addition, the
terms “mineral resource”, “measured mineral resource”, “indicated mineral resource” and “inferred
mineral resource” are defined in and required to be disclosed by NI 43-101; however, these terms
are not defined terms under SEC Industry Guide 7 and normally are not permitted to be used in
reports  and  registration  statements  filed  with  the  SEC.  Mineral  resources  that  are  not  mineral
reserves do not have demonstrated economic viability. Investors are cautioned not to assume
that  any  part  or  all  of  the  mineral  deposits  in  these  categories  will  ever  be  converted  into
reserves. “Inferred mineral resources” have a great amount of uncertainty as to their existence,
and great uncertainty as to their economic and legal feasibility. It cannot be assumed that all or
any  part  of  an  inferred  mineral  resource  will  ever  be  upgraded  to  a  higher  category.  Under
Canadian  securities  laws,  estimates  of  inferred  mineral  resources  may  not  form  the  basis  of
feasibility or pre-feasibility studies, except in rare cases. Additionally, disclosure of “contained
ounces” in a resource is permitted disclosure under Canadian securities laws; however, the SEC
normally only permits issuers to report mineralization that does not constitute “reserves” by SEC
standards as in place tonnage and grade without reference to unit measurements. Accordingly,
information  contained  or  referenced  in  this  press  release  containing  descriptions  of  the
Company's mineral deposits may not be comparable to similar information made public by U.S.
companies  subject  to  the  reporting  and  disclosure  requirements  of  United  States  federal
securities laws and the rules and regulations thereunder.