
EX-10.4 3 d345519dex104.htm FORM OF CREDIT AGREEMENT Form of Credit Agreement
Exhibit 10.4
FORM OF CREDIT AGREEMENT
dated as of [______ __], 2012
Among
HI-CRUSH PARTNERS LP
as Borrower,
AMEGY BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
as Administrative Agent, Issuing Lender and Swing Line Lender,
and
THE LENDERS NAMED HEREIN
as Lenders
$100,000,000
AMEGY BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION,
AS LEAD ARRANGER AND SOLE BOOKRUNNER
ARTICLE 1     DEFINITIONS AND ACCOUNTING TERMS
Section 1.1.    Certain Defined Terms
Section 1.2.    Computation of Time Periods
Section 1.3.    Accounting Terms; Changes in GAAP
Section 1.4.    Classes and Types of Advances
Section 1.5.    Miscellaneous
ARTICLE 2    CREDIT FACILITIES
Section 2.1.    Commitments
Section 2.2.    Letters of Credit
Section 2.3.    Advances
Section 2.4.    Prepayments
Section 2.5.    Repayment
Section 2.6.    Fees
Section 2.7.    Interest
Section 2.8.    Illegality
1
1
18
18
18
18
19
19
20
25
30
32
32
33
Section 2.8.    Illegality
Section 2.9.    Breakage Costs
Section 2.10.  Increased Costs
Section 2.11.  Payments and Computations
Section 2.12.  Taxes
Section 2.13.  Replacement of Lenders
Section 2.14.  Payments and Deductions to a Defaulting Lender
Section 2.15.  Increase in Commitments
ARTICLE 3    CONDITIONS OF LENDING
Section 3.1.    Conditions Precedent to Initial Borrowings and the Initial Letter of Credit
Section 3.2.    Conditions Precedent to Each Borrowing and to Each Issuance, Extension or Renewal of a
Letter of Credit
Section 3.3.    Determinations Under Sections 3.1 and 3.2
ARTICLE 4    REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
Section 4.1.    Organization
Section 4.2.    Authorization
Section 4.3.    Enforceability
Section 4.4.    Financial Condition
Section 4.5.    Ownership and Liens; Real Property
Section 4.6.    True and Complete Disclosure
-i-
Section 4.7.     Litigation
Section 4.8.     Compliance with Agreements
Section 4.9.     Pension Plans
Section 4.10.   Environmental Condition
Section 4.11.   Subsidiaries
Section 4.12.   Investment Company Act
Section 4.13.   Taxes
Section 4.14.   Permits, Licenses, etc.
Section 4.15.   Use of Proceeds
Section 4.16.   Condition of Property; Casualties
Section 4.17.   Insurance
Section 4.18.   Security Interest
Section 4.19.   OFAC; Anti-Terrorism
Section 4.20.   Solvency
ARTICLE 5     AFFIRMATIVE COVENANTS
Section 5.1.     Organization
Section 5.2.     Reporting
Section 5.3.     Insurance
34
34
34
36
37
40
41
43
44
44
47
48
48
48
48
48
48
49
49
49
50
50
50
51
51
51
51
52
52
52
52
52
52
52
53
53
Section 5.3.     Insurance
Section 5.4.     Compliance with Laws
Section 5.5.     Taxes
Section 5.6.     New Subsidiaries
Section 5.7.     Security
Section 5.8.     Deposit Accounts
Section 5.9.     Records; Inspection
Section 5.10.   Maintenance of Property
Section 5.11.   Royalty Agreements
Section 5.12.   Appraisal Reports; Sand Reserve Reports
Section 5.13.   Legal Separateness
ARTICLE 6     NEGATIVE COVENANTS
Section 6.1.     Debt
Section 6.2.     Liens
Section 6.3.     Investments
Section 6.4.     Acquisitions
Section 6.5.     Agreements Restricting Liens
Section 6.6.     Use of Proceeds; Use of Letters of Credit
-ii-
Section 6.7.     Corporate Actions; Accounting Changes
Section 6.8.     Sale of Assets
Section 6.9.     Restricted Payments
Section 6.10.   Affiliate Transactions
Section 6.11.   Line of Business
Section 6.12.   Hazardous Materials
Section 6.13.   Compliance with ERISA
Section 6.14.   Sale and Leaseback Transactions
Section 6.15.   Limitation on Hedging
Section 6.16.   Leverage Ratio
Section 6.17.   Interest Coverage Ratio
Section 6.18.   Capital Expenditures
Section 6.19.   Landlord Agreements
Section 6.20.   Operating Leases
Section 6.21.   Prepayment of Certain Debt
Section 6.22.   Amendment of the Subordinated Notes and Material Contracts
ARTICLE 7     DEFAULT AND REMEDIES
Section 7.1.     Events of Default
Section 7.2.     Optional Acceleration of Maturity
Section 7.3.     Automatic Acceleration of Maturity
56  
 57
57
57
58
58
58
58
59
59
59
59
60
61
62
63
64
64
64
65
65
65
66
66
66
67
67
67
67
68
68
68
68
68
69
69
70
Section 7.3.     Automatic Acceleration of Maturity
Section 7.4.     Set-off
Section 7.5.     Remedies Cumulative, No Waiver
Section 7.6.     Application of Payments
ARTICLE 8     THE ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT
Section 8.1.     Appointment, Powers, and Immunities
Section 8.2.    Reliance by Administrative Agent
Section 8.3.     Defaults
Section 8.4.     Rights as Lender
Section 8.5.     Indemnification
Section 8.6.     Non-Reliance on Administrative Agent and Other Lenders
Section 8.7.     Resignation of Administrative Agent and Issuing Lender
Section 8.8.     Collateral Matters
Section 8.9.     No Other Duties, etc
Section 8.10.   Flood Laws
-iii-
ARTICLE 9     MISCELLANEOUS
Section 9.1.     Costs and Expenses
Section 9.2.     Indemnification; Waiver of Damages
Section 9.3.     Waivers and Amendments
Section 9.4.     Severability
Section 9.5.     Survival of Representations and Obligations
Section 9.6.     Binding Effect
Section 9.7.     Lender Assignments and Participations
Section 9.8.     Confidentiality
Section 9.9.     Notices, Etc.
Section 9.10.   Usury Not Intended
Section 9.11.   Usury Recapture
Section 9.12.   Governing Law; Service of Process
Section 9.13.   Submission to Jurisdiction
Section 9.14.   Execution in Counterparts
Section 9.15.   Dispute Resolution
Section 9.16.   Subordination Agreements
Section 9.17.   USA Patriot Act
Section 9.18.   Business Loans
Section 9.19.   Integration
-iv-
71  
 71
72
72
73
73
73
74
74
74
75
75
76
77
77
77
77
77
79
79
79
80
80
81
82
82
83
83
84
84
84
85
86
86
86
EXHIBITS:
Exhibit A    – Form of Assignment and Acceptance
Exhibit B    – Form of Compliance Certificate
Exhibit C    – Form of Guaranty
Exhibit D    – Form of Notice of Borrowing
Exhibit E    – Form of Notice of Continuation or Conversion
Exhibit F    – Form of Pledge and Security Agreement
Exhibit G-1   – Form of Revolving Note
Exhibit G-2   – Form of Swing Line Note
SCHEDULES:
– Pricing Schedule
   – Commitments, Contact Information
   – Additional Conditions and Requirements for New Subsidiaries
– Organizational Information
   – Financial Condition
   – Owned and Leased Real Properties
   – Litigation
Schedule I
Schedule II
Schedule III
Schedule 1.1(a)   – Existing Letters of Credit
Schedule 1.1(b)   – Material Contracts
Schedule 4.1
Schedule 4.4
Schedule 4.5
Schedule 4.7
Schedule 4.10    – Environmental Condition
Schedule 4.11    – Subsidiaries
Schedule 6.1
Schedule 6.2
Schedule 6.3
Schedule 6.10    – Affiliate Transactions
– Existing Permitted Debt
   – Existing Permitted Liens
   – Existing Permitted Investments
-v-
CREDIT AGREEMENT
This CREDIT AGREEMENT dated as of [             ], 2012 (the “Agreement”) is among Hi-Crush Partners LP, a
Delaware limited partnership (the “Borrower”), the Lenders (as defined below) and Amegy Bank National Association,
as Administrative Agent (as defined below) for the Lenders, as Issuing Lender (as defined below) and as Swing Line
Lender (as defined below).
In consideration of the mutual covenants and agreements herein contained, the parties hereto hereby agree as
follows:
ARTICLE 1
DEFINITIONS AND ACCOUNTING TERMS
Section 1.1. Certain Defined Terms. The following terms shall have the following meanings (unless otherwise
indicated, such meanings to be equally applicable to both the singular and plural forms of the terms defined):
“Acceptable Security Interest” means a security interest which (a) exists in favor of the Administrative Agent for its
benefit and the ratable benefit of the Secured Parties, (b) is superior to all other security interests (other than the
Permitted Liens), (c) secures the Secured Obligations, (d) is enforceable against the Credit Party which created such
security interest and (e) is perfected.
“Account Control Agreement” shall mean, as to any deposit account of any Credit Party held with a bank, an
agreement or agreements in form and substance reasonably acceptable to the Administrative Agent, among the Credit
Party owning such deposit account, the Administrative Agent and such other bank governing such deposit account.
“Acquisition” means the purchase by any Credit Party of (a) any business, division or enterprise or all or substantially
all of any Person through the purchase of assets (but, for the avoidance of doubt, excluding purchases of equipment
only with no other tangible or intangible property associated with such equipment purchase unless such purchase of
equipment involves all or substantially all the assets of the seller) or (b) Equity Interests of any Person sufficient to
cause such Person to become a Subsidiary of a Credit Party.
“Acquisition Adjustment Period” means the period of two consecutive fiscal quarters commencing on the first day of
the fiscal quarter during which the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries consummates any Acquisition in which the total
consideration (including the adjustment of purchase price or similar adjustments) therefor exceeds $20,000,000
(whether such total consideration is paid in cash, by the assumption of Debt of the Person or assets so acquired, or
otherwise) and ending on the last day of the second fiscal quarter following such date.
“Additional Lender” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.15(a).
“Adjusted Base Rate” means, for any day, the fluctuating rate per annum of interest equal to the greatest of (a) the
Wall Street Journal Rate in effect on such day, (b) the Federal Funds Rate in effect on such day plus 0.50%, and
(c) the Daily One-Month LIBOR plus 1.00%. Any change in the Adjusted Base Rate due to a change in the Wall Street
Journal Rate, Daily One-Month LIBOR or the Federal Funds Rate shall be effective on the effective date of such
change in the Wall Street Journal Rate, Daily One-Month LIBOR or the Federal Funds Rate.
“Administrative Agent” means Amegy in its capacity as agent for the Lenders pursuant to Article 8 and any successor
agent pursuant to Section 8.7.
“Administrative Questionnaire” means an Administrative Questionnaire in a form supplied by the Administrative Agent.
“Advance” means any advance by a Lender or the Swing Line Lender to the Borrower as a part of a Borrowing.
“Affiliate” means, as to any Person, any other Person that, directly or indirectly, through one or more intermediaries,
controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with, such Person or any Subsidiary of such Person. The term
“control” (including the terms “controlled by” or “under common control with”) means the possession, directly or
indirectly, of the power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of a Person, whether through
ownership, by contract, or otherwise. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, in no event shall any
portfolio company or other investment of the Sponsor (other than the Hi-Crush Proppants Entities) be deemed to be an
Affiliate of the Borrower or its Subsidiaries solely as a result of the direct or indirect control by the Sponsor of such
portfolio company or investment.
“Agreement” means this Credit Agreement among the Borrower, the Lenders, the Issuing Lenders, the Swing Line
Lender and the Administrative Agent.
“Amegy” means Amegy Bank National Association.
“Applicable Margin” means, at any time with respect to each Type of Advance, the Letters of Credit and the
Commitment Fee, the percentage rate per annum which is applicable at such time with respect to such Advance,
Letter of Credit or Commitment Fee as set forth in Schedule I and subject to further adjustments as set forth in
Section 2.7(c).
“Assignment and Acceptance” means an assignment and acceptance executed by a Lender and an Eligible Assignee
and accepted by the Administrative Agent, in substantially the same form as Exhibit A.
“AutoBorrow Agreement” means any agreement providing for automatic borrowing services between the Borrower and
the Swing Line Lender.
“Banking Services” means each and any of the following bank services provided to any Credit Party by any Lender
(other than a Defaulting Lender) or any Affiliate of a Lender (other than a Defaulting Lender): (a) commercial credit
cards, (b) stored value cards and (c) treasury management services (including, without limitation, controlled
disbursement, automated clearinghouse transactions, return items, overdrafts and interstate depository network
services).
“Banking Services Obligations” means any and all obligations of the Borrower or any other Credit Party, whether
absolute or contingent and howsoever and whensoever created, arising, evidenced or acquired (including all renewals,
extensions and modifications thereof and substitutions therefor) in connection with Banking Services.
“Banking Services Provider” means any Lender (other than a Defaulting Lender) or Affiliate of a Lender (other than a
Defaulting Lender) that provides Banking Services to the Borrower or any Subsidiary.
“Base Rate Advance” means an Advance which bears interest based upon the Adjusted Base Rate.
“Borrower” means Hi-Crush Partners LP, a Delaware limited partnership.
“Borrowing” means a Revolving Borrowing or a Swing Line Borrowing.
“Business Day” means a day (a) other than a Saturday, Sunday, or other day on which the Administrative Agent is
authorized to close under the laws of, or is in fact closed in, Texas, and (b) if the applicable Business Day relates to
any Eurodollar Advances, on which dealings are carried on by commercial banks in the London interbank market.
“Capital Expenditures” for any Person and period of its determination means, without duplication, the aggregate of all
expenditures and costs (whether paid in cash or accrued as liabilities during that period and including that portion of
payments under Capital Leases that are capitalized on the balance sheet of such Person) of such Person during such
period that, in conformity with GAAP, are required to be included in or reflected by the property, plant, or equipment or
similar fixed asset accounts reflected in the balance sheet of such Person.
-2-
“Capital Leases” means, for any Person, any lease of any Property by such Person as lessee which would, in
accordance with GAAP, be required to be classified and accounted for as a capital lease on the balance sheet of
such Person.
“Cash Collateral Account” means a cash collateral account pledged to the Administrative Agent containing cash
deposited pursuant to the terms hereof to be maintained with the Administrative Agent in accordance with
Section 2.2(h).
“Casualty Event” means the damage, destruction or condemnation, including by process of eminent domain or any
transfer or disposition of property in lieu of condemnation, as the case may be, of property of any Person or any of its
Subsidiaries.
“CERCLA” means the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, as
amended, state and local analogs, and all rules and regulations and requirements thereunder in each case as now or
hereafter in effect.
“Certificated Equipment” means any equipment the ownership of which is evidenced by, or under applicable Legal
Requirement, is required to be evidenced by, a certificate of title.
“CFC” means a “controlled foreign corporation” within the meaning of Section 957 of the Code.
“Change in Control” means the occurrence of any of the following events:
(a) the Sponsor shall fail to, directly or indirectly, own the greater of 50.1% and a Controlling Percentage of the Equity
Interests (including the Voting Securities) of Hi-Crush Proppants;
(b) Hi-Crush Proppants shall fail to, directly or indirectly, own 100% of the Equity Interests of the General Partner;
(c) a majority of the members of the board of directors or other equivalent governing body of the General Partner
ceases to be composed of individuals that were elected by Hi-Crush Proppants; or
(d) the General Partner shall cease for any reason to be the sole general partner of the Borrower.
“Change in Law” means the occurrence, after the date of this Agreement (or with respect to any Lender, if later, the
date on which such Lender becomes a Lender), of any of the following: (a) the adoption or taking effect of any law,
rule, regulation or treaty, (b) any change in any law, rule, regulation or treaty or in the administration, interpretation,
implementation or application thereof by any Governmental Authority or (c) the making or issuance of any request,
rule, guideline or directive (whether or not having the force of law) by any Governmental Authority; provided that
notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, (x) the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act
and all requests, rules, guidelines or directives thereunder or issued in connection therewith and (y) all requests, rules,
guidelines or directives promulgated by the Bank for International Settlements, the Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision (or any successor or similar authority) or the United States or foreign regulatory authorities, in each case
pursuant to Basel III, shall in each case be deemed to be a “Change in Law”, regardless of the date enacted, adopted
or issued.
“Class” has the meaning set forth in Section 1.4.
“Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and the regulations and published interpretations
thereof.
-3-
“Collateral” means all property of the Credit Parties which is “Collateral” or “Mortgaged Property” (as defined in each of
the Mortgages or the Security Agreement, as applicable) or similar terms used in the Security Documents.
“Commitment” means, for each Lender, the obligation of each Lender to advance to Borrower the amount set opposite
such Lender’s name on Schedule II as its Commitment, or if such Lender has entered into any Assignment and
Acceptance, set forth for such Lender as its Commitment in the Register, as such amount may be reduced pursuant
to Section 2.1(b) or increased pursuant to Section 2.15; provided that, after the Maturity Date, the Commitment for
each Lender shall be zero. The initial aggregate Commitment on the Effective Date is $100,000,000.
“Commitment Fees” means the fees required under Section 2.6(a).
“Commitment Increase” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.15(a).
“Compliance Certificate” means a compliance certificate executed by a Responsible Officer of the Borrower or such
other Person as required by this Agreement in substantially the same form as Exhibit B.
“Controlled Group” means all members of a controlled group of corporations and all businesses (whether or not
incorporated) under common control which, together with the Borrower or any Subsidiary, are treated as a single
employer under Section 414 of the Code.
“Controlling Percentage” means, with respect to any Person, the percentage of the outstanding Voting Securities
(including any options, warrants or similar rights to purchase such Equity Interest) of such Person having ordinary
voting power which gives the direct or indirect holder of such Equity Interest the power to elect a majority of the board
of directors (or other applicable governing body), or directors holding a majority of the votes of the board of directors
(or other applicable governing body) of such Person.
“Convert,” “Conversion,” and “Converted” each refers to a conversion of Advances of one Type into Advances of
another Type pursuant to Section 2.3(b).
“Credit Documents” means this Agreement, the Subordination Agreements, the Notes, the Letters of Credit, the Letter
of Credit Applications, the Guaranty, the Notices of Borrowing, the Notices of Continuation or Conversion, the Security
Documents, any AutoBorrow Agreement, the Fee Letter, and each other agreement, instrument, or document
executed at any time in connection with this Agreement.
“Credit Parties” means the Borrower and the Guarantors.
“Daily One-Month LIBOR” means, for any day, the rate of interest equal to the Eurodollar Rate then in effect for
delivery of funds for a one (1) month period.
“Debt” means, for any Person, without duplication: (a) indebtedness of such Person for borrowed money, including the
face amount of any letters of credit supporting the repayment of indebtedness for borrowed money issued for the
account of such Person; (b) to the extent not covered under clause (a) above, obligations under letters of credit and
agreements relating to the issuance of letters of credit or acceptance financing, including Letters of Credit;
(c) obligations of such Person evidenced by bonds, debentures, notes or other similar instruments, or upon which
interest payments are customarily made; (d) obligations of such Person under conditional sale or other title retention
agreements relating to any Properties purchased by such Person (other than customary reservations or retentions of
title under agreements with suppliers entered into in the ordinary course of business); (e) obligations of such Person to
pay the deferred purchase price of property or services (including, without limitation, any contingent obligations or
other similar obligations associated with such purchase, and including obligations that are non-recourse to the credit
of such Person but are secured by the assets of such Person); (f) obligations of such Person as lessee under Capital
Leases and obligations of such Person in respect of synthetic leases; (g) obligations of such Person under any
Hedging Arrangement (except that such obligations shall not constitute Debt for purposes of the calculations for
compliance under Sections 6.16 and 6.17); (h) all obligations of such Person to mandatorily
-4-
purchase, redeem, retire, defease or otherwise make any payment in respect of any Equity Interest in such Person or
any other Person on a date certain or upon the occurrence of certain events or conditions; (i) the Debt of any
partnership or unincorporated joint venture in which such Person is a general partner or a joint venturer, but only to the
extent to which there is recourse to such Person for the payment of such Debt; (j) obligations of such Person under
direct or indirect guaranties in respect of, and obligations (contingent or otherwise) of such Person to purchase or
otherwise acquire, or otherwise to assure a creditor against loss in respect of, indebtedness or obligations of others of
the kinds referred to in clauses (a) through (i) above; (k) indebtedness or obligations of others of the kinds referred to
in clauses (a) through (j) secured by any Lien on or in respect of any Property of such Person, and (l) all liabilities of
such Person in respect of unfunded vested benefits under any Plan.
“Default” means (a) an Event of Default or (b) any event or condition which with notice or lapse of time or both would,
unless cured or waived, become an Event of Default.
“Default Rate” means a per annum rate equal to (a) in the case of principal of any Advance, 2.00% plus the rate
otherwise applicable to such Advance as provided in Sections 2.7(a), (b), or (c), and (b) in the case of any other
Obligation, 2.00% plus the non-default rate applicable to Base Rate Advances as provided in Section 2.7(a) or (c).
“Defaulting Lender” means any Lender that (a) (except, with regards to the funding of Swing Line Advances, the Swing
Line Lender) has failed to fund any portion of the Revolving Advances or participations in Letter of Credit Obligations
or Swing Line Advances required to be funded by it hereunder within two Business Days of the date required to be
funded by it hereunder unless, with the consent of the Administrative Agent and the Borrower (which consent may be
withheld at the sole discretion of the Administrative Agent and the Borrower), such failure has been cured, (b) has
indicated to the Administrative Agent, or has stated publicly, that such Lender will not fund any portion of the
Revolving Advances or participations in Letter of Credit Obligations or Swing Line Advances required to be funded by
it hereunder, unless, with the consent of the Administrative Agent and the Borrower (which consent may be withheld
at the sole discretion of the Administrative Agent and the Borrower), such Lender actually funds such Advances or
participations, (c) has otherwise failed to pay over to the Administrative Agent or any other Lender any other amount
required to be paid by it hereunder within two Business Days of the date when due, unless the subject of a good faith
dispute, or unless, with the consent of the Administrative Agent (which consent may be withheld at the sole discretion
of the Administrative Agent), such failure has been cured, (d) as to which a Lender Insolvency Event has occurred
and is continuing with respect to such Lender, or (e) has failed to confirm in writing to the Administrative Agent, for at
least three Business Days, in response to a written request of the Administrative Agent, that it will comply with its
funding obligations hereunder. Any determination that a Lender is a Defaulting Lender will be made by the
Administrative Agent in its sole discretion acting in good faith.
“Dollars” and “$” means lawful money of the United States of America.
“Domestic Subsidiary” means, with respect to any Person, any of its Subsidiaries that (a) is incorporated or organized
under the laws of the United States, any State thereof or the District of Columbia or (b) could provide a guarantee of
the Obligations without any material adverse federal income tax consequences to the Borrower (including by
constituting an investment of earnings in United States property under Section 956 (or any successor provision) of the
Code and, therefore, triggering an increase in the gross income of the Borrower pursuant to Section 951 (or a
successor provision) of the Code).
“Drop Down Acquisition” means the acquisition by one or more Credit Parties, in a single transaction or in a series of
related transactions, of property or assets (including Equity Interests) from any Hi-Crush Proppants Entity, so long as
the property or assets being acquired is engaged or used (or intended to be used), as applicable, primarily in the frac
sand excavation, processing and transportation business.
“EBITDA” means for the Borrower, on a consolidated basis for any period (it being understood that no amounts of any
Net Income of any entity constituting an Investment pursuant to Section 6.3(k) or (l) shall be taken into account in
calculating EBITDA other than to the extent provided in clause (c) below), the sum of (a) Net Income for such period,
plus (b) without duplication and to the extent deducted in determining such Net Income (i) depreciation and
amortization for such period, plus (ii) Interest Expense for such period, plus (iii) Income Tax Expense for such period,
plus (iv) letter of credit fees, plus (v) non-cash expenses resulting from any employee
-5-
benefit or management compensation plan or the grant of Equity Interests to employees of the Borrower or any of its
Subsidiaries pursuant to a written plan or agreement, plus (vi) customary non-capitalized expenses incurred in
connection with the transactions contemplated by this Agreement to occur on the Effective Date, plus (vii) customary
non-capitalized expenses incurred in connection with any Investment permitted under Section 6.3(j), (k) or (l), any
Acquisition permitted by Section 6.4, any incurrence of Debt permitted by Section 6.1 or any Equity Issuance (in each
case, whether or not consummated) in an aggregate amount not to exceed $1,000,000 in any fiscal year, plus
(viii) any losses (or minus any gains) realized upon any disposition of property permitted under Section 6.8 outside of
the ordinary course of business, plus (ix) non-recurring charges with respect to relocation or severance arrangements
between the Borrower or its Subsidiaries and their respective officers and employees in an aggregate amount not to
exceed $350,000 in any fiscal year, plus (x) exploration expenses in an aggregate amount not to exceed $500,000 in
any fiscal year, plus (xi) non-cash charges resulting from extraordinary, non-recurring events or circumstances for
such period, plus (c) cash dividends or distributions received by the Credit Parties and are Permitted Investments
pursuant to Section 6.3(k) or (l), minus (d) to the extent included in determining Net Income, non-cash income
resulting from extraordinary, non-recurring events or circumstances for such period and all other non-cash items of
income which were included in determining such Net Income; provided that such EBITDA shall be subject to pro
forma adjustments for acquisitions and asset sales (including, without limitation, the Wyeville Drop Down and each
other Drop Down Acquisition) assuming that such transactions had occurred on the first day of the determination
period, which adjustments shall be made in a manner, and subject to supporting documentation, acceptable to the
Administrative Agent.
“Effective Date” means the date on which the conditions precedent set forth in Section 3.1 shall have been satisfied,
which date shall not be later than September 30, 2012.
“Eligible Assignee” means (a) a Lender (other than a Defaulting Lender), (b) any Affiliate of a Lender approved by the
Administrative Agent, or (c) any other Person (other than a natural Person) reasonably acceptable to the
Administrative Agent and, unless an Event of Default has occurred and is continuing at the time any assignment is
effected in accordance with Section 9.7, the Borrower, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed by
the Borrower and such approval to be deemed given by the Borrower if no objection is received by the Administrative
Agent from the Borrower within five Business Days after notice of such proposed assignment has been provided to
the Borrower; provided, however, that neither the Borrower nor any Affiliate of the Borrower shall qualify as an Eligible
Assignee.
“Environment” shall have the meanings set forth in 42 U.S.C. 9601(8) (1988).
“Environmental Claim” means any third party (including governmental agencies and employees) action, lawsuit, claim,
demand, regulatory action or proceeding, order, decree, consent agreement or notice of potential or actual
responsibility or violation (including claims or proceedings under the Occupational Safety and Health Acts or similar
laws or requirements relating to health or safety of employees) which seeks to impose liability under any
Environmental Law.
“Environmental Law” means all federal, state, and local laws, rules, regulations, ordinances, orders, decisions,
agreements, and other requirements, including common law theories, now or hereafter in effect and relating to, or in
connection with the Environment, human health, or safety, including without limitation CERCLA, relating to
(a) pollution, contamination, injury, destruction, loss, protection, cleanup, reclamation or restoration of the air, surface
water, groundwater, land surface or subsurface strata, or other natural resources; (b) solid, gaseous or liquid waste
generation, treatment, processing, recycling, reclamation, cleanup, storage, disposal or transportation; (c) exposure to
pollutants, contaminants, hazardous, medical infections, or toxic substances, materials or wastes; (d) the safety or
health of employees; or (e) the manufacture, processing, handling, transportation, distribution in commerce, use,
storage or disposal of hazardous, medical infections, or toxic substances, materials or wastes.
“Environmental Permit” means any permit, license, order, approval, registration or other authorization under
Environmental Law.
“Equity Interest” means with respect to any Person, any shares, interests, participation, or other equivalents (however
designated) of corporate stock, membership interests or partnership interests (or any other ownership interests) of
such Person.
-6-
“Equity Investors” means Hi-Crush Proppants and/or the General Partner, as applicable.
“Equity Issuance” means any issuance of equity securities or any other Equity Interests (including any preferred
equity securities) by the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries.
“Equity Issuance Proceeds” means, with respect to any Equity Issuance, all cash and cash equivalent investments
received by the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries from such Equity Issuance (other than from any other Credit Party)
after payment of, or provision for, all underwriter fees and expenses, SEC and blue sky fees, printing costs, fees and
expenses of accountants, lawyers and other professional advisors, brokerage commissions and other out-of-pocket
fees and expenses actually incurred in connection with such Equity Issuance.
“ERISA” means the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended from time to time.
“Eurocurrency Liabilities” has the meaning assigned to that term in Regulation D of the Federal Reserve Board as in
effect from time to time.
“Eurodollar Advance” means an Advance that bears interest based upon the Eurodollar Rate (other than Advances
that bear interest based upon the Daily One Month LIBOR).
“Eurodollar Base Rate” means (a) in determining Eurodollar Rate for purposes of the “Daily One Month LIBOR”, the
rate per annum for Dollar deposits quoted by the Administrative Agent for the purpose of calculating effective rates of
interest for loans making reference to the “Daily One-Month LIBOR”, as the inter-bank offered rate in effect from time
to time for delivery of funds for one (1) month in amounts approximately equal to the principal amount of the
applicable Advances; provided that, the Administrative Agent may base its quotation of the inter-bank offered rate
upon such offers or other market indicators of the inter-bank market as the Administrative Agent in its discretion
deems appropriate including, but not limited to, the rate determined under the following clause (b), and (b) in
determining Eurodollar Rate for all other purposes, the rate per annum (rounded upward to the nearest whole multiple
of 1/100 of 1%) equal to the interest rate per annum set forth on the Reuters Reference LIBOR1 page as the London
Interbank Offered Rate, for deposits in Dollars at 11:00 a.m. (London, England time) two Business Days before the
first day of the applicable Interest Period and for a period equal to such Interest Period; provided that, if such
quotation is not available for any reason, then for purposes of this clause (b), Eurodollar Base Rate shall then be the
rate determined by the Administrative Agent to be the rate at which deposits in Dollars for delivery on the first day of
such Interest Period in immediately available funds in the approximate amount of the Advances being made,
continued or Converted by the Lenders and with a term equivalent to such Interest Period would be offered by the
Administrative Agent’s London Branch (or other branch or Affiliate of the Administrative Agent, or in the event that the
Administrative Agent does not have a London branch, the London branch of a Lender chosen by the Administrative
Agent) to major banks in the London or other offshore inter-bank market for Dollars at their request at approximately
11:00 a.m. (London time) two Business Days prior to the commencement of such Interest Period).
“Eurodollar Rate” means a rate per annum determined by the Administrative Agent pursuant to the following formula:
Where,
Eurodollar Rate =  Eurodollar Base Rate
1.00 – Eurodollar Reserve Percentage
“Eurodollar Reserve Percentage” means, as of any day, the reserve percentage (expressed as a decimal, carried out
to five decimal places) in effect on such day, whether or not applicable to any Lender, under regulations issued from
time to time by the Federal Reserve Board for determining the maximum reserve requirement (including any
emergency, supplemental or other marginal reserve requirement) with respect to liabilities or assets consisting of or
including Eurocurrency Liabilities. The Eurodollar Rate for each outstanding Advance shall be adjusted automatically
as of the effective date of any change in the Eurodollar Reserve Percentage.
-7-
“Event of Default” has the meaning specified in Section 7.1.
“Existing Letters of Credit” means the letters of credit issued by Amegy and set forth on the attached Schedule 1.1(a).
“FATCA” means Sections 1471 through 1474 of the Code as of the date of this Agreement (or any amended or
successor version that is substantively comparable and not materially more onerous to comply with) and any current
or future regulations or official interpretations thereof.
“Federal Funds Rate” means, for any day, the rate per annum equal to the weighted average of the rates on overnight
Federal funds transactions with members of the Federal Reserve System arranged by Federal funds brokers on such
day, as published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York on the Business Day next succeeding such day;
provided that (a) if such day is not a Business Day, the Federal Funds Rate for such day shall be such rate on such
transactions on the preceding Business Day as so published on the succeeding Business Day and (b) if no such rate
is so published on such next succeeding Business Day, the Federal Funds Rate for such day shall be the average
rate charged to the Administrative Agent (in its individual capacity) on such day on such transactions as determined
by the Administrative Agent.
“Federal Reserve Board” means the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or any of its successors.
“Fee Letter” means that certain Mandate and Fee Letter dated as of July 30, 2012 between the Borrower and Amegy.
“Financial Statements” means, for any period, the consolidated financial statements of the Borrower and its
Subsidiaries, including statements of operations, partners’ equity and cash flow for such period as well as a balance
sheet as of the end of such period, all prepared in accordance with GAAP.
“First-Tier Foreign Subsidiary” means any Foreign Subsidiary that is a CFC and the Equity Interests of which are held
directly by the Borrower or a Domestic Subsidiary.
“Foreign Lender” means any Lender that is not a “United States person” as defined in Section 7701(a)(30) of the Code.
“Foreign Subsidiary” means any Subsidiary of a Person that is not a Domestic Subsidiary.
“Funded Debt” of any Person means, at any time, without duplication, Debt of such Person (a) of the type described in
clauses (a), (b), (c), (f), and (h) of the definition of “Debt”; provided that Debt with respect to letters of credit referred to
in clause (b) of such definition shall be considered “Funded Debt” regardless of whether such letters of credit are
drawn or funded, (b) of the type described in clause (i) of the definition of “Debt”; provided that such Debt would
otherwise qualify as “Funded Debt” under this definition, or (c) of the type described in clauses (j) or (k) of the
definition of “Debt” to the extent that such guaranty covers, or such Lien secures, Debt of the type described in clause
(a) or clause (b) of this definition of “Funded Debt”. For the avoidance of doubt, all Debt outstanding under this
Agreement shall constitute “Funded Debt”. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Permitted Subordinated Debt shall not
constitute “Funded Debt” so long as each Subordination Agreement is in full force and effect.
“GAAP” means United States of America generally accepted accounting principles as in effect from time to time,
applied on a basis consistent with the requirements of Section 1.3.
“General Partner” means Hi-Crush GP LLC, a Delaware limited liability company.
“Governmental Authority” means, with respect to any Person, any foreign governmental authority, the United States of
America, any state of the United States of America, the District of Columbia, and any subdivision of any of the
foregoing, and any agency, department, commission, board, authority or instrumentality, bureau or court having
jurisdiction over such Person.
-8-
“Guarantors” means any Person that now or hereafter executes a Guaranty, including (a) each Wyeville Drop Down
Entity, (b) each other Subsidiary of the Borrower listed on Schedule 4.11, and (c) each Subsidiary of the Borrower that
becomes a guarantor of all or a portion of the Obligations and which has entered into either a joinder agreement
substantially in the form attached to the Guaranty or a new Guaranty; provided, however, notwithstanding anything
contained in this Agreement or any other Credit Document to the contrary, no Foreign Subsidiary of the Borrower shall
be required to execute a Guaranty.
“Guaranty” means the Guaranty Agreement executed in substantially the same form as Exhibit C.
“Hazardous Substance” means any substance or material identified as such pursuant to CERCLA and those regulated
under any other Environmental Law, including without limitation pollutants, contaminants, petroleum, petroleum
products, radionuclides, and radioactive materials.
“Hazardous Waste” means any substance or material regulated or designated as such pursuant to any Environmental
Law, including without limitation, pollutants, contaminants, flammable substances and materials, explosives,
radioactive materials, oil, petroleum and petroleum products, chemical liquids and solids, polychlorinated biphenyls,
asbestos, toxic substances, and similar substances and materials.
“Hedging Arrangement” means a hedge, call, swap, collar, floor, cap, option, forward sale or purchase or other
contract or similar arrangement (including any obligations to purchase or sell any commodity or security at a future
date for a specific price) which is entered into to reduce or eliminate or otherwise protect against the risk of
fluctuations in prices or rates, including interest rates, foreign exchange rates, commodity prices and securities
prices.
“Hi-Crush Proppants” means Hi-Crush Proppants LLC, a Delaware limited liability company.
“Hi-Crush Proppants Credit Agreement” means that certain Credit Agreement dated as of April 6, 2012 among Hi-
Crush Proppants, as borrower, the lenders party thereto from time to time, and Amegy, as administrative agent,
issuing lender and swing line lender.
“Hi-Crush Proppants Entities” means Hi-Crush Proppants and its Subsidiaries (other than the General Partner, the
Borrower and its Subsidiaries).
“Income Tax Expense” means for Borrower and its Subsidiaries, on a consolidated basis for any period, all state and
federal income taxes (including without limitation Texas franchise taxes) paid or due to be paid during such period.
“Increase Date” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.15(b).
“Increasing Lender” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.15(a).
“Independent Engineering Report” means a report, in form and substance consistent with the report dated January
2012 in respect of Credit Parties’ facility in Wyeville, Wisconsin or otherwise reasonably satisfactory to the
Administrative Agent, prepared by an independent engineer, with respect to the Sand Reserves owned by the
Borrower or its Subsidiaries which report shall specify the location, quantity, and type of the estimated Sand
Reserves.
“Initial Financial Statements” means the unaudited consolidated financial statements of Hi-Crush Proppants and its
Subsidiaries for the fiscal quarter ending June 30, 2012, including statements of income, retained earnings, changes
in equity and cash flow for such fiscal quarter as well as a balance sheet as of the end of such fiscal quarter, all
prepared in accordance with GAAP.
-9-
“Interest Coverage Ratio” means, as of the end of each fiscal quarter, the ratio of (a) (i) for the fiscal quarter period
ending September 30, 2012, the Borrower’s consolidated EBITDA for such fiscal quarter multiplied by 4, (ii) for the
fiscal quarter period ending December 31, 2012, the Borrower’s consolidated EBITDA for the two fiscal quarter period
then ended multiplied by 2, (iii) for the fiscal quarter period ending March 31, 2013, the Borrower’s consolidated
EBITDA for the three fiscal quarter period then ended multiplied by 4/3, and (iv) for each fiscal quarter period ending
thereafter, the Borrower’s consolidated EBITDA for the four-fiscal quarter period then ended to (b) (i) for the fiscal
quarter period ending September 30, 2012, the Borrower’s consolidated Net Interest Expense for such fiscal quarter
multiplied by 4, (ii) for the fiscal quarter period ending December 31, 2012, the Borrower’s consolidated Net Interest
Expense for the two fiscal quarter period then ended multiplied by 2, (iii) for the fiscal quarter period ending March 31,
2013, the Borrower’s consolidated Net Interest Expense for the three fiscal quarter period then ended multiplied by
4/3, and (iv) for each fiscal quarter period ending thereafter, the Borrower’s consolidated Net Interest Expense for the
four-fiscal quarter period then ended.
“Interest Expense” means, for any period and with respect to any Person, total interest expense (including, without
limitation, the amortization of debt discount and premium and the interest component under Capital Leases and the
arrangement and upfront fees paid pursuant to the Fee Letter and the Subordinated Notes) as determined in
accordance with GAAP.
“Interest Period” means for each Eurodollar Advance comprising part of the same Borrowing, the period commencing
on the date of such Eurodollar Advance is made or deemed made and ending on the last day of the period selected by
the Borrower pursuant to the provisions below and Section 2.3, and thereafter, each subsequent period commencing
on the day following the last day of the immediately preceding Interest Period and ending on the last day of the period
selected by the Borrower pursuant to the provisions below and Section 2.3. The duration of each such Interest Period
shall be one, two, three, or six months, in each case as the Borrower may select, provided that:
(a) Interest Periods commencing on the same date for Advances comprising part of the same Borrowing shall be of
the same duration;
(b) whenever the last day of any Interest Period would otherwise occur on a day other than a Business Day, the last
day of such Interest Period shall be extended to occur on the next succeeding Business Day, provided that if such
extension would cause the last day of such Interest Period to occur in the next following calendar month, the last day
of such Interest Period shall occur on the next preceding Business Day;
(c) any Interest Period which begins on the last Business Day of a calendar month (or on a day for which there is no
numerically corresponding day in the calendar month at the end of such Interest Period) shall end on the last
Business Day of the calendar month in which it would have ended if there were a numerically corresponding day in
such calendar month; and
(d) the Borrower may not select any Interest Period for any Advance which ends after the Maturity Date.
“Investment” has the meaning set forth in Section 6.3.
“IPO” means the initial public offering of the Borrower’s common units representing limited partner interests.
“Issuing Lender” means Amegy in its capacity as a Lender that issues Letters of Credit for the account of any Credit
Party pursuant to the terms of this Agreement.
“Legal Requirement” means any law, statute, ordinance, decree, requirement, order, judgment, rule, regulation (or
official interpretation of any of the foregoing) of, and the terms of any license or permit issued by, any Governmental
Authority, including, but not limited to, Regulations T, U and X.
-10-
“Lender Insolvency Event” means that (a) a Lender or its Lender Parent Company is insolvent, or is generally unable
to pay its debts as they become due, or admits in writing its inability to pay its debts as they become due, or makes a
general assignment for the benefit of its creditors, or (b) such Lender or its Lender Parent Company is the subject of a
bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, liquidation or similar proceeding, or a receiver, trustee, conservator, intervenor
or sequestrator or the like has been appointed for such Lender or its Lender Parent Company, or such Lender or its
Lender Parent Company has taken any action in furtherance of or indicating its consent to or acquiescence in any
such proceeding or appointment; provided, that a Lender Insolvency Event shall not be triggered solely as the result
of the acquisition or maintenance of an ownership interest in such Lender or its Lender Parent Company by a
Governmental Authority or an instrumentality thereof.
“Lender Parent Company” means, with respect to a Lender, the bank holding company (as defined in Federal Reserve
Board Regulation Y), if any, of such Lender, and/or any Person owning, beneficially or of record, directly or indirectly,
a majority of the shares of such Lender.
“Lenders” means the Persons listed on the signature pages hereto as Lenders, any other Person that shall have
become a Lender hereto pursuant to Section 2.13, and any other Person that shall have become a Lender hereto
pursuant to an Assignment and Acceptance, but in any event, excluding any such Person that ceases to be a party
hereto pursuant to an Assignment and Acceptance. Unless the context otherwise requires, the term “Lenders” also
references the Swing Line Lender.
“Lending Office” means, as to any Lender, the office or offices of such Lender described as such in such Lender’s
Administrative Questionnaire, or such other office or offices as a Lender may from time to time notify the Borrower
and the Administrative Agent.
“Letter of Credit” means any standby or commercial letter of credit issued by an Issuing Lender for the account of a
Credit Party pursuant to the terms of this Agreement, in such form as may be agreed by the Borrower and the Issuing
Lender.
“Letter of Credit Application” means the Issuing Lender’s standard form letter of credit application for standby or
commercial letters of credit which has been executed by the Borrower and accepted by such Issuing Lender in
connection with the issuance of a Letter of Credit.
“Letter of Credit Documents” means all Letters of Credit, Letter of Credit Applications and amendments thereof, and
agreements, documents, and instruments entered into in connection therewith or relating thereto.
“Letter of Credit Exposure” means, at the date of its determination by the Administrative Agent, the aggregate
outstanding undrawn amount of Letters of Credit plus the aggregate unpaid amount of all of the Borrower’s payment
obligations under drawn Letters of Credit.
“Letter of Credit Maximum Amount” means $15,000,000; provided that, on and after the Maturity Date, the Letter of
Credit Maximum Amount shall be zero.
“Letter of Credit Obligations” means any obligations of the Borrower under this Agreement in connection with the
Letters of Credit.
“Leverage Ratio” means, as of the end of each fiscal quarter, the ratio of (a) the consolidated Funded Debt of the
Borrower as of the last day of such fiscal quarter to (b) (i) for the fiscal quarter period ending September 30, 2012, the
Borrower’s consolidated EBITDA such fiscal quarter multiplied by 4, (ii) for the fiscal quarter period ending
December 31, 2012, the Borrower’s consolidated EBITDA for the two fiscal quarter period then ended multiplied by 2,
(iii) for the fiscal quarter period ending March 31, 2013, the Borrower’s consolidated EBITDA for the three fiscal
quarter period then ended multiplied by 4/3, and (iv) for each fiscal quarter period ending thereafter, the Borrower’s
consolidated EBITDA for the four-fiscal quarter period then ended.
“Lien” means any mortgage, lien, pledge, charge, deed of trust, security interest, or encumbrance to secure or provide
for the payment of any obligation of any Person, whether arising by contract, operation of law, or otherwise (including
the interest of a vendor or lessor under any conditional sale agreement, Capital Lease, or other title retention
agreement).
-11-
“Liquid Investments” means (a) readily marketable direct full faith and credit obligations of the United States of
America or obligations unconditionally guaranteed by the full faith and credit of the United States of America;
(b) commercial paper issued by (i) any Lender or any Affiliate of any Lender or (ii) any commercial banking institutions
or corporations rated at least P-1 by Moody’s or A-1 by S&P; (c) certificates of deposit, time deposits, and bankers’
acceptances issued by (i) any of the Lenders or (ii) any other commercial banking institution which is a member of the
Federal Reserve System and has a combined capital and surplus and undivided profits of not less than $250,000,000
and rated Aa by Moody’s or AA by S&P; (d) repurchase agreements which are entered into with any of the Lenders or
any major money center banks included in the commercial banking institutions described in clause (c) and which are
secured by readily marketable direct full faith and credit obligations of the government of the United States of America
or any agency thereof; (e) investments in any money market fund which holds investments substantially of the type
described in the foregoing clauses (a) through (d); (f) readily and immediately available cash held in any money
market account maintained with any Lender; provided that, such money market accounts and the funds therein shall
be unencumbered and free and clear of all Liens and other third party rights other than a Lien in favor of the
Administrative Agent pursuant to the Security Documents; and (g) other investments made through the Administrative
Agent or its Affiliates and approved by the Administrative Agent. All the Liquid Investments described in clauses
(a) through (d) above shall have maturities of not more than 365 days from the date of issue.
“Liquidity” means, as of a date of determination, the sum of (a) the excess, if any, of the Commitments over the sum
of the aggregate outstanding amount of all Revolving Advances and all Swing Line Advances plus the Letter of Credit
Exposure plus (b) readily and immediately available cash held in deposit accounts of any Credit Party (other than the
Cash Collateral Account); provided that, such deposit accounts and the funds therein shall be unencumbered and free
and clear of all Liens and other third party rights other than a Lien in favor of the Administrative Agent pursuant to the
Security Documents and Liens permitted by Section 6.2(j).
“Maintenance Capital Expenditures” means Capital Expenditures made by any Credit Party to maintain the operations
of any Credit Party.
“Majority Lenders” means Lenders holding greater than 50% of the sum of (a) the aggregate unfunded Commitments
at such time plus (b) the aggregate unpaid principal amount of the Revolving Notes (with the aggregate amount of
each Lender’s risk participation and funded participation in the Letter of Credit Exposure (including any such Letter of
Credit Exposure that has been reallocated to such Lender pursuant to Section 2.14) and Swing Line Advances being
deemed as unpaid principal under such Lender’s Revolving Note); provided that, the Commitment of, and the portion
of the Revolving Advances and Letter of Credit Exposure held or deemed held by, any Defaulting Lender shall be
excluded for purposes of making a determination of Majority Lenders unless all Lenders are Defaulting Lenders.
“Material Adverse Change” means a material adverse change (a) in the business, operations, Property or financial
condition of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole; (b) on the validity or enforceability of this Agreement
or any of the other Credit Documents; (c) on any Credit Party’s ability to perform its obligations under this Agreement,
any Note, the Guaranty or any other Credit Document; or (d) in any right or remedy of any Secured Party under any
Credit Document.
“Material Contract” means each contract listed on Schedule 1.1(b), as amended, restated, supplemented or otherwise
modified from time to time.
“Maturity Date” means the earliest of (a) [            ], 2016, (b) the termination in whole of the Commitments pursuant to
Section 2.1(b) and (c) the termination in whole of the Commitments and acceleration of the Revolving Advances
pursuant to Article 7.
“Maximum Rate” means the maximum nonusurious interest rate under applicable law.
-12-
“Moody’s” means Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. and any successor thereto which is a nationally recognized
statistical rating organization.
“Mortgage” means each mortgage or deed of trust in form acceptable to the Administrative Agent executed by any
Credit Party to secure all or a portion of the Obligations.
“Multiemployer Plan” means a “multiemployer plan” as defined in Section 4001(a)(3) of ERISA to which the Borrower
or any member of the Controlled Group is making or accruing an obligation to make contributions.
“Net Cash Proceeds” means with respect to any Casualty Event, all cash and Liquid Investments received in respect
of such Casualty Event after (a) payment of, or provision for, all brokerage commissions and other reasonable out of
pocket fees and expenses actually incurred (including attorneys’, accountants’, investment bankers’, consultants’ or
other customary fees and expenses); (b) payment of any outstanding obligations relating to such Property paid in
connection with any such Casualty Event; and (c) taxes paid or reasonably estimated to be payable within one year
after such Casualty Event as a result thereof and as a result of any gain recognized in connection therewith.
“Net Income” means, for any period and with respect to any Person, the net income for such period for such Person
after taxes as determined in accordance with GAAP, including any cash net gain but excluding, however,
(a) extraordinary items, including (i) any net non-cash gain or loss during such period arising from the sale, exchange,
retirement or other disposition of capital assets (such term to include all fixed assets and all securities) other than in
the ordinary course of business, and (ii) any write up or write down of assets and (b) the cumulative effect of any
change in GAAP.
“Net Interest Expense” means, for any period and with respect to any Person, Interest Expense minus interest income
of such Person for such period.
“Non-Defaulting Lender” means any Lender that is not then a Defaulting Lender.
“Notes” means the Revolving Notes and the Swing Line Note.
“Notice of Borrowing” means a notice of borrowing signed by the Borrower in substantially the same form as Exhibit D.
“Notice of Continuation or Conversion” means a notice of continuation or conversion signed by the Borrower in
substantially the same form as Exhibit E.
“Obligations” means all principal, interest (including post-petition interest), fees, reimbursements, indemnifications,
and other amounts now or hereafter owed by any of the Credit Parties to the Lenders, the Swing Line Lender, the
Issuing Lender, or the Administrative Agent under this Agreement and the Credit Documents, including, the Letter of
Credit Obligations, and any increases, extensions, and rearrangements of those obligations under any amendments,
supplements, and other modifications of the documents and agreements creating those obligations.
“OFAC” means The Office of Foreign Assets Control of the U.S. Department of the Treasury.
“Organization Documents” means (a) for any corporation, the certificate or articles of incorporation and the bylaws,
(b) for any partnership, the partnership agreement and, if applicable, certificate of limited partnership or (c) for any
limited liability company, the operating agreement and articles or certificates of formation of incorporation.
“Other Taxes” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.12(b).
“Partnership Agreement” means the First Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited Partnership of Hi-Crush
Partners LP, substantially in the form attached as Appendix A to the Prospectus to be entered into prior to the closing
of the IPO.
-13-
“Patriot Act” means the USA Patriot Act (Title III of Pub. L. 107-56 (signed into law October 26, 2001)).
“PBGC” means the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation or any entity succeeding to any or all of its functions under
ERISA.
“Permitted Debt” has the meaning set forth in Section 6.1.
“Permitted Investments” has the meaning set forth in Section 6.3.
“Permitted Liens” has the meaning set forth in Section 6.2.
“Permitted Refinancing” means Debt issued or incurred (including by means of the extension or renewal of existing
Debt) to refinance, refund, extend, renew or replace existing Debt (the “Refinanced Debt”); provided that (a) the
principal amount of such Permitted Refinancing is not greater than the outstanding principal amount of such
Refinanced Debt plus the amount of any premiums or penalties and accrued and unpaid interest paid thereon,
reasonable fees and expenses and existing commitments unutilized thereunder, (b) such Permitted Refinancing has a
final maturity that is no sooner than such Refinanced Debt, (c) the documentation evidencing such Permitted
Refinancing contains representations, warranties, covenants and events of default, taken as a whole, no less
favorable to the Borrower in any material respect than this Agreement and (d) if such Refinanced Debt or any
guarantees in respect thereof are subordinated to the Obligations, such Permitted Refinancing remains so
subordinated on terms no less favorable to the Administrative Agent and the Lenders.
“Permitted Subordinated Debt” means Debt permitted under Section 6.1(h).
“Person” means an individual, partnership, corporation (including a business trust), joint stock company, trust, limited
liability company, limited liability partnership, unincorporated association, joint venture, or other entity, or a
government or any political subdivision or agency thereof, or any trustee, receiver, custodian, or similar official.
“Plan” means an employee benefit plan (other than a Multiemployer Plan) maintained for employees of the Borrower or
any member of the Controlled Group and covered by Title IV of ERISA or subject to the minimum funding standards
under Section 412 of the Code.
“Pro Forma Financial Statements” means the unaudited pro forma consolidated balance sheet of the Borrower and its
Subsidiaries as of June 30, 2012, prepared giving pro forma effect to the IPO and the Wyeville Drop Down as if such
transactions had occurred on such date.
“Property” of any Person means any property or assets (whether real, personal, or mixed, tangible or intangible) of
such Person.
“Pro Rata Share” means, at any time with respect to any Lender, (a) the ratio (expressed as a percentage) of such
Lender’s Commitment at such time to the aggregate Commitments at such time, or (b) if all of the Commitments have
been terminated, the ratio (expressed as a percentage) of such Lender’s aggregate outstanding Revolving Advances
at such time to the total aggregate outstanding Revolving Advances at such time.
“Prospectus” means the latest prospectus included in the Registration Statement or filed with the SEC pursuant to
Rule 424(b) under the Securities Act prior to the Effective Date.
“Register” has the meaning set forth in Section 9.7(b).
“Registration Statement” means that Registration Statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-182574) filed by the Borrower
with the SEC, amended as of the date hereof.
-14-
“Regulations T, U, and X” means Regulations T, U, and X of the Federal Reserve Board, as each is from time to time
in effect, and all official rulings and interpretations thereunder or thereof. Each of Regulations T, U, or X may be
referred to individually as Regulation T, Regulation U, or Regulation X herein.
“Release” shall have the meaning set forth in CERCLA or under any other Environmental Law.
“Response” shall have the meaning set forth in CERCLA or under any other Environmental Law.
“Reportable Event” means any of the events set forth in Section 4043(c) of ERISA (other than any such event not
subject to the provision for 30-day notice to the PBGC under the regulations issued under such section).
“Responsible Officer” means (a) with respect to any Person that is a corporation, such Person’s Chief Executive
Officer, President, or Chief Financial Officer, (b) with respect to any Person that is a limited liability company, if such
Person has officers, then such Person’s Chief Executive Officer, President, or Chief Financial Officer, and if such
Person is managed by members, then a Responsible Officer of such Person’s managing member, and if such Person
is managed by managers, then a manager (if such manager is an individual) or a Responsible Officer of such manager
(if such manager is an entity), and (c) with respect to any Person that is a general partnership, limited partnership or a
limited liability partnership, the Responsible Officer of such Person’s general partner or partners.
“Restricted Payment” means, with respect to any Person, (a) any direct or indirect dividend or distribution (whether in
cash, securities or other Property) or any direct or indirect payment of any kind or character (whether in cash,
securities or other Property) made in connection with the Equity Interest of such Person, including those dividends,
distributions and payments made in consideration for or otherwise in connection with any retirement, purchase,
redemption or other acquisition of any Equity Interest of such Person, or any options, warrants or rights to purchase or
acquire any such Equity Interest of such Person or (b) principal or interest payments (in cash, Property or otherwise)
on, or redemptions of, subordinated debt of such Person; provided that the term “Restricted Payment” shall not
include any dividend or distribution payable solely in common or subordinated Equity Interests of such Person or
warrants, options or other rights to purchase such Equity Interests.
“Revolving Advance” means any advance by a Lender to the Borrower as part of a Revolving Borrowing.
“Revolving Borrowing” means a Borrowing consisting of simultaneous Revolving Advances of the same Type made by
the Lenders pursuant to Section 2.1(a) or Converted by each Lender to Revolving Advances of a different Type
pursuant to Section 2.3(b).
“Revolving Loan” means the aggregate principal from a Lender which represents such Lender’s ratable share of a
Revolving Borrowing.
“Revolving Note” means a promissory note of the Borrower payable to the order of a Lender in the amount of such
Lender’s Commitment, in substantially the same form as Exhibit G-1, evidencing indebtedness of the Borrower to
such Lender resulting from Revolving Advances owing to such Lender.
“S&P” means Standard & Poor’s Rating Agency Group, a division of McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., or any successor
thereof which is a national credit rating organization.
“Sanctioned Entity” means (a) a country or a government of a country, (b) an agency of the government of a country,
(c) an organization directly or indirectly controlled by a country or its government, (d) a Person resident in a country, in
each case, that is subject to a country sanctions program administered and enforced by OFAC.
“Sanctioned Person” means a person named on the list of Specially Designated Nationals maintained by OFAC.
-15-
“Sand Reserves” means (a) at any particular time, the estimated quantities of sand which geological and engineering
data demonstrate with reasonable certainty to be recoverable in future years under then existing economic and
operating conditions (i.e., prices and costs as of the date the estimate is made) and (b) any fee mineral interests,
term mineral interests, leases, subleases, farm-outs, royalties, overriding royalties, net profit interests, carried
interests, production payments and similar mineral interests, and all unsevered and unextracted sand in, under, or
attributable to the properties described in the foregoing clause (a).
“SEC” means, the Securities and Exchange Commission.
“Secured Obligations” means (a) the Obligations, (b) the Banking Services Obligations, and (c) all obligations of any of
the Credit Parties owing to Swap Counterparties under any Hedging Arrangements.
“Secured Parties” means the Administrative Agent, the Issuing Lender, the Lenders, the Swap Counterparties and
Banking Services Providers.
“Security Agreement” means the Pledge and Security Agreement among the Credit Parties and the Administrative
Agent in substantially the same form as Exhibit F.
“Security Documents” means, collectively, the Mortgages, Security Agreement, and any and all other instruments,
documents or agreements, including Account Control Agreements, now or hereafter executed by any Credit Party or
any other Person to secure the Secured Obligations.
“Solvent” means, as to any Person, on the date of any determination (a) the fair value of the Property of such Person
is greater than the total amount of debts and other liabilities (including without limitation, contingent liabilities) of such
Person, (b) the present fair salable value of the assets of such Person is not less than the amount that will be
required to pay the probable liability of such Person on its debts and other liabilities (including, without limitation,
contingent liabilities) as they become absolute and matured, (c) such Person is able to realize upon its assets and
pay its debts and other liabilities (including, without limitation, contingent liabilities) as they mature in the normal
course of business, (d) such Person does not intend to, and does not believe that it will, incur debts or liabilities
(including, without limitation, contingent liabilities) beyond such Person’s ability to pay as such debts and liabilities
mature, (e) such Person is not engaged in, and is not about to engage in, business or a transaction for which such
Person’s Property would constitute unreasonably small capital, and (f) such Person has not transferred, concealed or
removed any Property with intent to hinder, delay or defraud any creditor of such Person.
“Sponsor” means Avista Capital Holdings, L.P. or any entities that are used to form, organize or establish funds on
behalf of Avista Capital Holdings, L.P. and its affiliates.
“Subject Lender” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.13.
“Subordination Agreement” means a subordination agreement in form and substance satisfactory to the Majority
Lenders by and among each applicable Credit Party, the holder(s) of each Subordinated Note, and the Administrative
Agent.
“Subordinated Notes” means each subordinated promissory note by the Borrower with representations, warranties,
covenants and events of default, taken as a whole, no less favorable to the Borrower in any material respect than this
Agreement and otherwise in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the Majority Lenders.
“Subsidiary” means, with respect to any Person (the “holder”) at any date, any corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association or other entity the accounts of which would be consolidated with those of the holder in the
holder’s consolidated financial statements if such financial statements were prepared in accordance with GAAP as of
such date, as well as any other corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association or other entity, a
majority of whose outstanding Voting Securities shall at any time be owned by the holder or one more Subsidiaries of
the holder. Unless expressly provided otherwise, all references herein and in any other Credit Document to any
“Subsidiary” or “Subsidiaries” means a Subsidiary or Subsidiaries of the Borrower.
“Swap Counterparty” means a Lender or an Affiliate of a Lender that has entered into a Hedging Arrangement with a
Credit Party as permitted by the terms of this Agreement.
-16-
“Swing Line Advance” means an advance by the Swing Line Lender to the Borrower as part of a Swing Line Borrowing.
“Swing Line Borrowing” means the Borrowing consisting of a Swing Line Advance made by the Swing Line Lender
pursuant to Section 2.3(f) or, if an AutoBorrow Agreement is in effect, any transfer of funds pursuant to such
AutoBorrow Agreement.
“Swing Line Lender” means Amegy.
“Swing Line Note” means the promissory note made by the Borrower payable to the order of the Swing Line Lender
evidencing the indebtedness of the Borrower to the Swing Line Lender resulting from Swing Line Advances in
substantially the same form as Exhibit G-2.
“Swing Line Payment Date” means (a) if an AutoBorrow Agreement is in effect, the earliest to occur of (i) the date
required by such AutoBorrow Agreement, (ii) demand is made by the Swing Line Lender and (iii) the Maturity Date, or
(b) if an AutoBorrow Agreement is not in effect, the earlier to occur of (i) three (3) Business Days after demand is
made by the Swing Line Lender if no Event of Default exists, and otherwise upon demand by the Swing Line Lender
and (ii) the Maturity Date.
“Swing Line Sublimit Amount” means $5,000,000; provided that, on and after the Maturity Date, the Swing Line
Sublimit Amount shall be zero.
“Tax Group” has the meaning assigned to it in Section 4.13.
“Taxes” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.12(a).
“Termination Event” means (a) a Reportable Event with respect to a Plan, (b) the withdrawal of the Borrower or any
member of the Controlled Group from a Plan during a plan year in which it was a “substantial employer” as defined in
Section 4001(a)(2) of ERISA, (c) the filing of a notice of intent to terminate a Plan or the treatment of a Plan
amendment as a termination under Section 4041(c) of ERISA, (d) the institution of proceedings to terminate a Plan by
the PBGC, or (e) any other event or condition which constitutes grounds under Section 4042 of ERISA for the
termination of, or the appointment of a trustee to administer, any Plan.
“Type” has the meaning set forth in Section 1.4.
“Voting Securities” means (a) with respect to any corporation, capital stock of the corporation having general voting
power under ordinary circumstances to elect directors of such corporation (irrespective of whether at the time stock of
any other class or classes shall have or might have special voting power or rights by reason of the happening of any
contingency), (b) with respect to any partnership, any partnership interest or other ownership interest having general
voting power to elect the general partner or other management of the partnership or other Person, and (c) with respect
to any limited liability company, membership certificates or interests having general voting power under ordinary
circumstances to elect managers of such limited liability company.
“Wall Street Journal Rate” means a rate of interest per annum equal to the “prime rate” as published from time to time
in the Eastern Edition of the Wall Street Journal as the average prime lending rate for seventy-five percent (75%) of
the United States’ thirty (30) largest commercial banks, or if the Wall Street Journal shall cease publication or cease
publishing the “prime rate” on a regular basis, such other regularly published average prime rate applicable to such
commercial banks as is acceptable to the Administrative Agent in its reasonable discretion.
“Wyeville Drop Down” means the contribution of all of the Equity Interests of the Wyeville Drop Down Entities by Hi-
Crush Proppants to the Borrower pursuant to the Wyeville Drop Down Documents in exchange for (a) common units of
the Borrower, (b) subordinated units of the Borrower and (c) incentive distribution rights.
-17-
“Wyeville Drop Down Documents” means that certain Contribution, Assignment and Assumption Agreement dated as
of [              ], 2012 among Hi-Crush Proppants, the Borrower, and the General Partner together with each other
agreement, instrument, or document executed in connection with the Wyeville Drop Down.
“Wyeville Drop Down Entities” means Hi-Crush Operating LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, Hi-Crush
Chambers LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, Hi-Crush Railroad LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, and
Hi-Crush Wyeville LLC, a Delaware limited liability company.
Section 1.2. Computation of Time Periods. In this Agreement in the computation of periods of time from a specified
date to a later specified date, the word “from” means “from and including” and the words “to” and “until” each means “to
but excluding”.
Section 1.3. Accounting Terms; Changes in GAAP.
(a) All accounting terms not specifically defined in this Agreement shall be construed in accordance with GAAP
applied on a consistent basis with those applied in the preparation of the Initial Financial Statements.
(b) Unless otherwise indicated, all financial statements of the Borrower, all calculations for compliance with covenants
in this Agreement, all determinations of the Applicable Margin, and all calculations of any amounts to be calculated
under the definitions in Section 1.1 shall be based upon the consolidated accounts of the Borrower and its
Subsidiaries in accordance with GAAP and consistent with the principles of consolidation applied in preparing the
Initial Financial Statements.
(c) If at any time any change in GAAP would affect the computation of any financial ratio or requirement set forth in
any Credit Document, and either the Borrower or the Majority Lenders shall so request, the Administrative Agent, the
Lenders and the Borrower shall negotiate in good faith to amend such ratio or requirement to preserve the original
intent thereof in light of such change in GAAP (subject to the approval of the Majority Lenders); provided that, until so
amended, (i) such ratio or requirement shall continue to be computed in accordance with GAAP prior to such change
therein and (ii) the Borrower shall provide to the Administrative Agent and the Lenders financial statements and other
documents required under this Agreement or as reasonably requested hereunder setting forth a reconciliation between
calculations of such ratio or requirement made before and after giving effect to such change in GAAP.
Section 1.4. Classes and Types of Advances. Advances are distinguished by “Class” and “Type”. The “Class” of an
Advance refers to the determination of whether such Advance is a Revolving Advance or a Swing Line Advance. The
“Type” of an Advance refers to the determination of whether such Advance is a Base Rate Advance or a Eurodollar
Advance.
Section 1.5. Miscellaneous. Article, Section, Schedule, and Exhibit references are to this Agreement, unless
otherwise specified. All references to instruments, documents, contracts, and agreements (including this Agreement)
are references to such instruments, documents, contracts, and agreements as the same may be amended,
supplemented, and otherwise modified from time to time, unless otherwise specified and shall include all schedules
and exhibits thereto unless otherwise specified. Any reference herein to any law shall be construed as referring to
such law as amended, modified, codified or reenacted, in whole or in part, and in effect from time to time. Any
reference herein to any Person shall be construed to include such Person’s successors and assigns (subject to the
restrictions contained herein). The words “hereof”, “herein”, and “hereunder” and words of similar import when used in
this Agreement shall refer to this Agreement as a whole and not to any particular provision of this Agreement. The
term “including” means “including, without limitation,”. Paragraph headings have been inserted in this Agreement as a
matter of convenience for reference only and it is agreed that such paragraph headings are not a part of this
Agreement and shall not be used in the interpretation of any provision of this Agreement.
-18-
ARTICLE 2
CREDIT FACILITIES
Section 2.1. Commitments.
(a) Commitment. Each Lender severally agrees, on the terms and conditions set forth in this Agreement, to make
Revolving Advances to the Borrower from time to time on any Business Day during the period from the Effective Date
until the Maturity Date; provided that after giving effect to such Revolving Advances, the sum of the aggregate
outstanding amount of all Revolving Advances and all Swing Line Advances plus the Letter of Credit Exposure, shall
not exceed the aggregate Commitments in effect at such time. Each Revolving Borrowing shall (A) if comprised of
Base Rate Advances be in an aggregate amount not less than $500,000 and in integral multiples of $50,000 in excess
thereof, (B) if comprised of Eurodollar Advances be in an aggregate amount not less than $1,000,000 and in integral
multiples of $500,000 in excess thereof, and (C) consist of Revolving Advances of the same Type made on the same
day by the Lenders ratably according to their respective Commitments. Within the limits of each Lender’s
Commitment, the Borrower may from time to time borrow, prepay pursuant to Section 2.4, and reborrow under this
Section 2.1(a).
(b) Reduction of the Commitments.
(i) Commitments. The Borrower shall have the right, upon at least three Business Days’ irrevocable notice to the
Administrative Agent, to terminate in whole or reduce in part the unused portion of the Commitments; provided that
each partial reduction shall be in a minimum amount of $5,000,000 and in integral multiples of $1,000,000 in excess
thereof. Any reduction or termination of the Commitments pursuant to this Section 2.1(b)(i) shall be applied ratably to
each Lender’s Commitment and shall be permanent, with no obligation of the Lenders to reinstate such Commitments,
and the applicable Commitment Fees shall thereafter be computed on the basis of the Commitments, as so reduced.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Borrower may (subject to payment to the Lenders of any applicable amounts under
Section 2.9 hereof) rescind or postpone any notice to terminate in whole the Commitments if such termination would
have resulted from a refinancing of this Agreement, which refinancing shall not be consummated or shall otherwise be
delayed.
(ii) Defaulting Lender. At any time when a Lender is then a Defaulting Lender, the Borrower, at the Borrower’s election,
may elect to terminate such Defaulting Lender’s Commitment hereunder; provided that (A) such termination must be
of the Defaulting Lender’s entire Commitment, (B) the Borrower shall pay all amounts owed by the Borrower to such
Defaulting Lender in such Defaulting Lender’s capacity as a Lender under this Agreement and under the other Credit
Documents (including principal of and interest on the Revolving Advances owed to such Defaulting Lender, accrued
Commitment Fees (subject to Section 2.6(a)), and letter of credit fees but specifically excluding any amounts owing
under Section 2.9 as result of such payment of such Advances) and shall deposit with the Administrative Agent into
the Cash Collateral Account cash collateral in the amount equal to such Defaulting Lender’s ratable share of the Letter
of Credit Exposure (excluding any such Letter of Credit Exposure that has been reallocated pursuant to Section 2.14),
(C) a Defaulting Lender’s Commitment may be terminated by the Borrower under this Section 2.1(b)(ii) if and only if at
such time, the Borrower has elected, or is then electing, to terminate the Commitments of all then existing Defaulting
Lenders. Upon written notice to the Defaulting Lender and Administrative Agent of the Borrower’s election to
-19-
terminate a Defaulting Lender’s Commitment pursuant to this clause (ii) and the payment and deposit of amounts
required to be made by the Borrower under clause (B) above, (1) such Defaulting Lender shall cease to be a “Lender”
hereunder for all purposes except that such Lender’s rights and obligations as a Lender under Sections 2.10, 2.12, 8.5
and 9.2 shall continue with respect to events and occurrences occurring before or concurrently with its ceasing to be a
“Lender” hereunder, (2) such Defaulting Lender’s Commitment shall be deemed terminated, and (3) such Defaulting
Lender shall be relieved of its obligations hereunder as a “Lender”, except as to its obligations under Section 8.5 shall
continue with respect to events and occurrences occurring before or concurrently with its ceasing to be a “Lender”
hereunder, provided that, any such termination will not be deemed to be a waiver or release of any claim that
Borrower, the Administrative Agent, the Swing Line Lender, any Issuing Lender or any Lender may have against such
Defaulting Lender.
(c) Notes. The indebtedness of the Borrower to each Lender resulting (i) from Revolving Advances owing to such
Lender shall be evidenced by a Revolving Note and (ii) from Swing Line Advances owing to the Swing Line Lender, as
set forth in Section 2.3(f) below, shall be evidenced by a Swing Line Note.
Section 2.2. Letters of Credit
(a) Commitment for Letters of Credit. Subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this Agreement, the Issuing
Lender agrees, in reliance upon the agreements of the other Lenders set forth in this Section 2.2, from time to time on
any Business Day during the period from the Effective Date until the fifth Business Day prior to the Maturity Date, to
issue, increase or extend the expiration date of, Letters of Credit for the account of any Credit Party, provided that no
Letter of Credit will be issued, increased, or extended:
(i) if such issuance, increase, or extension would cause the Letter of Credit Exposure to exceed the lesser of (A) the
Letter of Credit Maximum Amount and (B) an amount equal to (1) the aggregate Commitments in effect at such time
minus (2) the sum of the aggregate outstanding amount of all Revolving Advances and all Swing Line Advances;
(ii) unless such Letter of Credit has an expiration date not later than the earlier of (A) one year after its issuance or
extension and (B) five (5) Business Days prior to the Maturity Date; provided that, (1) if the Commitments are
terminated in whole pursuant to Section 2.1(b), the Borrower shall either (A) deposit into the Cash Collateral Account
cash in an amount equal to 105% of the Letter of Credit Exposure for the Letters of Credit which have an expiry date
beyond the date the Commitments are terminated or (B) provide a replacement letter of credit (or other security)
reasonably acceptable to the Administrative Agent and the Issuing Lender in an amount equal to 105% of the Letter of
Credit Exposure, and (2) any such Letter of Credit with a one-year tenor may expressly provide for an automatic
extension of one additional year so long as such Letter of Credit expressly allows the Issuing Lender, at its sole
discretion, to elect not to provide such extension; provided that, in any event, such automatic extension may not
result in an expiration date that occurs after the fifth Business Day prior to the Maturity Date;
(iii) unless such Letter of Credit is (A) a standby letter of credit not supporting the repayment of indebtedness for
borrowed money of any Person, or (B) with the consent of the Issuing Lender and so long as the Borrower has agreed
to such additional fees which may apply, a commercial letter of credit;
-20-
(iv) unless such Letter of Credit is in form and substance acceptable to the Issuing Lender in its reasonable
discretion;
(v) unless the Borrower has delivered to the Issuing Lender a completed and executed Letter of Credit Application;
provided that, if the terms of any Letter of Credit Application conflicts with the terms of this Agreement, the terms of
this Agreement shall control;
(vi) unless such Letter of Credit is governed by (A) the Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary Credits (2007
Revision), International Chamber of Commerce Publication No. 600, or (B) the International Standby Practices
(ISP98), International Chamber of Commerce Publication No. 590, in either case, including any subsequent revisions
thereof approved by a Congress of the International Chamber of Commerce and adhered to by the Issuing Lender;
(vii) if any order, judgment or decree of any Governmental Authority or arbitrator shall by its terms purport to enjoin or
restrain the Issuing Lender from issuing, increasing or extending such Letter of Credit, or any Legal Requirement
applicable to the Issuing Lender or any request or directive (whether or not having the force of law) from any
Governmental Authority with jurisdiction over the Issuing Lender shall prohibit, or request that the Issuing Lender
refrain from, the issuance, increase or extension of letters of credit generally or such Letter of Credit in particular or
shall impose upon the Issuing Lender with respect to such Letter of Credit any restriction, reserve or capital
requirement (for which the Issuing Lender is not otherwise compensated hereunder) not in effect on the date hereof, or
shall impose upon the Issuing Lender any unreimbursed loss, cost or expense which was not applicable on the date
hereof and which the Issuing Lender in good faith deems material to it;
(viii) if the issuance, increase or extension of such Letter of Credit would violate one or more policies of the Issuing
Lender applicable to letters of credit generally;
(ix) if Letter of Credit is to be denominated in a currency other than Dollars;
(x) if any Lender is at such time a Defaulting Lender hereunder, unless the Issuing Lender has entered into
satisfactory arrangements with the Borrower or such Lender to eliminate the Issuing Lender’s risk with respect to such
Lender; or
(xi) if such Letter of Credit supports the obligations of any Person in respect of (x) a lease of real property, or (y) an
employment contract, in each case, if the Issuing Lender reasonably determines that the Borrower’s obligation to
reimburse any draws under such Letter of Credit may be limited.
Each Existing Letter of Credit, as of the Effective Date, shall be a Letter of Credit deemed to have been issued
pursuant to the Commitments and shall constitute a portion of the Letter of Credit Exposure.
(b) Requesting Letters of Credit. Each Letter of Credit shall be issued pursuant to a Letter of Credit Application given
by the Borrower to the Administrative Agent and the Issuing Lender by facsimile or other writing not later than 11:00
a.m. (Houston, Texas, time) on the third Business Day before the proposed date of issuance for the Letter of Credit.
Each Letter of Credit Application shall be fully completed and shall specify the information required therein. Each
Letter of Credit Application shall be irrevocable and binding on the Borrower. Subject to the terms and conditions
hereof, the Issuing Lender shall before 2:00 p.m. (Houston, Texas, time) on the date of such Letter of Credit
Application issue such Letter of Credit to the beneficiary of such Letter of Credit.
-21-
(c) Reimbursements for Letters of Credit; Funding of Participations.
(i) With respect to any Letter of Credit, in accordance with the related Letter of Credit Application, the Borrower agrees
to pay on demand to the Administrative Agent on behalf of the Issuing Lender an amount equal to any amount paid by
the Issuing Lender under such Letter of Credit. Upon the Issuing Lender’s demand for payment under the terms of a
Letter of Credit Application, the Borrower may, with a written notice, request that the Borrower’s obligations to the
Issuing Lender thereunder be satisfied with the proceeds of a Revolving Advance in the same amount
(notwithstanding any minimum size or increment limitations on individual Revolving Advances). If the Borrower does
not make such request and does not otherwise make the payments demanded by the Issuing Lender as required
under this Agreement or the Letter of Credit Application, then the Borrower shall be deemed for all purposes of this
Agreement to have requested such a Revolving Advance in the same amount and the transfer of the proceeds thereof
to satisfy the Borrower’s obligations to the Issuing Lender, and the Borrower hereby unconditionally and irrevocably
authorizes, empowers, and directs the Lenders to make such Revolving Advance, to transfer the proceeds thereof to
the Issuing Lender in satisfaction of such obligations, and to record and otherwise treat such payments as a
Revolving Advance to the Borrower. The Administrative Agent and each Lender may record and otherwise treat the
making of such Revolving Borrowings as the making of a Revolving Borrowing to the Borrower under this Agreement
as if requested by the Borrower. Nothing herein is intended to release any of the Borrower’s obligations under any
Letter of Credit Application, but only to provide an additional method of payment therefor. The making of any
Revolving Borrowing under this Section 2.2(c) shall not constitute a cure or waiver of any Default, other than the
payment Default which is satisfied by the application of the amounts deemed advanced hereunder, caused by the
Borrower’s failure to comply with the provisions of this Agreement or the Letter of Credit Application.
(ii) Each Lender (including the Lender acting as Issuing Lender) shall, upon notice from the Administrative Agent that
the Borrower has requested or is deemed to have requested a Revolving Advance pursuant to Section 2.2 and
regardless of whether (A) the conditions in Section 3.2 have been met, (B) such notice complies with Section 2.3, or
(C) a Default exists, make funds available to the Administrative Agent for the account of the Issuing Lender in an
amount equal to such Lender’s Pro Rata Share of the amount of such Revolving Advance not later than 12:00 noon on
the Business Day specified in such notice by the Administrative Agent, whereupon each Lender that so makes funds
available shall be deemed to have made a Revolving Advance to the Borrower in such amount. The Administrative
Agent shall remit the funds so received to the Issuing Lender.
(iii) If any such Lender shall not have so made its Revolving Advance available to the Administrative Agent pursuant
to this Section 2.2, such Lender agrees to pay interest thereon for each day from such date until the date such
amount is paid at the lesser of (A) the Federal Funds Rate for such day for the first three days and thereafter the
interest rate applicable to the Revolving Advance and (B) the Maximum Rate. Whenever, at any time after the
Administrative Agent has received from any Lender such Lender’s Revolving Advance, the Administrative Agent
receives any payment on account thereof, the Administrative Agent will pay to such Lender its participating interest in
such amount (appropriately adjusted, in the case of interest payments, to reflect the period of time during which such
Lender’s Revolving Advance was outstanding and funded), which payment shall be subject to repayment by such
Lender if such payment received by the Administrative Agent is required to be returned. Each Lender’s obligation to
make the Revolving Advance pursuant to this Section 2.2 shall be absolute and unconditional and shall not be
affected by any circumstance, including (1) any set-off,
-22-
counterclaim, recoupment, defense or other right which such Lender or any other Person may have against the
Issuing Lender, the Administrative Agent or any other Person for any reason whatsoever; (2) the occurrence or
continuance of a Default or the termination of the Commitments; (3) any breach of this Agreement by any Credit Party
or any other Lender; or (4) any other circumstance, happening or event whatsoever, whether or not similar to any of
the foregoing.
(d) Participations. Upon the date of the issuance or increase of a Letter of Credit (including in the case of each
Existing Letter of Credit, the deemed issuance with respect thereto on the Effective Date), the Issuing Lender shall be
deemed to have sold to each other Lender and each other Lender shall have been deemed to have purchased from
the Issuing Lender a participation in the related Letter of Credit Obligations equal to such Lender’s Pro Rata Share at
such date and such sale and purchase shall otherwise be in accordance with the terms of this Agreement. The
Issuing Lender shall promptly notify each such participant Lender by telex, telephone, or telecopy of each Letter of
Credit issued or increased and the actual dollar amount of such Lender’s participation in such Letter of Credit.
(e) Obligations Unconditional. The obligations of the Borrower under this Agreement in respect of each Letter of Credit
shall be unconditional and irrevocable, and shall be paid strictly in accordance with the terms of this Agreement under
all circumstances, notwithstanding the following circumstances:
(i) any lack of validity or enforceability of any Letter of Credit Documents;
(ii) any amendment or waiver of or any consent to departure from any Letter of Credit Documents;
(iii) the existence of any claim, set-off, defense or other right which any Credit Party may have at any time against
any beneficiary or transferee of such Letter of Credit (or any Persons for whom any such beneficiary or any such
transferee may be acting), the Issuing Lender, any Lender or any other person or entity, whether in connection with
this Agreement, the transactions contemplated in this Agreement or in any Letter of Credit Documents or any
unrelated transaction;
(iv) any statement or any other document presented under such Letter of Credit proving to be forged, fraudulent,
invalid or insufficient in any respect or any statement therein being untrue or inaccurate in any respect to the extent
the Issuing Lender would not be liable therefor pursuant to the following paragraph (g);
(v) payment by the Issuing Lender under such Letter of Credit against presentation of a draft or certificate which does
not comply with the terms of such Letter of Credit; or
(vi) any other circumstance or happening whatsoever, whether or not similar to any of the foregoing;
provided, however, that nothing contained in this paragraph (e) shall be deemed to constitute a waiver of any remedies
of the Borrower in connection with the Letters of Credit.
(f) Prepayments of Letters of Credit. In the event that any Letter of Credit shall be outstanding or shall be drawn and
not reimbursed on or prior to the fifth Business Day prior to the Maturity Date, the Borrower shall pay to the
Administrative Agent an amount equal to 105% of the Letter of Credit Exposure allocable to such Letter of Credit,
such amount to be due and payable on the fifth Business Day prior to the Maturity Date, and to be held in the Cash
Collateral Account and applied in accordance with paragraph (h) below.
-23-
(g) Liability of Issuing Lender. The Borrower assumes all risks of the acts or omissions of any beneficiary or
transferee of any Letter of Credit with respect to its use of such Letter of Credit. Neither the Issuing Lender nor any of
its officers or directors shall be liable or responsible for:
(i) the use which may be made of any Letter of Credit or any acts or omissions of any beneficiary or transferee in
connection therewith;
(ii) the validity, sufficiency or genuineness of documents, or of any endorsement thereon, even if such documents
should prove to be in any or all respects invalid, insufficient, fraudulent or forged;
(iii) payment by the Issuing Lender against presentation of documents which do not comply with the terms of a Letter
of Credit, including failure of any documents to bear any reference or adequate reference to the relevant Letter of
Credit; or
(iv) any other circumstances whatsoever in making or failing to make payment under any Letter of Credit (INCLUDING
THE ISSUING LENDER’S OWN NEGLIGENCE),
except that the Borrower shall have a claim against the Issuing Lender, and the Issuing Lender shall be liable to, and
shall promptly pay to, the Borrower, to the extent of any direct, as opposed to consequential, damages suffered by
the Borrower which the Borrower proves were caused by (A) the Issuing Lender’s willful misconduct or gross
negligence in determining whether documents presented under a Letter of Credit comply with the terms of such Letter
of Credit or (B) the Issuing Lender’s willful failure to make lawful payment under any Letter of Credit after the
presentation to it of a draft and certificate strictly complying with the terms and conditions of such Letter of Credit. In
furtherance and not in limitation of the foregoing, the Issuing Lender may accept documents that appear on their face
to be in order, without responsibility for further investigation, regardless of any notice or information to the contrary.
(h) Cash Collateral Account.
(i) If the Borrower is required to deposit funds in the Cash Collateral Account pursuant to Sections 2.2(a), 2.2(f),
2.4(c), 2.14, 7.2(b) or 7.3(b) or any other provision under this Agreement, then the Borrower and the Administrative
Agent shall establish the Cash Collateral Account and the Borrower shall execute any documents and agreements,
including the Administrative Agent’s standard form assignment of deposit accounts, that the Administrative Agent
requests in connection therewith to establish the Cash Collateral Account and grant the Administrative Agent an
Acceptable Security Interest in such account and the funds therein. The Borrower hereby pledges to the
Administrative Agent and grants the Administrative Agent a security interest in the Cash Collateral Account, whenever
established, all funds held in the Cash Collateral Account from time to time, and all proceeds thereof as security for
the payment of the Secured Obligations.
(ii) Funds held in the Cash Collateral Account shall be held as cash collateral for obligations with respect to Letters of
Credit and promptly applied by the Administrative Agent at the request of the Issuing Lender to any reimbursement or
other obligations under Letters of Credit that exist or occur. To the extent that any surplus funds are held in the Cash
Collateral Account above the Letter of Credit Exposure during the existence of an Event of Default the Administrative
Agent may (A) hold such surplus funds in the Cash Collateral Account as cash
-24-
collateral for the Secured Obligations or (B) apply such surplus funds to any Secured Obligations in any manner
directed by the Majority Lenders. If no Default exists, the Administrative Agent shall release any surplus funds held in
the Cash Collateral Account above the Letter of Credit Exposure to the Borrower at the Borrower’s written request.
(iii) Funds held in the Cash Collateral Account may be invested in Liquid Investments maintained with, and under the
sole dominion and control of, the Administrative Agent or in another investment if mutually agreed upon by the
Borrower and the Administrative Agent, but the Administrative Agent shall have no obligation to make any investment
of the funds therein. The Administrative Agent shall exercise reasonable care in the custody and preservation of any
funds held in the Cash Collateral Account and shall be deemed to have exercised such care if such funds are
accorded treatment substantially equivalent to that which the Administrative Agent accords its own property, it being
understood that the Administrative Agent shall not have any responsibility for taking any necessary steps to preserve
rights against any parties with respect to any such funds.
(i) Defaulting Lender. If, at any time, a Defaulting Lender exists hereunder, then, at the request of the Issuing Lender
subject to Section 2.14(c), the Borrower shall deposit funds with Administrative Agent into the Cash Collateral
Account an amount equal to such Defaulting Lender’s Pro Rata Share of the Letter of Credit Exposure.
(j) Letters of Credit Issued for Guarantors or any Subsidiary. Notwithstanding that a Letter of Credit issued or
outstanding hereunder is in support of any obligations of, or is for the account of, a Guarantor or any Subsidiary, the
Borrower shall be obligated to reimburse the Issuing Lender hereunder for any and all drawings under such Letter of
Credit issued hereunder by the Issuing Lender. The Borrower hereby acknowledges that the issuance of Letters of
Credit for the account of any Guarantor, the Borrower or any Subsidiary inures to the benefit of the Borrower, and that
the Borrower’s business (indirectly or directly) derives substantial benefits from the businesses of such other
Persons.
Section 2.3. Advances.
(a) Notice. Each Borrowing (other than the Borrowings to be made on the Effective Date), shall be made pursuant to
the applicable Notice of Borrowing given by the Borrower to the Administrative Agent not later than (i) 11:00 a.m.
(Houston, Texas time) on the third Business Day before the date of the proposed Borrowing, in the case of a
Eurodollar Advance or (ii) 11:00 a.m. (Houston, Texas time) on the Business Day before the date of the proposed
Borrowing, in the case of a Base Rate Advance, by the Borrower to the Administrative Agent, which shall give to each
Lender prompt notice of such proposed Borrowing, by facsimile or telex. The Borrowings to be made on the Effective
Date shall be made pursuant to the applicable Notices of Borrowing given not later than 11:00 a.m. (Houston, Texas
time) on the Effective Date by the Borrower to the Administrative Agent, which shall give to each Lender prompt
notice of such proposed Borrowing, by facsimile or telex. Each Notice of Borrowing shall be by facsimile or telex,
confirmed promptly by the Borrower with a hard copy (other than with respect to notice sent by facsimile), specifying
(i) the requested date of such Borrowing, (ii) the requested Type and Class of Advances comprising such Borrowing,
(iii) the aggregate amount of such Borrowing, and (iv) if such Borrowing is to be comprised of Eurodollar Advances,
the requested Interest Period for each such Advance; provided that, and all Borrowings to be made on the Effective
Date shall consist only of Base Rate Advance which may, subject to the terms of this Agreement, be thereafter
Converted into Eurodollar Advances. In the case of a proposed Borrowing comprised of Eurodollar Advances, the
Administrative Agent shall promptly notify each Lender of the applicable interest rate under Section 2.7(b). Each
Lender shall, before 12:00 noon (Houston, Texas time) on the date of such Borrowing, make available for the account
of its applicable Lending Office to the Administrative Agent at its address referred to in Section
-25-
9.9, or such other location as the Administrative Agent may specify by notice to the Lenders, in same day funds,
such Lender’s Pro Rata Share of such Borrowing. After the Administrative Agent’s receipt of such funds and upon
fulfillment of the applicable conditions set forth in Article 3, the Administrative Agent will make such funds available to
the Borrower at its account with the Administrative Agent or as otherwise directed by the Borrower with written notice
to the Administrative Agent.
(b) Conversions and Continuations. In order to elect to Convert or continue a Revolving Advance under this paragraph,
the Borrower shall deliver an irrevocable Notice of Continuation or Conversion to the Administrative Agent at the
Administrative Agent’s office no later than 11:00 a.m. (Houston, Texas time) (i) on the Business Day before the date
of the proposed conversion date in the case of a Conversion to a Base Rate Advance and (ii) at least three Business
Days in advance of the proposed Conversion or continuation date in the case of a Conversion to, or a continuation of,
a Eurodollar Advance. Each such Notice of Continuation or Conversion shall be in writing or by telex or facsimile
confirmed promptly by the Borrower with a hard copy (other than with respect to notice sent by facsimile), specifying
(i) the requested Conversion or continuation date (which shall be a Business Day), (ii) the amount, Type, and Class of
the Advance to be Converted or continued, (iii) whether a Conversion or continuation is requested and, if a
Conversion, into what Type of Advance, and (iv) in the case of a Conversion to, or a continuation of, a Eurodollar
Advance, the requested Interest Period. Promptly after receipt of a Notice of Conversion or Continuation under this
paragraph, the Administrative Agent shall provide each Lender with a copy thereof and, in the case of a Conversion to
or a Continuation of a Eurodollar Advance, notify each Lender of the applicable interest rate under Section 2.7(b). The
portion of Advances comprising part of the same Borrowing that are Converted to Advances of another Type shall
constitute a new Borrowing.
(c) Certain Limitations. Notwithstanding anything in paragraphs (a) and (b) above:
(i) at no time shall there be more than seven Interest Periods applicable to outstanding Eurodollar Advances;
(ii) the Borrower may not select Eurodollar Advances for any Borrowing at any time when an Event of Default has
occurred and is continuing;
(iii) if any Lender shall, at least one Business Day before the date of any requested Borrowing, notify the
Administrative Agent that the introduction of or any change in or in the interpretation of any law or regulation makes it
unlawful, or that any central bank or other Governmental Authority asserts that it is unlawful, for such Lender or its
applicable Lending Office to perform its obligations under this Agreement to make Eurodollar Advances or to fund or
maintain Eurodollar Advances, (A) the obligation of such Lender to make such Eurodollar Advance as part of the
requested Borrowing or for any subsequent Borrowing shall be suspended until such Lender shall notify the Borrower
that the circumstances causing such suspension no longer exist and such Lender’s portion of such requested
Borrowing or any subsequent Borrowing of Eurodollar Advances shall be made in the form of a Base Rate Advance,
and (B) such Lender agrees to use commercially reasonable efforts (consistent with its internal policies and legal and
regulatory restrictions) to designate a different Lending Office if the making of such designation would avoid the effect
of this paragraph and would not, in the reasonable judgment of such Lender, be otherwise disadvantageous to such
Lender;
(iv) if the Administrative Agent is unable to determine the Eurodollar Rate for Eurodollar Advances comprising any
requested Borrowing, the right of the Borrower to select Eurodollar Advances for such Borrowing or for any
subsequent Borrowing shall be suspended until the Administrative Agent shall notify the Borrower and the Lenders
that the circumstances causing such suspension no longer exist, and each Advance comprising such Borrowing shall
be a Base Rate Advance;
-26-
(v) if the Majority Lenders shall, at least one Business Day before the date of any requested Borrowing, notify the
Administrative Agent that the Eurodollar Rate for Eurodollar Advances comprising such Borrowing will not adequately
reflect the cost to such Lenders of making or funding their respective Eurodollar Advances, as the case may be, for
such Borrowing, the right of the Borrower to select Eurodollar Advances for such Borrowing or for any subsequent
Borrowing shall be suspended until the Administrative Agent shall notify the Borrower and the Lenders that the
circumstances causing such suspension no longer exist, and each Advance comprising such Borrowing shall be a
Base Rate Advance; and
(vi) if the Borrower shall fail to select the duration or continuation of any Interest Period for any Eurodollar Advances in
accordance with the provisions contained in the definition of Interest Period in Section 1.1 and paragraph (b) above,
the Administrative Agent will forthwith so notify the Borrower and the Lenders and such Advances will be made
available to the Borrower on the date of such Borrowing as Eurodollar Advances with an interest period duration of one
month or, in the case of continuation of an existing Advance, Convert into Base Rate Advances.
(d) Notices Irrevocable. Each Notice of Borrowing and Notice of Continuation or Conversion delivered by the Borrower
hereunder, including its deemed request for borrowing made under Section 2.2(c), shall be irrevocable and binding on
the Borrower.
(e) Administrative Agent Reliance. Unless the Administrative Agent shall have received notice from a Lender before
the date of any Revolving Borrowing that such Lender will not make available to the Administrative Agent such
Lender’s Pro Rata Share of any Borrowing, the Administrative Agent may assume that such Lender has made its Pro
Rata Share of such Borrowing available to the Administrative Agent on the date of such Borrowing in accordance with
Section 2.3(a), and the Administrative Agent may, in reliance upon such assumption, make available to the Borrower
on such date a corresponding amount. If and to the extent that such Lender shall not have so made its Pro Rata
Share of such Borrowing available to the Administrative Agent, such Lender and the Borrower severally agree to
immediately repay to the Administrative Agent on demand such corresponding amount, together with interest on such
amount, for each day from the date such amount is made available to the Borrower until the date such amount is
repaid to the Administrative Agent, at (i) in the case of the Borrower, the interest rate applicable on such day to
Advances comprising such Borrowing and (ii) in the case of such Lender, the lesser of (A) the Federal Funds Rate for
such day for the first three days and thereafter the interest rate applicable to the Advance and (B) the Maximum Rate.
If such Lender shall repay to the Administrative Agent such corresponding amount and interest as provided above,
such corresponding amount so repaid shall constitute such Lender’s Advance as part of such Borrowing for purposes
of this Agreement even though not made on the same day as the other Advances comprising such Borrowing.
(f) Swing Line Advances.
(i) Facility. On the terms and conditions set forth in this Agreement, and if an AutoBorrow Agreement is in effect,
subject to the terms and conditions of such AutoBorrow Agreement, the Swing Line Lender may, in its sole discretion,
from time-to-time on any Business Day during the period from the date of this Agreement until the last Business Day
occurring before the Maturity Date, make Swing Line Advances under the Swing Line Note to the Borrower which shall
be due and payable on the Swing Line Payment Date (except that no Swing Line Advance may mature after the
Maturity Date), and in an aggregate outstanding principal
-27-
amount not to exceed the Swing Line Sublimit Amount at any time; provided that (A) after giving effect to such Swing
Line Advance, the sum of the aggregate amount of all Revolving Advances plus the Letter of Credit Exposure plus the
aggregate outstanding amount of all Swing Line Advances, shall not exceed the aggregate Commitments in effect at
such time; (B) no Swing Line Advance shall be made by the Swing Line Lender if the conditions set forth in
Section 3.2 have not been met as of the date of such Swing Line Advance, it being agreed by the Borrower that the
giving of the applicable Notice of Revolving Borrowing and the acceptance by the Borrower of the proceeds of such
Swing Line Advance shall constitute a representation and warranty by the Borrower that on the date of such Swing
Line Advance such conditions have been met; (C) only if an AutoBorrow Agreement is not in effect, each Swing Line
Advance shall be in an aggregate amount not less than $100,000 and in integral multiples of $50,000 in excess
thereof; and (D) if an AutoBorrow Agreement is in effect, such additional terms and conditions of such AutoBorrow
Agreement shall have been satisfied, and in the event that any of the terms of this Section 2.3(f)(i) conflict with such
AutoBorrow Agreement, the terms of the AutoBorrow Agreement shall govern and control. The indebtedness of the
Borrower to the Swing Line Lender resulting from Swing Line Advances shall be evidenced by the Swing Line Note. No
Lender shall have any rights or obligations under any AutoBorrow Agreement, but each Lender shall have the
obligation to purchase and fund risk participations in the Swing Line Advances and to refinance Swing Line Advances
as provided below.
(ii) Prepayment. Within the limits expressed in this Agreement, amounts advanced pursuant to Section 2.3(f)(i) may
from time to time be borrowed, prepaid without penalty, and reborrowed. If the aggregate outstanding principal amount
of the Swing Line Advances ever exceeds the Swing Line Sublimit Amount, the Borrower shall prepay to the Swing
Line Lender outstanding principal of the Swing Line Advances such that such excess is eliminated. If an AutoBorrow
Agreement is in effect, each prepayment of a Swing Line Borrowing shall be made as provided in such AutoBorrow
Agreement.
(iii) Reimbursements for Swing Line Obligations.
(A) With respect to the Swing Line Advances and the interest, premium, fees, and other amounts owed by the
Borrower to the Swing Line Lender in connection with the Swing Line Advances, the Borrower agrees to pay to the
Swing Line Lender such amounts when due and payable to the Swing Line Lender under the terms of this Agreement
and, if an AutoBorrow Agreement is in effect, in accordance with the terms of such AutoBorrow Agreement. The
Borrower may, with a written notice request that such obligations to the Swing Line Lender be satisfied with the
proceeds of a Revolving Advance in the same amount (notwithstanding any minimum size or increment limitations on
individual Revolving Advances). If the Borrower does not pay to the Swing Line Lender any such amounts when due
and payable to the Swing Line Lender, the Swing Line Lender may upon notice to the Administrative Agent request the
satisfaction of such obligation by the making of a Revolving Borrowing in the amount of any such amounts not paid
when due and payable. Upon such request, the Borrower shall be deemed to have requested the making of a
Revolving Borrowing in the amount of such obligation and the transfer of the proceeds thereof to the Swing Line
Lender. The Administrative Agent shall promptly forward notice of such Revolving Borrowing to the Borrower and the
Lenders, and each Lender shall, regardless of whether (A) the conditions in Section 3.2 have been met, (B) such
notice complies with Section 2.3(a), or (C) a Default exists, make available such Lender’s Pro Rata Share of such
Revolving Borrowing to the Administrative Agent, and the Administrative Agent shall promptly deliver the proceeds
thereof to the Swing Line Lender for application to such amounts
-28-
owed to the Swing Line Lender. The Borrower hereby unconditionally and irrevocably authorizes, empowers, and
directs the Swing Line Lender to make such requests for Revolving Borrowings on behalf of the Borrower, and for the
Lenders to make Revolving Advances to the Administrative Agent for the benefit of the Swing Line Lender in
satisfaction of such obligations. The Administrative Agent and each Lender may record and otherwise treat the
making of such Revolving Borrowings as the making of a Revolving Borrowing to the Borrower under this Agreement
as if requested by the Borrower. Nothing herein is intended to release the Borrower’s obligations under the Swing Line
Note, but only to provide an additional method of payment therefor. The making of any Revolving Borrowing under this
Section 2.3(f)(iii)(A) shall not constitute a cure or waiver of any Default or Event of Default, other than the payment
Default or Event of Default which is satisfied by the application of the amounts deemed advanced hereunder, caused
by the Borrower’s failure to comply with the provisions of this Agreement or the Swing Line Note.
(B) If at any time, the Commitments shall have expired or be terminated while any Swing Line Advance is
outstanding, each Lender, at the sole option of the Swing Line Lender, shall either (A) notwithstanding the expiration or
termination of the Commitments, make a Revolving Advance as a Base Rate Advance, or (B) be deemed, without
further action by any Person, to have purchased from the Swing Line Lender a participation in such Swing Line
Advance, in either case in an amount equal to the product of such Lender’s Pro Rata Share times the outstanding
aggregate principal balance of the Swing Line Advances. The Administrative Agent shall notify each such Lender of
the amount of such Revolving Advance or participation, and such Lender will transfer to the Administrative Agent for
the account of the Swing Line Lender on the next Business Day following such notice, in immediately available funds,
the amount of such Revolving Advance or participation.
(C) If any such Lender shall not have so made its Revolving Advance or its percentage participation available to the
Administrative Agent pursuant to this Section 2.3(f), such Lender agrees to pay interest thereon for each day from
such date until the date such amount is paid at the lesser of (A) the Federal Funds Rate for such day for the first
three days and thereafter the interest rate applicable to the Revolving Advance and (B) the Maximum Rate.
Whenever, at any time after the Administrative Agent has received from any Lender such Lender’s Revolving
Advance or participating interest in a Swing Line Advance, the Administrative Agent receives any payment on
account thereof, the Administrative Agent will pay to such Lender its participating interest in such amount
(appropriately adjusted, in the case of interest payments, to reflect the period of time during which such Lender’s
Revolving Advance or participating interest was outstanding and funded), which payment shall be subject to
repayment by such Lender if such payment received by the Administrative Agent is required to be returned. Each
Lender’s obligation to make the Revolving Advance or purchase such participating interests pursuant to this
Section 2.3(f) shall be absolute and unconditional and shall not be affected by any circumstance, including (1) any
set-off, counterclaim, recoupment, defense or other right which such Lender or any other Person may have against
the Swing Line Lender, the Administrative Agent or any other Person for any reason whatsoever; (2) the occurrence or
continuance of a Default or the termination of the Commitments; (3) any breach of this Agreement by the Borrower or
any other Lender; or (4) any other circumstance, happening or event whatsoever, whether or not similar to any of the
foregoing. Each Swing Line Advance, once so participated by any Lender, shall cease to be a Swing Line Advance
with respect to that amount for purposes of this Agreement, but shall continue to be a Revolving Loan.
-29-
(iv) Method of Borrowing. If an AutoBorrow Agreement is in effect, each Swing Line Borrowing shall be made as
provided in such AutoBorrow Agreement. Otherwise, and except as provided in the clause (c) above, each request for
a Swing Line Advance shall be made pursuant to telephone notice to the Swing Line Lender given no later than 1:00
p.m. (Houston, Texas time) on the date of the proposed Swing Line Advance, promptly confirmed by a completed and
executed Notice of Revolving Borrowing telecopied or facsimiled to the Administrative Agent and the Swing Line
Lender. The Swing Line Lender will promptly make the Swing Line Advance available to the Borrower at the Borrower’s
account with the Swing Line Lender.
(v) Interest for Account of Swing Line Lender. Swing Line Lender shall be responsible for invoicing the Borrower for
interest on the Swing Line Advances (provided that any failure of the Swing Line Lender to provide such invoice shall
not release the Borrower from its obligation to pay such interest). Until each Lender funds its Revolving Advance or
risk participation pursuant to clause (iii) above, interest in respect of Lender’s Pro Rata Share of the Swing Line
Advances shall be solely for the account of the Swing Line Lender.
(vi) Payments Directly to Swing Line Lender. The Borrower shall make all payments of principal and interest in respect
of the Swing Line Advances directly to the Swing Line Lender.
(vii) Discretionary Nature of the Swing Line Facility. Notwithstanding any terms to the contrary contained herein or in
any AutoBorrow Agreement, the swing line facility provided herein or in any AutoBorrow Agreement (i) is an
uncommitted facility and the Swing Line Lender may, but shall not be obligated to, make Swing Line Advances, and
(ii) may be terminated at any time by the Swing Line Lender upon written notice to the Borrower.
Section 2.4. Prepayments.
(a) Right to Prepay; Ratable Prepayment. The Borrower shall have no right to prepay any principal amount of any
Advance except as provided in this Section 2.4 and all notices given pursuant to this Section 2.4 shall be irrevocable
and binding upon the Borrower. Each payment of any Advance pursuant to this Section 2.4 shall be made in a manner
such that all Advances comprising part of the same Borrowing are paid in whole or ratably in part other than Advances
owing to a Defaulting Lender as provided in Section 2.14.
(b) Optional. The Borrower may elect to prepay any of the Advances without penalty or premium except as set forth in
Section 2.9 and after giving by 11:00 a.m. (Houston, Texas time) (i) in the case of Eurodollar Advances, at least three
Business Days’ or (ii) in case of Base Rate Advances, one Business Day’s prior written notice to the Administrative
Agent stating the proposed date and aggregate principal amount of such prepayment. If any such notice is given, the
Borrower shall prepay Advances comprising part of the same Borrowing in whole or ratably in part in an aggregate
principal amount equal to the amount specified in such notice, together with accrued interest to the date of such
prepayment on the principal amount prepaid and amounts, if any, required to be paid pursuant to Section 2.9 as a
result of such prepayment being made on such date; provided that (A) each optional prepayment of Eurodollar
Advances shall be in a minimum amount not less than $500,000 and in multiple integrals of $100,000 in excess
thereof, (B) each optional prepayment of Base Rate Advances shall be in a minimum amount not less than $500,000
and in multiple integrals of $50,000 in excess thereof, and (C) only if an AutoBorrow Agreement is not in effect, each
optional prepayment of Swing Line Advances shall be in a minimum
-30-
amount not less than $250,000 and in multiple integrals of $50,000 in excess thereof. If an AutoBorrow Agreement is
in effect, each prepayment of Swing Line Advances shall be made as provided in such AutoBorrow Agreement.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Borrower may (subject to payment to the Lenders of any applicable amounts under
Section 2.9 hereof) rescind or postpone any notice of prepayment under this Section 2.4(b) if such prepayment would
have resulted from a refinancing of this Agreement, which refinancing shall not be consummated or shall otherwise be
delayed.
(c) Mandatory.
(i) On any date that (a) the sum of the outstanding principal amount of all Swing Line Advances and all Revolving
Advances plus the Letter of Credit Exposure exceeds (b) the aggregate amount of Commitments, as notified to the
Borrower by the Administrative Agent (with such calculation set forth in reasonable detail which shall be conclusive
absent manifest error), the Borrower shall, within one Business Day, to the extent of such excess, first prepay to the
Swing Line Lender the outstanding principal amount of the Swing Line Advances, second prepay to the Lenders on a
pro rata basis the outstanding principal amount of the Revolving Advances, and third make deposits into the Cash
Collateral Account to provide cash collateral in the amount of such excess for the Letter of Credit Exposure.
(ii) If the Borrower or any Subsidiary is subject to a Casualty Event which results in Net Cash Proceeds in excess of
$1,000,000 in any fiscal year, then the Borrower shall, no later than three Business Days following the receipt thereof,
apply an amount equal to 100% of such Net Cash Proceeds first to prepay to the Swing Line Lender the outstanding
principal amount of the Swing Line Advances, second to prepay to the Lenders on a pro rata basis the outstanding
principal amount of the Revolving Advances, and third to make deposits into the Cash Collateral Account to provide
cash collateral for the Letter of Credit Exposure; provided that, (A) if no Event of Default exists or would arise
therefrom, then such proceeds shall not be required to be so applied on such date to the extent that Borrower shall
have delivered a certificate by a Responsible Officer of the Borrower to the Administrative Agent on or prior to such
date stating that such Net Cash Proceeds are reasonably expected to be reinvested in fixed or capital assets of any
Credit Party within 180 days following the date of such Casualty Event (which officers’ certificate shall set forth the
estimates of the proceeds to be so expended); and (B) if all or any portion of such Net Cash Proceeds are not
reinvested within such 180-day period as provided in clause (A) above, then 100% of such unused portion shall be
applied on the last day of such period first to prepay to the Swing Line Lender the outstanding principal amount of the
Swing Line Advances, second to prepay to the Lenders on a pro rata basis the outstanding principal amount of the
Revolving Advances, and third to make deposits into the Cash Collateral Account to provide cash collateral for the
Letter of Credit Exposure.
(iii) If an increase in the aggregate Commitments is effected as permitted under Section 2.15, the Borrower shall
prepay any Revolving Advances outstanding on the date such increase is effected to the extent necessary to keep
the outstanding Revolving Advances ratable to reflect the revised Pro Rata Shares of the Lenders arising from such
increase. Any prepayment made by Borrower in accordance with this clause (iii) may be made with the proceeds of
Revolving Advances made by all the Lenders in connection such increase occurring simultaneously with the
prepayment.
(d) Interest; Costs. Each prepayment pursuant to this Section 2.4 shall be accompanied by accrued interest on the
amount prepaid to the date of such prepayment and amounts, if any, required to be paid pursuant to Section 2.9 as a
result of such prepayment being made on such date.
Section 2.5. Repayment.
-31-
(a) Revolving Advances. The Borrower shall pay to the Administrative Agent for the ratable benefit of each Lender the
aggregate outstanding principal amount of the Revolving Advances on the Maturity Date.
(b) Swing Line Advances. Each Swing Line Advance shall be paid in full on each Swing Line Payment Date.
Section 2.6. Fees.
(a) Commitment Fees. The Borrower agrees to pay to the Administrative Agent for the account of each Lender a
commitment fee on the average daily amount by which (A) such Lender’s Commitment exceeds (B) the sum of such
Lender’s outstanding Revolving Advances plus such Lender’s Pro Rata Share of the Letter of Credit Exposure, at the
rate equal to the Applicable Margin for Commitment Fees for such period; provided that, no such commitment fee
shall accrue on the Commitment of a Defaulting Lender during the period such Lender remains a Defaulting Lender.
Such Commitment Fee is due quarterly in arrears on March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31 of each
year commencing on September 30, 2012 and on the Maturity Date. For the avoidance of doubt and for purposes of
this Section 2.6(a) only, outstanding Swing Line Advances shall not reduce the amount of unused Commitment.
(b) Fees for Letters of Credit. The Borrower agrees to pay the following:
(i) Subject to Section 2.14, to the Administrative Agent for the pro rata benefit of the Lenders a per annum letter of
credit fee for each Letter of Credit issued hereunder, for the period such Letter of Credit is to be outstanding, in an
amount equal to the greater of (A) the Applicable Margin for Eurodollar Advances per annum on the face amount of
such Letter of Credit, and (B) $600 per Letter of Credit. Such fee shall be due and payable quarterly in arrears on
March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31 of each year, and on the Maturity Date.
(ii) To the Issuing Lender, a fronting fee for each Letter of Credit equal to the greater of (A) 0.125% per annum on the
face amount of such Letter of Credit and (B) $600. Such fee shall be due and payable in advance on the date of the
issuance of the Letter of Credit, and, in the case of an increase or extension only, on the date of such increase or
such extension.
(iii) Subject to Section 2.14, to the Administrative Agent for the pro rata benefit of the Lenders such additional per
annum letter of credit fee for each commercial Letter of Credit issued hereunder, for the period such Letter of Credit is
to be outstanding, in an amount agreed to between the Borrower and the Issuing Lender in writing. Such fee shall be
due and payable quarterly in arrears on March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31 of each year, and on the
Maturity Date.
(iv) To the Issuing Lender, an additional fronting fee for each commercial Letter of Credit equal an amount agreed to
between the Borrower and the Issuing Lender. Such fee shall be due and payable in advance on the date of the
issuance of the Letter of Credit in writing, and, in the case of an increase or extension only, on the date of such
increase or such extension.
(v) To the Issuing Lender such other usual and customary fees associated with any transfers, amendments, drawings,
negotiations or reissuances of any Letters of Credit. Such fees shall be due and payable as requested by the Issuing
Lender in accordance with the Issuing Lender’s then current fee policy.
-32-
The Borrower shall have no right to any refund of letter of credit fees previously paid by the Borrower, including any
refund claimed because any Letter of Credit is canceled prior to its expiration date.
(c) Fee Letter. The Borrower agrees to pay the fees to Amegy as set forth in the Fee Letter.
Section 2.7. Interest.
(a) Base Rate Advances. Each Base Rate Advance shall bear interest at the Adjusted Base Rate in effect from time
to time plus the Applicable Margin for Base Rate Advances for such period. The Borrower shall pay to Administrative
Agent for the ratable account of each Lender all accrued but unpaid interest on such Lender’s Revolving Advances
which are Base Rate Advances on each March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31 commencing on
September 30, 2012, and on the Maturity Date. The Swing Line Advances shall bear interest at the Adjusted Base
Rate plus the Applicable Margin for Base Rate Advances or such other per annum rate to be agreed to between the
Borrower and the Swing Line Lender. The Borrower shall pay to the Swing Line Lender all accrued but unpaid interest
on such Swing Line Advances on each March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31 commencing on
September 30, 2012, and on the Maturity Date.
(b) Eurodollar Advances. Each Eurodollar Advance shall bear interest during its Interest Period equal to at all times
the Eurodollar Rate for such Interest Period plus the Applicable Margin for Eurodollar Advances for such period. The
Borrower shall pay to the Administrative Agent for the ratable account of each Lender all accrued but unpaid interest
on each of such Lender’s Eurodollar Advances on the last day of the Interest Period therefor (provided that for
Eurodollar Advances with Interest Periods in excess of three months, accrued but unpaid interest shall also be due on
the day three months from the first day of such Interest Period), on the date any Eurodollar Advance is repaid, and on
the Maturity Date.
(c) Retroactive Adjustments of Applicable Margin. In the event that any financial statement or Compliance Certificate
delivered pursuant to Section 5.2 is shown to be inaccurate, and such inaccuracy, if corrected, would have led to the
application of a higher Applicable Margin for any period (an “Applicable Period”) than the Applicable Margin applied for
such Applicable Period, then (i) the Borrower shall immediately deliver to the Administrative Agent a corrected
Compliance Certificate for such Applicable Period, (ii) the Applicable Margin shall be determined as if the higher
Applicable Margin that would have applied were applicable for such Applicable Period, and (iii) the Borrower shall
immediately, without further action by the Administrative Agent, any Lender or any Issuing Lender, pay to the
Administrative Agent for the account of the applicable Lenders, the accrued additional interest owing as a result of
such increased Applicable Margin for such Applicable Period. This Section 2.7(c) shall not limit the rights of the
Administrative Agent and Lenders with respect to the Default Rate as set forth in Section 2.7(d).
(d) Default Rate. Notwithstanding the foregoing, (i) upon the occurrence and during the continuance of an Event of
Default under Section 7.1(a) or Section 7.1(g), all overdue amounts shall bear interest, after as well as before
judgment, at the Default Rate and (ii) upon the occurrence and during the continuance of any Event of Default
(including under Section 7.1(a) and Section 7.1(g)), upon the request of the Majority Lenders, all Obligations shall bear
interest, after as well as before judgment, at the Default Rate. Interest accrued pursuant to this Section 2.7(d) and all
interest accrued but unpaid on or after the Maturity Date shall be due and payable on demand.
-33-
Section 2.8. Illegality. If any Lender shall notify the Borrower that any Change in Law makes it unlawful, or that any
central bank or other Governmental Authority asserts that it is unlawful, for such Lender or its applicable Lending
Office to perform its obligations under this Agreement to make, maintain, or fund any Eurodollar Advances of such
Lender then outstanding hereunder, (a) the Borrower shall, no later than 11:00 a.m. (Houston, Texas, time) (i) if not
prohibited by law, on the last day of the Interest Period for each outstanding Eurodollar Advance or (ii) if required by
such notice, on the second Business Day following its receipt of such notice, prepay all of the Eurodollar Advances of
such Lender then outstanding, together with accrued interest on the principal amount prepaid to the date of such
prepayment and amounts, if any, required to be paid pursuant to Section 2.9 as a result of such prepayment being
made on such date, (b) such Lender shall simultaneously make a Base Rate Advance to the Borrower on such date in
an amount equal to the aggregate principal amount of the Eurodollar Advances prepaid to such Lender, and (c) the
right of the Borrower to select Eurodollar Advances from such Lender for any subsequent Borrowing shall be
suspended until such Lender shall notify the Borrower that the circumstances causing such suspension no longer
exist. Each Lender agrees to use commercially reasonable efforts (consistent with its internal policies and legal and
regulatory restrictions) to designate a different Lending Office if the making of such designation would avoid the effect
of this paragraph and would not, in the reasonable judgment of such Lender, be otherwise disadvantageous to such
Lender.
Section 2.9. Breakage Costs. Upon demand of any Lender (with a copy to the Administrative Agent) from time to
time, the Borrower shall promptly compensate such Lender for and hold such Lender harmless from any loss, cost or
expense incurred by it as a result of:
(a) any continuation, conversion, payment or prepayment (including any deemed payment or repayment and any
reallocated repayment to Non-Defaulting Lenders provided for in Section 2.11(a) or Section 2.14) of any Advance other
than a Base Rate Advance on a day other than the last day of the Interest Period for such Advance (whether
voluntary, mandatory, automatic, by reason of acceleration, or otherwise);
(b) any failure by the Borrower (for a reason other than the failure of such Lender to make an Advance) to prepay,
borrow, continue or Convert any Advance other than a Base Rate Advance on the date or in the amount notified by
the Borrower; or
(c) any assignment of an Eurodollar Advance on a day other than the last day of the Interest Period therefor as a
result of a request by the Borrower pursuant to Section 2.13;
including any loss of anticipated profits, any foreign exchange losses and any loss or expense arising from the
liquidation or reemployment of funds obtained by it to maintain such Advance, from fees payable to terminate the
deposits from which such funds were obtained or from the performance of any foreign exchange contract. The
Borrower shall also pay any customary administrative fees charged by such Lender in connection with the foregoing.
For purposes of calculating amounts payable by the Borrower to the Lenders under this Section 2.9, the requesting
Lender shall be deemed to have funded the Eurodollar Advances made by it at the Eurodollar Base Rate used in
determining the Eurodollar Rate for such Advance by a matching deposit or other borrowing in the offshore interbank
market for Dollars for a comparable amount and for a comparable period, whether or not such Eurodollar Advance was
in fact so funded.
Section 2.10. Increased Costs.
(a) Eurodollar Advances. If any Change in Law shall:
(i) impose, modify, or deem applicable any reserve, special deposit, assessment, or similar requirement (other than by
way of imposition or increase of reserve requirements included
-34-
in the Eurodollar Rate Reserve Percentage) relating to any extensions of credit or other assets of, or any deposits
with or other liabilities or commitments of, financial institutions generally, including any Lender (or its applicable
Lending Office), including the Commitments of such Lender hereunder; or
(ii) impose on financial institutions generally, including such Lender (or its applicable Lending Office), or on the London
interbank market any other condition affecting this Agreement or its Notes or any of such extensions of credit or
liabilities or commitments;
and the result of any of the foregoing is to increase the cost to such Lender (or its applicable Lending Office) of
making, Converting into, continuing, or maintaining any Eurodollar Advances or to reduce any sum received or
receivable by such Lender (or its applicable Lending Office) under this Agreement or its Notes with respect to any
Eurodollar Advances, then the Borrower shall pay to such Lender within three Business Days after written demand
made by such Lender such amount or amounts as such Lender determines in good faith to be necessary to
compensate such Lender for such increased cost or reduction.
(b) Capital Adequacy. If, after the date hereof, any Lender or the Issuing Lender shall have determined that any
Change in Law affecting such Lender or Issuing Lender or any Lending Office of such Lender or such Lender’s or
Issuing Lender’s holding company, if any, regarding capital requirements has or would have the effect of reducing the
rate of return on the capital of financial institutions generally, including such Lender or the Issuing Lender or any
corporation controlling such Lender or the Issuing Lender, as a consequence of such Lender’s or the Issuing Lender’s
obligations hereunder to a level below that which such Lender or the Issuing Lender or such corporation could have
achieved but for such Change in Law (taking into consideration its policies with respect to capital adequacy), then
from time to time within three Business Days after written demand by such Lender or the Issuing Lender, as the case
may be, the Borrower shall pay to such Lender or the Issuing Lender such additional amount or amounts as such
Lender determines in good faith to be necessary to compensate such Lender or the Issuing Lender for such reduction.
(c) Mitigation. Each Lender shall promptly notify the Borrower and the Administrative Agent of any event of which it
has knowledge, occurring after the date hereof, which will entitle such Lender to compensation pursuant to this
Section 2.10 and will designate a different Lending Office if such designation will avoid the need for, or reduce the
amount of, such compensation and will not, in the reasonable judgment of such Lender, be otherwise
disadvantageous to it. Any Lender claiming compensation under this Section 2.10 shall furnish to the Borrower and
the Administrative Agent a statement setting forth the additional amount or amounts to be paid to it hereunder which
shall be determined by such Lender in good faith and which shall be conclusive in the absence of manifest error. In
determining such amount, such Lender may use any reasonable averaging and attribution methods.
(d) Delay in Requests. Failure or delay on the part of any Lender or Issuing Lender to demand compensation pursuant
to this Section 2.10 shall not constitute a waiver of such Lender’s or such Issuing Lender’s right to demand such
compensation, provided that the Borrower shall not be required to compensate a Lender or Issuing Lender pursuant to
this Section 2.10 for any increased costs incurred or reductions suffered more than 180 days prior to the date that
such Lender or Issuing Lender, as the case may be, notifies the Borrower and the Administrative Agent of the Change
in Law giving rise to such increased costs or reductions and of such Lender’s or Issuing Lender’s intention to claim
compensation therefor (except that, if the Change in Law giving rise to such increased costs or reductions is
retroactive, then the 180-day period referred to above shall be extended to include the period of retroactive effect
thereof).
-35-
Section 2.11. Payments and Computations.
(a) Payments. All payments of principal, interest, and other amounts to be made by the Borrower under this
Agreement and other Credit Documents shall be made to the Administrative Agent in Dollars and in immediately
available funds, without setoff, deduction, or counterclaim; provided that, the Borrower may setoff amounts owing to
any Lender that is at such time a Defaulting Lender against Advances that such Defaulting Lender failed to fund to the
Borrower under this Agreement (the “Unfunded Advances”) so long as (i) the Borrower shall have delivered prior written
notice of such setoff to the Administrative Agent and such Defaulting Lender, (ii) the Advances made by the Non-
Defaulting Lenders as part of the original Borrowing to which the Unfunded Advances applied shall still be outstanding,
(iii) if such Defaulting Lender failed to fund Advances under more than one Borrowing, such setoff shall be applied in a
manner satisfactory to the Administrative Agent, and (iv) upon the application of such setoff, the Unfunded Advances
shall be deemed to have been made by such Defaulting Lender on the effective date of such setoff.
(b) Payment Procedures. The Borrower shall make each payment under this Agreement and under the Notes not later
than 1:00 p.m. (Houston, Texas time) on the day when due in Dollars to the Administrative Agent at the location
referred to in the Notes (or such other location as the Administrative Agent shall designate in writing to the Borrower)
in same day funds. The Administrative Agent will promptly thereafter, and in any event prior to the close of business
on the day any timely payment is made, cause to be distributed like funds relating to the payment of principal, interest
or fees ratably (other than amounts payable solely to the Administrative Agent or a specific Lender pursuant to
Sections 2.8, 2.9, 2.10, 2.12, 2.13, and 9.2 and such other provisions herein which expressly provide for payments to
a specific Lender, but after taking into account payments effected pursuant to Section 9.1) in accordance with each
Lender’s Pro Rata Share to the Lenders for the account of their respective applicable Lending Offices, and like funds
relating to the payment of any other amount payable to any Lender to such Lender for the account of its applicable
Lending Office, in each case to be applied in accordance with the terms of this Agreement. Upon receipt of other
amounts due solely to the Administrative Agent, the Issuing Lender, the Swing Line Lender or a specific Lender, the
Administrative Agent shall distribute such amounts to the appropriate party to be applied in accordance with the terms
of this Agreement.
(c) Non Business Day Payments. Whenever any payment shall be stated to be due on a day other than a Business
Day, such payment shall be made on the next succeeding Business Day, and such extension of time shall in such
case be included in the computation of payment of interest or fees, as the case may be; provided that if such
extension would cause payment of interest on or principal of Eurodollar Advances to be made in the next following
calendar month, such payment shall be made on the next preceding Business Day.
(d) Computations. All computations of interest for Base Rate Advances shall be made by the Administrative Agent on
the basis of a year of 365/366 days and all computations of all other interest and fees shall be made by the
Administrative Agent on the basis of a year of 360 days, in each case for the actual number of days (including the
first day, but excluding the last day) occurring in the period for which such interest or fees are payable. Each
determination by the Administrative Agent of an amount of interest or fees shall be conclusive and binding for all
purposes, absent manifest error.
(e) Sharing of Payments, Etc. If any Lender shall obtain any payment (whether voluntary, involuntary, through the
exercise of any right of set off, or otherwise) on account of the Advances made by it in excess of its ratable share of
payments on account of the Advances or Letter of Credit Obligations obtained by the Lenders (other than as a result
of a termination of a Defaulting Lender’s Commitment under Section 2.1(b)(ii), the setoff right of the Borrower under
clause (a) above, or the non-pro rata application of payments provided in the last sentence of this clause (e)), such
Lender shall notify the other Lenders and forthwith purchase from the other Lenders such participations in the
Advances made by it or the Letter of Credit Obligations held by it as shall be necessary to cause such purchasing
Lender to share
-36-
the excess payment ratably with the other Lenders; provided that if all or any portion of such excess payment is
thereafter recovered from such purchasing Lender, such purchase from the other Lenders shall be rescinded and each
such Lender shall repay to the purchasing Lender the purchase price to the extent of such Lender’s ratable share, but
without interest. The Borrower agrees that any Lender so purchasing a participation from another Lender pursuant to
this Section 2.11(e) may, to the fullest extent permitted by law, exercise all its rights of payment (including the right of
set off) with respect to such participation as fully as if such Lender were the direct creditor of the Borrower in the
amount of such participation. If a Lender fails to fund a Revolving Advance with respect to a Borrowing as and when
required hereunder and the Borrower subsequently makes a repayment of any Revolving Advances, then, after taking
into account any setoffs made pursuant to Section 2.11(a) above, such payment shall be applied among the Non-
Defaulting Lenders ratably in accordance with their respective Commitment percentages until each Lender (including
any Lender that is at such time a Defaulting Lender) has its percentage of all of the outstanding Revolving Advances
and the balance of such repayment shall be applied among the Lenders in accordance with their Pro Rata Share. The
provisions of this Section 2.11(e) shall not be construed to apply to any payment made by the Borrower pursuant to
and in accordance with the express terms of this Agreement or any payment obtained by a Lender as consideration
for the assignment of or sale of a participation in any of its Advances or participations in Letter of Credit Exposure to
any assignee or participant, other than to the Borrower or any Subsidiary or Affiliate thereof (as to which the
provisions of this Section 2.11(e) shall apply).
Section 2.12. Taxes.
(a) No Deduction for Certain Taxes. Any and all payments by any Credit Party under any of the Credit Documents to
the Administrative Agent, the Issuing Lender, or a Lender shall be made, in accordance with Section 2.11, free and
clear of and without deduction for any and all present or future taxes, levies, imposts, deductions, charges, or
withholdings, and all liabilities with respect thereto, excluding, in the case of the Administrative Agent, the Issuing
Lender, or a Lender, (i) taxes imposed on or measured by its income or profits (however denominated) and franchise
(or margin) taxes imposed on it by the jurisdiction (or any political subdivision thereof) (A) under the laws of which (or
under the laws of a political subdivision of which) it is organized or in which its principal executive office is located or,
in the case of a Lender, the laws of which (or under the laws of a political subdivision of which) such Lender’s
applicable Lending Office is located, or (B) as a result of a present or former connection between it and the jurisdiction
(or any political subdivision thereof) imposing such tax (other than any such connection arising solely from it having
executed, delivered or performed its obligations or received a payment under, or enforced, this Agreement or any
other Credit Document); (ii) branch profits taxes imposed by the United States of America or any similar taxes
imposed by any jurisdiction described in (i); (iii) in the case of a Lender other than a Lender that becomes a party to
this Agreement or any other Credit Document pursuant to an Assignment and Acceptance, any taxes imposed by the
United States of America by means of withholding at the source, if and to the extent such United States withholding
taxes are in effect on the date a Lender becomes a Lender hereunder; (iv) in the case of any Lender that becomes a
party to this Agreement or any other Credit Document pursuant to an Assignment and Acceptance, any taxes
imposed by the United States of America by means of withholding at the source, except to the extent that, pursuant
to this Section 2.12, amounts with respect to such taxes were payable to such Lender’s assignor immediately before
such Lender became a party to this Agreement or such Credit Document with respect to its applicable ownership
interest in the Commitments; and (v) any U.S. withholding taxes imposed under FATCA (all such nonexcluded taxes,
levies, imposts, deductions, charges, withholdings, and liabilities being hereinafter referred to as “Taxes”). Except as
provided in Section 2.12(f), if the Borrower shall be required by law to deduct any Taxes from or in respect of any sum
payable to the Administrative Agent, the Issuing Lender, or any Lender, (i) the sum payable shall be increased as may
be necessary so that, after making all required deductions (including deductions applicable to additional sums payable
under this Section 2.12), such Lender receives an amount equal to
-37-
the sum it would have received had no such deductions been made; (ii) the Borrower or the Administrative Agent, as
applicable, shall make such deductions; and (iii) the Borrower or the Administrative Agent, as applicable, shall pay the
full amount deducted to the relevant Governmental Authority or other authority in accordance with applicable law.
(b) Other Taxes. In addition, except as provided in Section 2.12(f), the Borrower agrees to pay any present or future
stamp or documentary taxes or any other excise or property taxes, charges, or similar levies which arise from any
payment made under any Credit Document or from the execution, delivery, or registration of, or otherwise with respect
to, this Agreement, the Notes, or the other Credit Documents (hereinafter referred to as “Other Taxes”).
(c) Indemnification. Except as provided in Section 2.12(f), the Borrower will indemnify each Lender, the Issuing
Lender, and the Administrative Agent for the full amount of Taxes or Other Taxes (including, without limitation, any
Taxes or Other Taxes imposed on amounts payable under this Section 2.12) paid by such Lender, the Issuing Lender,
or the Administrative Agent (as the case may be) and any interest and reasonable expenses arising therefrom or with
respect thereto, whether or not such Taxes or Other Taxes were correctly or legally asserted.
(d) Evidence of Tax Payments. As soon as practicable after any payment of Taxes or Other Taxes by any Credit
Party to a Governmental Authority, the Borrower shall deliver to the Administrative Agent the original or a certified
copy of any receipt issued by such Governmental Authority evidencing such payment, a copy of the return reporting
such payment, or other evidence of such payment reasonably satisfactory to the Administrative Agent.
(e) Withholding Reduction or Exemption. Each Foreign Lender that is entitled to an exemption from, or a reduction of,
withholding tax with respect to payments under this Agreement or under any other Credit Document shall, to the
extent that it is legally entitled to do so, deliver to the Borrower (with a copy to the Administrative Agent), on or before
the date it becomes a party to this Agreement and from time to time thereafter at the time or times prescribed by
applicable law or reasonably requested by the Borrower or the Administrative Agent, such properly completed and
executed documentation prescribed by applicable law or reasonably requested by the Borrower or the Administrative
Agent as will permit such payments to be made without, or at a reduced rate of, withholding. In addition, any Lender
shall, to the extent that it is legally entitled to do so, deliver to Borrower (with a copy to the Administrative Agent), on
or before the date it becomes a party to this Agreement and from time to time thereafter at the time or times
prescribed by applicable law or reasonably requested by the Borrower or the Administrative Agent as will enable the
Borrower or the Administrative Agent to determine that such Lender is not subject to United States backup withholding
and whether or not such Lender is subject to United States information reporting requirements.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, each Lender shall deliver to the Borrower and the Administrative Agent
(in such number of copies as shall be requested by the recipient), on or before the date on which such Lender
becomes a party to this Agreement and from time to time thereafter at the time or times prescribed by applicable law
or reasonably requested by the Borrower or Administrative Agent, whichever of the following is applicable:
(i) In the case of any Lender that is not a Foreign Lender, duly completed and executed originals of IRS Form W-9 (or
any successor form) certifying that such Lender is exempt from United States backup withholding;
(ii) In the case of any Foreign Lender, to the extent that it is legally entitled to do so:
-38-
(A) duly completed and executed originals of IRS Form W-8BEN (or any successor form) claiming eligibility for
benefits of an income tax treaty to which the United States is a party;
(B) duly completed and executed originals of IRS Form W-8ECI (or any successor form);
(C) in the case of a Foreign Lender claiming the benefits of the exemption for portfolio interest under section 881(c) of
the Code, (1) a certificate to the effect that such Foreign Lender is not (a) a “bank” within the meaning of section
881(c)(3)(A) of the Code, (b) a “10 percent shareholder” of the Borrower within the meaning of section 881(c)(3)(B) of
the Code, or (c) a “controlled foreign corporation” described in section 881(c)(3)(C) of the Code, and (2) duly completed
and executed originals of IRS Form W-8BEN (or any successor form); or
(D) any other form prescribed by applicable law as a basis for claiming exemption from or a reduction in United States
federal withholding tax duly completed together with such supplementary documentation as may be prescribed by
applicable law to permit the Borrower and the Administrative Agent to determine the withholding or deduction required
to be made.
Without limiting any of the foregoing, if a payment made to a Lender hereunder or under any other Credit Document
would be subject to United States federal withholding taxes imposed pursuant to FATCA if such Lender were to fail to
comply with the applicable reporting requirements of FATCA (including those contained in Section 1471(b) or 1472(b)
of the Code, as applicable), such Lender shall deliver to the Borrower and the Administrative Agent, at the time or
times prescribed by applicable law and at such time or times reasonably requested by the Borrower and the
Administrative Agent, such documentation prescribed by applicable law (including as prescribed by Section 1471(b)(3)
(C)(i) of the Code) and such additional documentation reasonably requested by the Borrower or the Administrative
Agent as may be necessary for the Borrower or the Administrative Agent to comply with its obligations under FATCA,
to determine that such Lender has complied with its obligations under FATCA, or to determine the amount to deduct
and withhold from such payment; provided, that solely for purposes of this paragraph, the term “FATCA” shall include
any amendments made to FATCA after the date of this Agreement.
Each Lender further agrees that it shall (i) promptly notify the Borrower and the Administrative Agent of any change in
circumstances which would modify or render invalid any claimed exemption or reduction in withholding taxes, and
(ii) in the event any previous form delivered by such Lender pursuant to this Section 2.12(e) expires or becomes
obsolete or inaccurate, update any such form or certification or promptly deliver any such other properly completed
and executed form, certification or documentation as may be required in order to confirm or establish the entitlement
of such Lender to an exemption from or a reduction in withholding taxes with respect to payments hereunder or under
any other Credit Document if such Lender continues to be so entitled.
(f) Failure to Provide Forms. For any period with respect to which a Lender has failed to provide the Borrower or the
Administrative Agent with the appropriate forms referred to in this Section 2.12, such Lender shall not be entitled to
indemnification or the payment of additional amounts under Section 2.12(a), (b), or (c) with respect to Taxes imposed;
provided that if a Lender, that is otherwise exempt from or subject to a reduced rate of withholding tax, becomes
subject to Taxes because of its failure to deliver a form required hereunder, the Borrower shall take such steps as
such Lender shall reasonably request, and at the expense of such Lender, to assist such Lender to recover such
Taxes.
-39-
(g) Mitigation. Each Lender shall use reasonable efforts (consistent with its internal policies and legal and regulatory
restrictions) to select a jurisdiction for its applicable Lending Office or change the jurisdiction of its applicable Lending
Office, as the case may be, so as to avoid the imposition of any Taxes or Other Taxes or to eliminate or reduce the
payment of any additional sums under this Section 2.12; provided, that no such selection or change of jurisdiction for
its applicable Lending Office shall be made if, in the reasonable judgment of such Lender, such selection or change
would be disadvantageous to such Lender.
(h) Tax Credits and Refunds. If the Administrative Agent, any Lender or the Issuing Lender determines, in its sole
discretion exercised in good faith, that it has received a refund of any Taxes or Other Taxes as to which it has been
indemnified by the Borrower or with respect to which the Borrower has paid additional amounts pursuant to this
Section 2.12, it shall pay to the Borrower an amount equal to such refund (but only to the extent of indemnity
payments made, or additional amounts paid, by the Borrower under this Section 2.12 with respect to the Taxes or
Other Taxes giving rise to such refund), net of all out-of-pocket expenses of the Administrative Agent, such Lender or
the Issuing Lender, as the case may be, and without interest (other than any interest paid by the relevant
Governmental Authority with respect to such refund), provided that the Borrower, upon the request of the
Administrative Agent, such Lender or the Issuing Lender, agrees to repay the amount paid over to the Borrower (plus
any penalties, interest or other charges imposed by the relevant Governmental Authority) to the Administrative Agent,
such Lender or the Issuing Lender in the event the Administrative Agent, such Lender or the Issuing Lender is
required to repay such refund to such Governmental Authority. This subsection shall not be construed to require the
Administrative Agent, any Lender or the Issuing Lender to make available its tax returns (or any other information
relating to its taxes that it deems confidential) to any Borrower or any other Person.
(i) Payment. If the Administrative Agent or any Lender becomes entitled to receive payment of Taxes, Other Taxes or
additional sums pursuant to this Section 2.12, it shall give notice and demand thereof to the Borrower, and the
Borrower (unless the Administrative Agent or Lender shall withdraw such notice and demand or the Borrower is not
obligated to pay such amounts) shall pay such Taxes, Other Taxes or additional sums within 30 days after the
Borrower’s receipt of such notice and demand. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, neither any Lender,
the Issuing Bank, nor the Administrative Agent shall be indemnified for any Taxes or Other Taxes under this
Section 2.12 unless such Lender, the Issuing Bank, or the Administrative Agent shall make written demand on
Borrower for such reimbursement no later than 6 months after the earlier of (i) the date on which the relevant
Governmental Authority makes written demand upon such Lender, the Issuing Bank, or the Administrative Agent for
such Taxes or Other Taxes, and (ii) the date on which such Lender, the Issuing Bank, or the Administrative Agent has
made payment of such Taxes or Other Taxes to the relevant Governmental Authority; provided that if the Taxes or
Other Taxes imposed or asserted giving rise to such claims are retroactive, then the 6-month period referred to above
shall be extended to include the retroactive effect thereof.
Section 2.13. Replacement of Lenders. If (a) the Borrower is required pursuant to Section 2.10 or 2.12 to make any
additional payment to any Lender, (b) any Lender’s obligation to make or continue, or to Convert Base Rate Advances
into, Eurodollar Advances shall be suspended pursuant to Section 2.3(c)(iii) or 2.8, or (c) any Lender is a Defaulting
Lender (any such Lender described in any of the preceding clauses (a) – (c), being a “Subject Lender”), then (i) in the
case of a Defaulting Lender, the Administrative Agent may, upon notice to the Subject Lender and the Borrower,
require such Defaulting Lender to assign and delegate, without recourse (in accordance with and subject to the
restrictions contained in, and consents required by, Section 9.7), all of its interests, rights and obligations under this
Agreement and the related Credit Documents as a Lender to an Eligible Assignee that shall assume such obligations
(which assignee may be another Lender, if a Lender accepts such assignment) and (ii) in the
-40-
case of any Subject Lender, the Borrower may, upon notice to the Subject Lender and the Administrative Agent and at
the Borrower’s sole cost and expense, require such Subject Lender to assign and delegate, without recourse (in
accordance with and subject to the restrictions contained in, and consents required by, Section 9.7), all of its
interests, rights and obligations under this Agreement and the related Credit Documents to an Eligible Assignee that
shall assume such obligations (which Eligible Assignee may be another Lender, if a Lender accepts such
assignment), provided that, in any event
(A) as to assignments required by the Borrower, the Borrower shall have paid to the Administrative Agent the
assignment fee specified in Section 9.7;
(B) such Subject Lender shall have received payment of an amount equal to the outstanding principal of its applicable
Advances and participations in outstanding Letter of Credit Obligations, accrued interest thereon, accrued fees and all
other amounts payable to it hereunder and under the other Credit Documents (including any amounts under
Section 2.9) from the assignee (to the extent of such outstanding principal and accrued interest and fees) or the
Borrower (in the case of all other amounts);
(C) in the case of any such assignment resulting from a claim for compensation under Section 2.12, such assignment
will result in a reduction in such compensation or payments thereafter; and
(D) such assignment does not conflict with applicable Legal Requirements.
A Lender shall not be required to make any such assignment or delegation if, prior thereto, as a result of a waiver by
such Lender or otherwise, the circumstances entitling the Borrower or the Administrative Agent to require such
assignment and delegation cease to apply. Solely for purposes of effecting any assignment involving a Defaulting
Lender under this Section 2.13 and to the extent permitted under applicable Legal Requirements, each Lender hereby
designates and appoints the Administrative Agent as true and lawful agent and attorney-in-fact, with full power
and authority, for and on behalf of and in the name of such Lender to execute, acknowledge and deliver the
Assignment and Acceptance required hereunder if such Lender is a Defaulting Lender and such Lender shall
be bound thereby as fully and effectively as if such Lender had personally executed, acknowledged and
delivered the same. In lieu of the Borrower or the Administrative Agent replacing a Defaulting Lender as provided in
this Section 2.13, the Borrower may terminate such Defaulting Lender’s Commitment as provided in Section 2.1(b)(ii).
Section 2.14. Payments and Deductions to a Defaulting Lender.
(a) If any Lender shall fail to make any payment required to be made by it pursuant to Section 2.1(a), Section 2.2, or
Section 2.11 then the Administrative Agent may, in its discretion (notwithstanding any contrary provision hereof),
apply any amounts thereafter received by the Administrative Agent for the account of such Lender to satisfy such
Lender’s obligations under such Sections until all such unsatisfied obligations are fully paid in cash.
(b) If a Defaulting Lender as a result of the exercise of a set-off shall have received a payment in respect of its
outstanding applicable Advances or Pro Rata Share of Letter of Credit Exposure which results in its outstanding
applicable Advances and Pro Rata Share of Letter of Credit Exposure being less than its pro rata share of the
aggregate outstanding applicable Advances and Letter of Credit Exposure, then no payments will be made to such
Defaulting Lender until such time as all amounts due and owing to the Lenders have been equalized in accordance
with each Lender’s respective pro rata share of the aggregate outstanding applicable Advances and Letter of Credit
Exposure. Further, if at any time prior to the acceleration or maturity of the Advances, the Administrative Agent shall
receive any payment in respect of principal attributable to an applicable Advance or Letter of Credit Obligations while
one or
-41-
more Defaulting Lenders shall be party to this Agreement, the Administrative Agent shall apply such payment first to
the Borrowings for which such Defaulting Lender(s) shall have failed to fund its pro rata share until such time as such
Borrowing(s) are paid in full or each Lender (including each Defaulting Lender) is owed its pro rata share of all
Advances then outstanding. After acceleration or maturity of the Advances, subject to the first sentence of this
Section 2.14(b), all principal will be paid ratably as provided in Section 2.11(e).
(c) If any Letter of Credit Exposure exists at the time a Lender becomes a Defaulting Lender then:
(i) such Letter of Credit Exposure shall be automatically reallocated among the Non-Defaulting Lenders in accordance
with their respective Pro Rata Share of such Defaulting Lender’s Pro Rata Share of the Letter of Credit Exposure (and
each Lender is deemed to have purchased and assigned such participation interest in such reallocated portion of the
Letter of Credit Exposure) but only to the extent that (A) the sum of each Non-Defaulting Lender’s outstanding
Revolving Advances plus its share of the Letter of Credit Exposure, after giving effect to the reallocation provided
herein, does not exceed such Non-Defaulting Lender’s Commitment, and (B) the conditions set forth in Section 3.2 are
satisfied at such time; provided that, such reallocation shall not constitute a waiver or release of any claim the
Borrower, the Administrative Agent, the Issuing Lender or any other Lender may have against such Defaulting Lender
or cause such Defaulting Lender to be a Non-Defaulting Lender;
(ii) if the reallocation described in clause (i) above cannot, or can only partially, be effected, then the Borrower shall,
within one Business Day following notice by the Administrative Agent, cash collateralize such Defaulting Lender’s
share of the Letter of Credit Exposure (after giving effect to any partial reallocation pursuant to clause (i) above) in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 2.2(h) for so long as such Letter of Credit Exposure is
outstanding;
(iii) if the Borrower cash collateralizes any portion of such Defaulting Lender’s Letter of Credit Exposure pursuant to
this Section 2.14 then the Borrower shall not be required to pay any fees to such Defaulting Lender pursuant to
Section 2.6(b)(i) or (iii) with respect to such Defaulting Lender’s Letter of Credit Exposure during the period such
Defaulting Lender’s Letter of Credit Exposure is cash collateralized;
(iv) if the Letter of Credit Exposure of the Non-Defaulting Lenders is reallocated pursuant to clause (i) above, then the
fees payable to the Lenders pursuant to Section 2.6(b)(i) and (iii) shall be adjusted in accordance with such Non-
Defaulting Lenders’ Pro Rata Share;
(v) if any Defaulting Lender’s share of the Letter of Credit Exposure is neither cash collateralized nor reallocated
pursuant to the preceding provisions, then, without prejudice to any rights or remedies of the Issuing Lender or any
Lender hereunder, all letter of credit fees payable under Section 2.6(b)(i) and (iii) with respect to such Defaulting
Lender’s share of the Letter of Credit Exposure shall be payable to the Issuing Lender until such Letter of Credit
Exposure is cash collateralized and/or reallocated.
In the event that the Administrative Agent, the Borrower and the Issuing Lender each agrees that a Defaulting Lender
has adequately remedied all matters that caused such Lender to be a Defaulting Lender, then (i) the Letter of Credit
Exposure of the Lenders shall be readjusted to reflect the inclusion of such Lender’s Commitment and on such date
such Lender shall be deemed to have purchased at par such of the Revolving Advances or participations in Letters of
Credit of the other Lenders as the Administrative Agent shall determine may be necessary in order for such Lender to
hold such Revolving Advances and Letter of Credit Exposure in accordance with its Pro Rata Share, and (ii) if no
Default exists, then any cash collateral posted by the Borrower pursuant to clause (c)(ii) above with respect to such
Lender shall be returned to the Borrower.
-42-
Section 2.15. Increase in Commitments.
(a) At any time prior to the Business Day immediately preceding the Maturity Date, the Borrower may effectuate one
or more increases in the aggregate Commitments (each such increase being a “Commitment Increase”), by
designating either one or more of the existing Lenders (each of which, in its sole discretion, may determine whether
and to what degree to participate in such Commitment Increase) or one or more other Eligible Assignees that at the
time agree, in the case of any existing Lender, to increase its Commitment as such Lender shall so select (an
“Increasing Lender”) and, in the case of any Eligible Assignee that is not an existing Lender (an “Additional Lender”),
to become a party to this Agreement as a Lender; provided, however, that (i) each such Commitment Increase shall
be equal to at least $5,000,000, (ii) all Commitments and Advances provided pursuant to a Commitment Increase
shall be available on the same terms as those applicable to the existing Commitments and Advances except as to
upfront fees which may be as agreed to between the Borrower and such Increasing Lender or Additional Lender, as
the case may be, (iii) the aggregate of all such Commitment Increases shall not exceed an amount equal to the sum
of $100,000,000, and (iv) such Commitment Increase shall not effect an increase in the aggregate Commitments if the
Maturity Date has occurred. The Borrower shall provide prompt notice of such proposed Commitment Increase
pursuant to this Section 2.15 to the Administrative Agent and the Lenders. This Section 2.15 shall not be construed to
create any obligation on the Administrative Agent or any of the Lenders to advance or to commit to advance any
credit to the Borrower or to arrange for any other Person to advance or to commit to advance any credit to the
Borrower.
(b) The Commitment Increase shall become effective on the date (the “Increase Date”) on or prior to which each of
following conditions shall have been satisfied: (i) the receipt by the Administrative Agent of (A) an agreement in form
and substance reasonably satisfactory to the Administrative Agent signed by the Borrower, each Increasing Lender
and/or each Additional Lender, setting forth the Commitments, if any, of each such Increasing Lender and/or
Additional Lender and, if applicable, setting forth the agreement of each Additional Lender to become a party to this
Agreement and to be bound by all the terms and provisions hereof binding upon each Lender, and (B) such evidence
of appropriate authorization on the part of the Borrower and the Guarantors with respect to such Commitment Increase
and such legal opinions as the Administrative Agent may reasonably request, (ii) the funding by each Increasing
Lender and Additional Lender of the Revolving Advances to be made by each such Lender to effect the prepayment
requirement set forth in Section 2.4(c)(iii), (iii) receipt by the Administrative Agent of a certificate of an authorized
officer of the Borrower certifying (A) both before and after giving effect to such Commitment Increase, no Default has
occurred and is continuing, (B) all representations and warranties made by the Borrower in this Agreement are true
and correct in all material respects, unless such representation or warranty relates to an earlier date which remains
true and correct in all material respects as of such earlier date, and (C) the pro forma compliance with the covenants
in Sections 6.16 and 6.17, after giving effect to such Commitment Increase, and (iv) receipt by the Increasing Lender
or Additional Lender, as applicable, of all such fees as agreed to between such Increasing Lender and /or Additional
Lender and the Borrower.
(c) On such Increase Date, each Lender’s share of the Letter of Credit Exposure and participations in respect of
Swing Line Advances on such date shall automatically be deemed to equal such Lender’s Pro Rata Share of such
Letter of Credit Obligations and participations in respect of Swing Line Advances (such Pro Rata Share for such
Lender to be determined as of the Increase Date in accordance with its Commitment on such date as a percentage of
the aggregate Commitments on such date) without further action by any party.
-43-
ARTICLE 3
CONDITIONS OF LENDING
Section 3.1. Conditions Precedent to Initial Borrowings and the Initial Letter of Credit. The obligations of each Lender
to make the initial Advances and the Issuing Lender to issue an initial Letter of Credit, shall be subject to the
conditions precedent that:
(a) Documentation. The Administrative Agent shall have received the following, duly executed by all the parties
thereto, in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the Administrative Agent and the Lenders:
(i) this Agreement and all attached Exhibits and Schedules and the Notes payable to the order of each applicable
Lender;
(ii) the Guaranty executed by each Wyeville Drop Down Entity and each other Subsidiary of the Borrower existing on
the Effective Date;
(iii) the Security Agreement executed by each Credit Party, together with appropriate UCC-1 financing statements, if
any, necessary or desirable for filing with the appropriate authorities and any other documents, agreements, or
instruments necessary to create, perfect or maintain an Acceptable Security Interest in the Collateral described in the
Security Agreement;
(iv) fully executed Mortgages covering all fee owned real property of any Credit Party, together with (A) a copy of an
existing owner’s policy of title insurance reflecting no Liens on such real property other than Permitted Liens, (B) a
flood determination certificate issued by the appropriate Governmental Authority or third party indicating whether such
property is designated as a “flood hazard area” and (C) if such property is designated to be in a “flood hazard area”,
evidence of flood insurance on such property obtained by the applicable Credit Party in such total amount as required
by Regulation H of the Federal Reserve Board, and all official rulings and interpretations thereunder or thereof, and
otherwise in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Flood Disaster Protection Act
of 1973;
(v) certificates of insurance naming the Administrative Agent as loss payee with respect to property insurance, or
additional insured with respect to liability insurance, and covering the Borrower’s or its Subsidiaries’ Properties with
such insurance carriers, for such amounts and covering such risks that are acceptable to the Administrative Agent
together with copies of endorsements of the Credit Parties’ insurance policies maintained pursuant to Section 5.3 as
reasonably requested by the Administrative Agent;
(vi) a certificate from an authorized officer of the Borrower dated as of the Effective Date stating that as of such date
(A) all representations and warranties of the Borrower set forth in this Agreement are true and correct, (B) no Default
has occurred and is continuing; and (C) the conditions precedent set forth in Section 3.1(b), (e), (m)(i) and (ii), and
(n) have been met;
(vii) a secretary’s certificate from each Credit Party certifying such Person’s (A) officers’ incumbency, (B) authorizing
resolutions, and (C) Organization Documents;
(viii) certificates of good standing for each Credit Party in each state in which each such Person is organized or
qualified to do business, which certificate shall be (A) dated a date not earlier than 30 days prior to Effective Date or
(B) otherwise effective on the Effective Date;
-44-
(ix) legal opinions of (A) Fulbright & Jaworski L.L.P. as Texas counsel to the Credit Parties and (B) Reinhart Boerner
Van Deuren s.c., as Wisconsin counsel to the Credit Parties, each in form and substance reasonably acceptable to
the Administrative Agent;
(x) a copy of a registration rights agreement, omnibus agreement, and underwriting agreement in substantially the
same form as the applicable exhibits attached to the Registration Statement, certified as of the Effective Date by an
authorized officer of the Borrower (x) as being true and correct copies of such documents and (y) as being in full force
and effect;
(xi) copies of the Wyeville Drop Down Documents, certified as of the Effective Date by an authorized officer of the
Borrower (x) as being true and correct copies of such documents, (y) as being in full force and effect and (z) that no
material term or condition thereof shall have been amended, modified or waived after the execution thereof without the
prior written consent of the Administrative Agent;
(xii) letter of credit applications or amendments to the Existing Letters of Credit, as applicable, and such other
documents and instruments of transfer as the Administrative Agent and the Issuing Lender deem necessary to
effectuate the deemed issuance of the Existing Letters of Credit hereunder; and
(xiii) such other documents, governmental certificates, agreements, and lien searches as the Administrative Agent or
any Lender may reasonably request.
(b) Consents; Authorization; Conflicts. The Borrower shall have received any consents, licenses and approvals
required in accordance with applicable law, or in accordance with any document, agreement, instrument or
arrangement to which the Borrower or any Subsidiary is a party, in connection with the execution, delivery,
performance, validity and enforceability of this Agreement and the other Credit Documents and the consummation of
the IPO and the Wyeville Drop Down. In addition, the Borrower and the Subsidiaries shall have all such material
consents, licenses and approvals required in connection with the continued operation of the Borrower and the
Subsidiaries, and such approvals shall be in full force and effect, and all applicable waiting periods shall have expired
without any action being taken or threatened by any competent authority which would restrain, prevent or otherwise
impose adverse conditions on this Agreement and the actions contemplated hereby.
(c) Representations and Warranties. The representations and warranties contained in Article 4 and in each other Credit
Document shall be true and correct on and as of the Effective Date before and after giving effect to the initial
Borrowings or issuance (or deemed issuance) of Letters of Credit and to the application of the proceeds from such
Borrowing, as though made on and as of such date.
(d) Fee Letter; Payment of Fees. The Borrower shall have paid the fees and expenses required to be paid as of the
Effective Date by Sections 2.6(c) and 9.1 or any other provision of a Credit Document.
(e) Other Proceedings. No action, suit, investigation or other proceeding (including without limitation, the enactment or
promulgation of a statute or rule) by or before any arbitrator or any Governmental Authority shall be pending or, to the
Borrower’s knowledge, threatened and no preliminary or permanent injunction or order by a state or federal court shall
have been entered (i) in connection with this Agreement, any other Credit Document or any transaction contemplated
hereby or thereby, including the consummation of the IPO and the Wyeville Drop Down or (ii) which in the judgment of
the Administrative Agent could reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Change.
-45-
(f) Other Reports. The Administrative Agent shall have received, in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to it,
all existing environmental reports (including all available Phase I Environmental Site Assessment reports and Phase II
Environmental Site Assessment reports), and such other reports, audits or certifications in the possession of the
Credit Parties as it may reasonably request.
(g) Material Adverse Change. Since May 8, 2012, there shall not have occurred any event, development or
circumstance that has or could reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Change.
(h) Solvency. The Administrative Agent shall have received a certificate in form and substance reasonably
satisfactory to the Administrative Agent from a senior financial officer or such other officer acceptable to the
Administrative Agent of the Borrower and each Guarantor certifying that, before and after giving effect to the initial
Borrowings made hereunder on the Effective Date, the Borrower and each such other Guarantor is Solvent (assuming
with respect to each Guarantor, that the fraudulent conveyance savings language contained in the Guaranty
applicable to such Guarantor will be given full effect).
(i) Delivery of Initial Financial Statements; Projections. The Administrative Agent shall have received true and correct
copies of (i) the Initial Financial Statements, (ii) the Pro Forma Financial Statements and (iii) the projections prepared
by management of balance sheets, income statements and cashflow statements of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries,
after giving effect to the IPO and the Wyeville Drop Down, covering the first four full years after the Effective Date.
(j) Notices of Borrowing. The Administrative Agent shall have received a Notice of Borrowing from the Borrower, with
appropriate insertions and executed by a duly appointed Responsible Officer of the Borrower.
(k) USA Patriot Act. The Administrative Agent shall have received all documentation and other information that is
required by regulatory authorities under applicable “know your customer” and anti-money-laundering rules and
regulations, including, without limitation, the Patriot Act.
(l) Calculation of Run Rate EBITDA. The Administrative Agent shall have received a certificate in form acceptable to
the Administrative Agent and executed by the chief executive officer or chief financial officer of the Borrower and
reflecting run-rate EBITDA for the Borrower and its consolidated Subsidiaries, after giving effect to the IPO and the
Wyeville Drop Down, calculated based on annualized EBITDA for the fiscal quarter ending June 30, 2012, of no less
than $45,000,000.
(m) Capital Structure; Consummation of IPO and Wyeville Drop Down. The capital and ownership structure and the
equityholder arrangements of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries (and all agreements relating thereto) will be reasonably
satisfactory to the Administrative Agent. The Administrative Agent shall have received evidence, in form and
substance satisfactory to the Administrative Agent, of (i) the consummation of the IPO in accordance with the
Prospectus and (ii) the consummation of the Wyeville Drop Down in accordance with the Wyeville Drop Down
Documents.
(n) Amendment of Hi-Crush Proppants Credit Agreement. The Administrative Agent shall have received evidence, in
form and substance satisfactory to the Administrative Agent, that (i) the Hi-Crush Proppants Credit Agreement has
been amended to permit the IPO, the Wyeville Drop Down and the transactions contemplated hereby and (ii) all
obligations, liabilities and Liens of the General Partner, the Borrower, and each Wyeville Drop Down Entity relating to
the Hi-Crush Proppants Credit Agreement and the other Credit Documents (as defined in the Hi-Crush Proppants
Credit Agreement) have been released and terminated.
-46-
(o) Landlord Agreements; Account Control Agreements. The Administrative Agent shall have received lien waivers or
subordination agreements in form and substance satisfactory to the Administrative Agent and executed by the
landlords or lessors identified in, and covering each of the leased real properties listed on, Schedule 4.5. The
Administrative Agent shall have received Account Control Agreements in accordance with Section 5.8 and the
Security Documents.
(p) Sand Reserve Report. The Administrative Agent shall have received the Independent Engineering Report dated
January 2012 in respect of the Credit Parties’ facility in Wyeville, Wisconsin, together with a letter from John T. Boyd
Company permitting the Administrative Agent and the Lenders to rely on such Independent Engineering Report.
(q) Certificates of Title. For each piece of Certificated Equipment of any Credit Party, if any, to the extent required by
Section 4.10 of the Security Agreement, the Administrative Agent shall have received the original certificate of title to
such equipment and such other documents, agreements or instruments required in order to evidence the
Administrative Agent’s first priority lien on the certificate of title for such Certificated Equipment.
(r) Liens. The Administrative Agent shall have received evidence satisfactory to it that there are no Liens encumbering
any of the Credit Parties’ respective Property other than Permitted Liens.
NOTWITHSTANDING ANYTHING TO THE CONTRARY HEREIN, NO LENDER SHALL BE OBLIGATED TO MAKE
ADVANCES HEREUNDER AND THE ISSUING LENDER SHALL NOT BE OBLIGATED TO ISSUE ANY LETTER OF
CREDIT HEREUNDER UNLESS EACH OF THE FOREGOING CONDITIONS PRECEDENT IS SATISFIED ON OR
PRIOR TO SEPTEMBER 30, 2012.
Section 3.2. Conditions Precedent to Each Borrowing and to Each Issuance, Extension or Renewal of a Letter of
Credit. The obligation of each Lender to make an Advance on the occasion of each Borrowing (including the initial
Borrowing), the obligation of each Issuing Lender to issue, increase, renew or extend a Letter of Credit (including the
deemed issuance of Letters of Credit) and of any reallocation of Letter of Credit Exposure provided in Section 2.14,
shall be subject to the further conditions precedent that on the date of such Borrowing or such issuance, increase,
renewal or extension:
(a) Representations and Warranties. The representations and warranties made by any Credit Party or any officer or
employee of any Credit Party contained in the Credit Documents shall be true and correct in all material respects on
such date, except that any representation and warranty which by its terms is made as of a specified date shall be
required to be true and correct only as of such specified date and each request for the making of any Advance or
issuance, increase, renewal or extension of any Letter of Credit and the making of such Advance or the issuance,
increase, renewal or extension of such Letter of Credit shall be deemed to be a reaffirmation of such representations
and warranties.
(b) Event of Default. No Default or Event of Default shall exist, and the making of such Advance or issuance,
increase, renewal or extension of such Letter of Credit, or the relocation of the Letter of Credit Exposure would not
cause a Default or Event of Default.
Each of the giving of the applicable Notice of Borrowing or Letter of Credit Application, the acceptance by the
Borrower of the proceeds of such Borrowing, the issuance, increase, or extension of such Letter of Credit, and the
reallocation of the Letter of Credit Exposure, shall constitute a representation and warranty by the Borrower that on the
date of such Borrowing, such issuance, increase, or extension of such Letter of Credit or such reallocation, as
applicable, the foregoing conditions have been met.
-47-
Section 3.3. Determinations Under Sections 3.1 and 3.2. For purposes of determining compliance with the conditions
specified in Sections 3.1 and 3.2 each Lender shall be deemed to have consented to, approved or accepted or to be
satisfied with each document or other matter required thereunder to be consented to or approved by or acceptable or
satisfactory to the Lenders unless an officer of the Administrative Agent responsible for the transactions
contemplated by the Credit Documents shall have received written notice from such Lender prior to the Borrowings
hereunder specifying its objection thereto and such Lender shall not have made available to the Administrative Agent
such Lender’s ratable portion of such Borrowings.
ARTICLE 4
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
Each Credit Party hereto represents and warrants as follows:
Section 4.1. Organization. Each Credit Party is duly and validly organized and existing and in good standing under the
laws of its jurisdiction of incorporation or formation. Each Credit Party is authorized to do business and is in good
standing in all jurisdictions in which such qualifications or authorizations are necessary except where the failure to be
so qualified or authorized could not reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Change. As of the
Effective Date, each Credit Party’s type of organization and jurisdiction of incorporation or formation are set forth on
Schedule 4.1.
Section 4.2. Authorization. The execution, delivery, and performance by each Credit Party of each Credit Document to
which such Credit Party is a party and the consummation of the transactions contemplated thereby, including the IPO
and the Wyeville Drop Down (a) are within such Credit Party’s powers, (b) have been duly authorized by all necessary
corporate, limited liability company or partnership action, (c) do not contravene any articles or certificate of
incorporation or bylaws, partnership or limited liability company agreement binding on or affecting such Credit Party,
(d) do not contravene any law or any contractual restriction binding on or affecting such Credit Party, (e) do not result
in or require the creation or imposition of any Lien prohibited by this Agreement, and (f) do not require any
authorization or approval or other action by, or any notice or filing with, any Governmental Authority except, in the
case of clauses (d) and (f), to the extent such contravention or the failure to obtain authorization, approval or notice or
take other action could not reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Change.
Section 4.3. Enforceability. The Credit Documents have each been duly executed and delivered by each Credit Party
that is a party thereto and each Credit Document constitutes the legal, valid, and binding obligation of each Credit
Party that is a party thereto enforceable against such Credit Party in accordance with its terms, except as limited by
applicable bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium, or similar laws at the time in effect affecting the rights
of creditors generally and by general principles of equity whether applied by a court of law or equity.
Section 4.4. Financial Condition.
(a) The Initial Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP and present fairly, in all material
respects, the consolidated financial condition of the Borrower and its consolidated Subsidiaries as of the respective
dates thereof, except as otherwise expressly noted therein, subject only to normal year-end audit adjustments and the
absence of footnotes. As of the date of the aforementioned financial statements, there were no material contingent
obligations, material unaccrued liabilities for taxes, material unusual forward or long-term commitments, or material
unrealized or anticipated losses of the applicable Persons, except as disclosed therein or as set forth on Schedule 4.4
and adequate reserves for such items have been made in accordance with GAAP.
-48-
(b) The Pro Forma Financial Statements have been prepared in good faith by the Borrower, based on assumptions
believed by the Borrower on the Effective Date to be reasonable, are based on the best information available to the
Borrower as of the date of delivery thereof, accurately reflect all adjustments required to be made to give effect to the
IPO and the Wyeville Drop Down and present fairly, in all material respects, on a pro forma basis the estimated
consolidated financial position of the Borrower and its consolidated Subsidiaries as of such date and for such period.
(c) Since the Effective Date, no event or condition has occurred that could reasonably be expected to result in
Material Adverse Change.
Section 4.5. Ownership and Liens; Real Property. Each Credit Party (a) has good and marketable title to, or a valid
and subsisting leasehold interest in, all real property, and good title to all personal Property, in each case necessary
for its business, and (b) none of the Property owned by the Borrower or a Subsidiary of the Borrower is subject to any
Lien except for minor defects in title that do not materially interfere with its ability to conduct its business or to utilize
such assets for their intended purpose and Permitted Liens. As of the Effective Date, the Borrower and its
Subsidiaries own no real property other than that listed on Schedule 4.5 and all equipment (other than office
equipment and equipment located on jobsites, in transit or off location for servicing, repairs or modifications) owned by
the Borrower and its Subsidiaries are located at the fee owned or leased real property listed on Schedule 4.5.
Section 4.6. True and Complete Disclosure. All written factual information (whether delivered before or after the date
of this Agreement) prepared by or on behalf of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries and furnished to the Administrative
Agent or the Lenders for purposes of or in connection with this Agreement, any other Credit Document or any
transaction contemplated hereby or thereby does not contain any material misstatement of fact or omits to state any
material fact necessary to make the statements therein not misleading. There is no fact known to any Responsible
Officer of any Credit Party on the date of this Agreement that has not been disclosed to the Administrative Agent that
could reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Change. All projections, estimates, budgets, and pro
forma financial information furnished by the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries (or on behalf of the Borrower or any
such Subsidiary), were prepared on the basis of assumptions, data, information, tests, or conditions (including current
and reasonably foreseeable business conditions) believed to be reasonable at the time such projections, estimates,
budgets and pro forma financial information were furnished; it being understood that actual results may vary and such
variances may be material.
Section 4.7. Litigation. Except as otherwise provided in Schedule 4.7, there are no actions, suits, or proceedings
pending or, to any Credit Party’s knowledge, threatened against the Borrower or any Subsidiary, at law, in equity, or in
admiralty, or by or before any Governmental Authority, which could reasonably be expected to result in a Material
Adverse Change. Additionally, except as disclosed in writing to the Administrative Agent and the Lenders, there is no
pending or, to the Borrower’s knowledge, threatened action or proceeding instituted against the Borrower or any
Subsidiary which seeks to adjudicate the Borrower or any Subsidiary as bankrupt or insolvent, or seeking liquidation,
winding up, reorganization, arrangement, adjustment, protection, relief, or composition of it or its debts under any law
relating to bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization or relief of debtors, or seeking the entry of an order for relief or the
appointment of a receiver, trustee or other similar official for it or for any substantial part of its Property; provided that
this Section 4.7 does not apply with respect to environmental claims.
-49-
Section 4.8. Compliance with Agreements.
(a) Neither the Borrower nor any of its Subsidiaries is a party to any indenture, loan or credit agreement or any lease
or any other types of agreement or instrument or subject to any charter or corporate restriction or provision of
applicable law or governmental regulation the performance of or compliance with which could reasonably be expected
to cause a Material Adverse Change. Neither the Borrower nor any of its Subsidiaries is in default under or with
respect to any contract, agreement, lease or any other types of agreement or instrument to which the Borrower or
such Subsidiary is a party and which could reasonably be expected to cause a Material Adverse Change. To the
knowledge of the Credit Parties, neither the Borrower nor any of its Subsidiaries is in default under, or has received a
notice of default under, any contract, agreement, lease or any other document or instrument to which the Borrower or
its Subsidiaries is a party which is continuing and which, if not cured, could reasonably be expected to cause a
Material Adverse Change.
(b) No Default has occurred and is continuing.
Section 4.9. Pension Plans. (a) Except for matters that could not reasonably be expected to result in a Material
Adverse Change, all Plans are in compliance with all applicable provisions of ERISA, (b) no Termination Event has
occurred with respect to any Plan that would result in an Event of Default under Section 7.1(i), and, except for matters
that could not reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Change, each Plan has complied with and been
administered in accordance with applicable provisions of ERISA and the Code, (c) no “accumulated funding
deficiency” (as defined in Section 302 of ERISA) has occurred, and for plan years after December 31, 2007, no unpaid
minimum required contribution exists, and there has been no excise tax imposed under Section 4971 of the Code,
(d) to the knowledge of Credit Parties, no Reportable Event has occurred with respect to any Multiemployer Plan, and
each Multiemployer Plan has complied with and been administered in accordance with applicable provisions of ERISA
and the Code, (e) the present value of all benefits vested under each Plan (based on the assumptions used to fund
such Plan) did not, as of the last annual valuation date applicable thereto, exceed the value of the assets of such
Plan allocable to such vested benefits in an amount that could reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse
Change, (f) neither the Borrower nor any member of the Controlled Group has had a complete or partial withdrawal
from any Multiemployer Plan for which there is any unsatisfied withdrawal liability that could reasonably be expected
to result in a Material Adverse Change or an Event of Default under Section 7.1(j), and (g) except for matters that
could not reasonably result in a Material Adverse Change, as of the most recent valuation date applicable thereto,
neither the Borrower nor any member of the Controlled Group would become subject to any liability under ERISA if the
Borrower or any Subsidiary has received notice that any Multiemployer Plan is insolvent or in reorganization. Based
upon GAAP existing as of the date of this Agreement and current factual circumstances, no Credit Party has any
reason to believe that the annual cost during the term of this Agreement to the Borrower or any Subsidiary for post-
retirement benefits to be provided to the current and former employees of the Borrower or any Subsidiary under Plans
that are welfare benefit plans (as defined in Section 3(1) of ERISA) could, in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to
cause a Material Adverse Change.
Section 4.10. Environmental Condition.
(a) Permits, Etc. Each Credit Party (i) has obtained all material Environmental Permits necessary for the ownership
and operation of its Properties and the conduct of its businesses; (ii) has at all times since the date six months prior
to the Effective Date been and is currently in material compliance with all terms and conditions of such Environmental
Permits and with all other material requirements of applicable Environmental Laws; (iii) has not received written notice
of any material violation or alleged material violation of any Environmental Law or Environmental Permit; and (iv) is
not subject to any actual or contingent Environmental Claim which could reasonably be expected to cause a Material
Adverse Change.
-50-
(b) Certain Liabilities. Except as disclosed on Schedule 4.10, to such Credit Parties’ knowledge, none of the present
or previously owned or operated Property of any such Credit Party or of any Subsidiary thereof, wherever located,
(i) has been placed on or proposed to be placed on the National Priorities List, the Comprehensive Environmental
Response Compensation Liability Information System list, or their state or local analogs, or have been otherwise
investigated, designated, listed, or identified as a potential site for removal, remediation, cleanup, closure, restoration,
reclamation, or other response activity under any Environmental Laws; (ii) is subject to a Lien, arising under or in
connection with any Environmental Laws, that attaches to any revenues or to any Property owned or operated by any
Credit Party, wherever located, which could reasonably be expected to cause a Material Adverse Change; or (iii) has
been the site of any Release of Hazardous Substances or Hazardous Wastes from present or past operations which
has caused at the site or at any third party site any condition that has resulted in or could reasonably be expected to
result in the need for Response that could cause a Material Adverse Change.
(c) Certain Actions. Without limiting the foregoing and except as disclosed on Schedule 4.10, (i) all necessary material
notices have been properly filed, and no further action is required under current applicable Environmental Law as to
each Response or other restoration or remedial project undertaken by the Borrower, any of its Subsidiaries or any of
the Borrower’s or such Subsidiary’s former Subsidiaries on any of their presently or formerly owned or operated
Property and (ii) the present and, to the Credit Parties’ knowledge, future liability, if any, of the Borrower or of any
Subsidiary which could reasonably be expected to arise in connection with requirements under Environmental Laws
will not reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Change.
Section 4.11. Subsidiaries. As of the Effective Date, the Borrower has no Subsidiaries other than those listed on
Schedule 4.11. Each Subsidiary of the Borrower (including any such Subsidiary formed or acquired subsequent to the
Effective Date) has complied with the requirements of Section 5.6.
Section 4.12. Investment Company Act. Neither the Borrower nor any Subsidiary is an “investment company” or a
company “controlled” by an “investment company” within the meaning of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as
amended. Neither the Borrower nor any Subsidiary is subject to regulation under any Federal or state statute,
regulation or other Legal Requirement which limits its ability to incur Debt.
Section 4.13. Taxes. Proper and accurate (in all material respects), federal, state, local and foreign tax returns,
reports and statements required to be filed (after giving effect to any extension granted in the time for filing) by the
Borrower and each Subsidiary (hereafter collectively called the “Tax Group”) have been filed with the appropriate
Governmental Authorities, and all taxes and other impositions due and payable, in each case, which are material in
amount, have been timely paid prior to the date on which any fine, penalty, interest, late charge or loss may be added
thereto for non-payment thereof except where contested in good faith by appropriate proceeding and for which
adequate reserves have been established in compliance with GAAP. Neither the Borrower nor any member of the Tax
Group has given, or been requested to give, a waiver of the statute of limitations relating to the payment of any
federal, state, local or foreign taxes or other impositions. Proper and accurate amounts have been withheld by the
Borrower and all other members of the Tax Group from their employees for all periods to comply in all material
respects with the tax, social security and unemployment withholding provisions of applicable federal, state, local and
foreign law.
Section 4.14. Permits, Licenses, etc. Each of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries possesses all permits, licenses,
patents, patent rights or licenses, trademarks, trademark rights, trade names rights, and copyrights which are material
to the conduct of its business. Each of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries manages and operates its business in
accordance with all applicable Legal Requirements except where the failure to so manage or operate could not
reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Change; provided that this Section 4.14 does not apply with
respect to Environmental Permits.
-51-
Section 4.15. Use of Proceeds. The proceeds of the Advances will be used by the Borrower for the purposes
described in Section 6.6. No Credit Party is engaged in the business of extending credit for the purpose of purchasing
or carrying margin stock (within the meaning of Regulation U). No proceeds of any Advance will be used to purchase
or carry any margin stock in violation of Regulation T, U or X.
Section 4.16. Condition of Property; Casualties. The material Properties used or to be used in the continuing
operations of the Borrower and each Subsidiary, are in good working order and condition, normal wear and tear and
casualty and condemnation (excluding casualty and condemnation which could, individually or in the aggregate,
reasonably be expected to cause a Material Adverse Change) excepted. Neither the business nor the material
Properties of the Borrower or any Subsidiary has been affected as a result of any fire, explosion, earthquake, flood,
drought, windstorm, accident, strike or other labor disturbance, embargo, requisition or taking of Property or
cancellation of contracts, permits or concessions by a Governmental Authority, riot, activities of armed forces or acts
of God or of any public enemy, which effect could reasonably be expected to cause a Material Adverse Change.
Section 4.17. Insurance. Each of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries carry insurance (which may be carried by the
Borrower on a consolidated basis) with reputable insurers in respect of such of their respective Properties, in such
amounts and against such risks as is customarily maintained by other Persons of similar size engaged in similar
businesses.
Section 4.18. Security Interest. Each Credit Party has authorized the filing of financing statements sufficient when
filed to perfect the Lien created by the Security Documents. When such financing statements are filed in the offices
noted therein, the Administrative Agent will have a valid and perfected security interest in all Collateral that is capable
of being perfected by filing financing statements.
Section 4.19. OFAC; Anti-Terrorism. Neither the Borrower nor any Subsidiary of the Borrower is in violation of any of
the country or list based economic and trade sanctions administered and enforced by OFAC. Neither the Borrower nor
any Subsidiary of the Borrower (a) is a Sanctioned Person or a Sanctioned Entity, (b) has its assets located in
Sanctioned Entities, or (c) derives revenues from investments in, or transactions with Sanctioned Persons or
Sanctioned Entities. No proceeds of any Advance will be used to fund any operations in, finance any investments or
activities in, or make any payments to, a Sanctioned Person or a Sanctioned Entity.
Section 4.20. Solvency. Before and after giving effect to the making of each Advance and the issuance, increase, or
amendment of each Letter of Credit, the Credit Parties are, when taken as a whole, Solvent.
ARTICLE 5
AFFIRMATIVE COVENANTS
So long as any Obligation (other than (a) Letter of Credit Obligations which are not yet due and payable in connection
with Letters of Credit which have been cash collateralized in accordance with this Agreement and (b) contingent
indemnification obligations which are not due and payable and which by their terms survive the termination or
expiration of this Agreement and the other Credit Documents) shall remain unpaid, any Lender shall have any
Commitment hereunder, or there shall exist any Letter of Credit Exposure (other than Letter of Credit exposure which
has been cash collateralized in accordance with this Agreement), each Credit Party agrees to comply with the
following covenants.
-52-
Section 5.1. Organization. Each Credit Party shall, and shall cause each of its respective Subsidiaries to, (a) preserve
and maintain its partnership, limited liability company or corporate existence, rights, franchises and privileges in the
jurisdiction of its organization, and (b) qualify and remain qualified as a foreign business entity in each jurisdiction in
which qualification is necessary in view of its business and operations or the ownership of its Properties and where
failure to qualify could reasonably be expected to cause a Material Adverse Change; provided, however, that nothing
herein contained shall prevent any transaction permitted by Section 6.7 or Section 6.8.
Section 5.2. Reporting.
(a) Annual Financial Reports. The Borrower shall provide, or shall cause to be provided, to the Administrative Agent,
as soon as available, but in any event within 120 days after the end of each fiscal year of the Borrower (commencing
with the fiscal year ended December 31, 2012), a consolidated balance sheet of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries as
at the end of such fiscal year, and the related consolidated statements of income or operations, partners’ equity and
cash flows for such fiscal year, setting forth in each case in comparative form the figures for the previous fiscal year,
all in reasonable detail and prepared in accordance with GAAP, such consolidated statements to be audited and
accompanied by a report and opinion of an independent certified public accountant of nationally recognized standing
reasonably acceptable to the Administrative Agent, which report and opinion shall be prepared in accordance with
generally accepted auditing standards and shall not be subject to any “going concern” or like qualification or exception
or any qualification or exception as to the scope of such audit, and such statements to be certified by the chief
executive officer or chief financial officer of the Borrower, to the effect that (i) such statements fairly, in all material
respects, present the financial condition, results of operations, partners’ equity and cash flows of the Borrower and its
Subsidiaries in accordance with GAAP and (ii) there were no material contingent obligations, material unaccrued
liabilities for taxes, material unusual forward or long-term commitments, or material unrealized or anticipated losses of
the Borrower and its Subsidiaries, except as disclosed therein or as otherwise disclosed in writing to the
Administrative Agent and adequate reserves for such items have been made in accordance with GAAP;
(b) Quarterly Financial Reports. The Borrower shall provide, or shall cause to be provided, to the Administrative Agent,
as soon as available, but in any event within 45 days after the end of each of the first three fiscal quarters of each
fiscal year of the Borrower (commencing with the fiscal quarter ending September 30, 2012), (i) consolidated balance
sheet of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries as at the end of such fiscal quarter, and the related consolidated
statements of income or operations, partners’ equity and cash flows for such fiscal quarter and for the portion of the
Borrower’s fiscal year then ended, setting forth in each case in comparative form the figures for the corresponding
fiscal quarter of the previous fiscal year and the corresponding portion of the previous fiscal year, all in reasonable
detail, such consolidated statements to be certified by the chief executive officer or the chief financial officer of the
Borrower as (A) fairly presenting, in all material respects, the financial condition, results of operations, partners’ equity
and cash flows of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries in accordance with GAAP, subject only to normal year-end audit
adjustments and the absence of footnotes, and (B) showing that there were no material contingent obligations,
material unaccrued liabilities for taxes, material unusual forward or long term commitments, or material unrealized or
anticipated losses of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries, except as disclosed therein or as otherwise disclosed in
writing to the Administrative Agent and adequate reserves for such items have been made in accordance with GAAP,
and (ii) a copy of the management discussion and analysis with respect to such financial statements;
-53-
(c) Compliance Certificate. (i) Concurrently with the delivery of the financial statements referred to in Section 5.2(a)
and (b) above, the Borrower shall provide to the Administrative Agent a duly completed Compliance Certificate signed
by the chief executive officer or chief financial officer of the Borrower;
(d) Annual Budget. As soon as available and in any event within 60 days after the end of each fiscal year of the
Borrower, the Borrower shall provide to the Administrative Agent an annual operating, capital and cash flow budget for
the immediately following fiscal year and detailed on a quarterly basis;
(e) Defaults. The Credit Parties shall provide to the Administrative Agent promptly, but in any event within five
(5) Business Days after the occurrence thereof, a notice of each Default or Event of Default known to the Responsible
Officer of the Borrower or to any of its Subsidiaries, together with a statement of a Responsible Officer of the
Borrower setting forth the details of such Default or Event of Default and the actions which the Credit Parties have
taken and proposes to take with respect thereto;
(f) Other Creditors. The Credit Parties shall provide to the Administrative Agent promptly after the giving or receipt
thereof, copies of any default notices given or received by the Borrower or by any of its Subsidiaries pursuant to the
terms of any indenture, loan agreement, credit agreement, royalty agreement or similar agreement;
(g) Litigation. The Credit Parties shall provide to the Administrative Agent promptly after the commencement thereof,
notice of all actions, suits, and proceedings before any Governmental Authority, affecting the Borrower or any of its
Subsidiaries or any of their respective assets that has a claim for damages in excess of $500,000 or that could
otherwise result in a cost, expense or loss to the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries in excess of $500,000;
(h) Environmental Notices. Promptly upon, and in any event no later than thirty (30) days after, the receipt thereof, or
the acquisition of knowledge thereof, by any Credit Party, the Credit Parties shall provide the Administrative Agent
with a copy of any form of request, claim, complaint, order, notice, summons or citation received from any
Governmental Authority or any other Person, (i) concerning violations or alleged violations of Environmental Laws,
which seeks to impose liability therefore in excess of $500,000, (ii) concerning any action or omission on the part of
any of the Credit Parties or any of their former Subsidiaries in connection with Hazardous Waste or Hazardous
Substances which could reasonably result in the imposition of liability in excess of $500,000 or requiring that action
be taken to respond to or clean up a Release of Hazardous Substances or Hazardous Waste into the environment and
such action or clean-up could reasonably be expected to exceed $500,000, including without limitation any information
request related to, or notice of, potential responsibility under CERCLA, or (iii) concerning the filing of a Lien securing
liabilities in excess of $500,000 described in clause (i) or (ii) above upon, against or in connection with the Borrower,
any Subsidiary, or any of their respective former Subsidiaries, or any of their material leased or owned Property,
wherever located;
(i) Material Changes. The Credit Parties shall provide to the Administrative Agent prompt written notice of any event,
development of circumstance that has had or would reasonably be expected to give rise to a Material Adverse
Change;
(j) Termination Events. As soon as possible and in any event (i) within thirty (30) days after the Borrower or any
member of the Controlled Group knows or has reason to know that any Termination Event described in clause (a) of
the definition of Termination Event with respect to any Plan has occurred, and (ii) within ten (10) days after the
Borrower or any member of the Controlled Group knows or has reason to know that any other Termination Event with
respect to any Plan has occurred, the Credit Parties shall provide to the Administrative Agent a statement of a
Responsible Officer of the Borrower describing such Termination Event and the action, if any, which the Borrower or
any Affiliate of the Borrower proposes to take with respect thereto;
-54-
(k) Termination of Plans. Promptly and in any event within five (5) Business Days after receipt thereof by the Borrower
or any member of the Controlled Group from the PBGC, the Credit Parties shall provide to the Administrative Agent
copies of each notice received by the Borrower or any such member of the Controlled Group of the PBGC’s intention
to terminate any Plan or to have a trustee appointed to administer any Plan;
(l) Other ERISA Notices. Promptly and in any event within five (5) Business Days after receipt thereof by the Borrower
or any member of the Controlled Group from a Multiemployer Plan sponsor, the Credit Parties shall provide to the
Administrative Agent a copy of each notice received by the Borrower or any member of the Controlled Group
concerning the imposition or amount of withdrawal liability imposed on the Borrower or any member of the Controlled
Group pursuant to Section 4202 of ERISA;
(m) Other Governmental Notices. Promptly and in any event within five (5) Business Days after receipt thereof by the
Borrower or any Subsidiary, the Credit Parties shall provide to the Administrative Agent a copy of any notice,
summons, citation, or proceeding seeking to modify in any material respect, revoke, or suspend any material
contract, license, permit, or agreement with any Governmental Authority;
(n) Disputes; etc. The Credit Parties shall provide to the Administrative Agent prompt written notice of (i) any claims,
legal or arbitration proceedings, proceedings before any Governmental Authority, or disputes, or to the knowledge of
any Credit Party, any such actions threatened, or affecting the Borrower or any Subsidiary, which could reasonably be
expected to cause a Material Adverse Change, or any material labor controversy of which the Borrower or any of its
Subsidiaries has knowledge resulting in or reasonably considered to be likely to result in a strike against the Borrower
or any Subsidiary, and (ii) any claim, judgment, Lien or other encumbrance (other than a Permitted Lien) affecting any
Property of the Borrower or any Subsidiary, if the value of the claim, judgment, Lien, or other encumbrance affecting
such Property shall exceed $500,000;
(o) Management Letters; Other Accounting Reports. Promptly upon receipt thereof, a copy of any final management
letter submitted to the Borrower or any Subsidiary by its independent accountants, and a copy of any response by the
Borrower or any Subsidiary of the Borrower, or the board of directors or managers (or other applicable governing body)
of the Borrower or any Subsidiary of the Borrower, to such letter;
(p) Material Contracts. Promptly upon receipt thereof, the applicable Credit Party shall provide to the Administrative
Agent a copy of any amendment of or notice of default under any Material Contract to which it is a party;
(q) Securities Law Filings and other Public Information. The Borrower shall provide to the Administrative Agent
promptly after the same are available, copies of each annual report, proxy or financial statement or other material
report or communication sent to the equityholders of the Borrower, and copies of all annual, regular, periodic and
special reports and registration statements which the Borrower may file or be required to file with the SEC under
Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 or any other securities Governmental Authority, and not
otherwise required to be delivered to the Administrative Agent pursuant hereto; and
-55-
(r) Other Information. Subject to the confidentiality provisions of Section 9.8, the Credit Parties shall provide to the
Administrative Agent such other information respecting the business, operations, or Property of the Borrower or any
Subsidiary, financial or otherwise, as any Lender through the Administrative Agent may reasonably request.
The Borrower hereby acknowledges that (1) the Administrative Agent will make available to the Lenders materials
and/or information provided by or on behalf of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries hereunder (collectively, “Borrower
Materials”) by posting the Borrower Materials on IntraLinks or another similar electronic system (the “Platform”) and
(2) certain of the Lenders may be “public-side” Lenders (i.e., Lenders that do not wish to receive material non-public
information with respect to the Borrower or its securities) (each, a “Public Lender”). The Borrower hereby agrees that
(w) all Borrower Materials that are to be made available to Public Lenders shall be clearly and conspicuously marked
“PUBLIC” which, at a minimum, shall mean that the word “PUBLIC” shall appear prominently on the first page thereof;
(x) by marking Borrower Materials “PUBLIC,” the Borrower shall be deemed to have authorized the Administrative
Agent, the Swing Line Lender, the Issuing Lender and the Lenders to treat such Borrower Materials as not containing
any material non-public information with respect to the Borrower, its Subsidiaries or their securities for purposes of
United States Federal and state securities laws; (y) all Borrower Materials marked “PUBLIC” are permitted to be made
available through a portion of the Platform designated “Public Investor;” and (z) the Administrative Agent shall be
entitled to treat any Borrower Materials that are not marked “PUBLIC” as being suitable only for posting on a portion of
the Platform not designated “Public Investor.”
Documents required to be delivered pursuant to Section 5.2(q) may be delivered electronically and if so delivered,
shall be deemed to have been delivered on the date (i) on which the Borrower posts such documents, or provides a
link thereto on the Borrower’s website on the Internet and (ii) on which such documents are posted on the Borrower’s
behalf on an Internet or intranet website, if any, to which each Lender and the Administrative Agent have access
(whether a commercial, third-party website or whether sponsored by the Administrative Agent); provided, however,
that (x) the Borrower shall deliver paper copies of such documents to the Administrative Agent or any Lender that
requests the Borrower to deliver such paper copies until a written request to cease delivering paper copies is given by
the Administrative Agent or such Lender and (y) the Borrower shall notify the Administrative Agent and each Lender
(by telecopier or electronic mail) of the posting of any such documents.
Section 5.3. Insurance.
(a) Each Credit Party shall, and shall cause each of its Subsidiaries to, carry and maintain all such other insurance in
such amounts and against such risks as is customarily maintained by other Persons of similar size engaged in similar
businesses and reasonably acceptable to the Administrative Agent and with reputable insurers reasonably acceptable
to the Administrative Agent.
(b) If requested by the Administrative Agent, copies of all policies of insurance or certificates thereof covering the
property or business of the Credit Parties, and endorsements and renewals thereof, certified as true and correct
copies of such documents by a Responsible Officer of the Borrower shall be delivered by Borrower to and retained by
the Administrative Agent. All policies of property insurance with respect to the Collateral either shall have attached
thereto a lender’s loss payable endorsement in favor of the Administrative Agent for its benefit and the ratable benefit
of the Secured Parties or name the Administrative Agent as loss payee for its benefit and the ratable benefit of the
Secured Parties, in either case, in form reasonably satisfactory to the Administrative Agent, and all policies of liability
insurance with respect to the Credit Parties shall name the Administrative Agent for its benefit and the ratable benefit
of the Secured Parties as an additional insured and shall provide for a waiver of subrogation in favor of the
Administrative Agent for its benefit and the ratable benefit of the
-56-
Secured Parties. All policies or certificates of insurance shall set forth the coverage, the limits of liability, the name of
the carrier, the policy number, and the period of coverage. All such policies shall contain a provision that
notwithstanding any contrary agreements between the Borrower, its Subsidiaries, and the applicable insurance
company, such policies will not be canceled or allowed to lapse without renewal without at least thirty (30) days’ (or
ten (10) days in the case of non-payment) prior written notice to the Administrative Agent.
(c) If at any time the area in which any real property constituting Collateral is located is designated a “flood hazard
area” in any Flood Insurance Rate Map published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (or any successor
agency), the Borrower shall, and shall cause each of its Subsidiaries to, obtain flood insurance in such total amount
as required by Regulation H of the Federal Reserve Board, as from time to time in effect and all official rulings and
interpretations thereunder or thereof, and otherwise comply with the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in
the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, as it may be amended from time to time.
(d) Notwithstanding Section 2.4(c)(ii) of this Agreement, after the occurrence and during the continuance of an Event
of Default, all proceeds of insurance, including any casualty insurance proceeds, property insurance proceeds,
proceeds from actions, and any other proceeds, shall be paid directly to the Administrative Agent and if necessary,
assigned to the Administrative Agent, to be applied in accordance with Section 7.6 of this Agreement, whether or not
the Secured Obligations are then due and payable.
(e) In the event that any insurance proceeds are paid to any Credit Party in violation of clause (d), such Credit Party
shall hold the proceeds in trust for the Administrative Agent, segregate the proceeds from the other funds of such
Credit Party, and promptly pay the proceeds to the Administrative Agent with any necessary endorsement. Upon the
request of the Administrative Agent, each of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries shall execute and deliver to the
Administrative Agent any additional assignments and other documents as may be necessary or desirable to enable
the Administrative Agent to directly collect the proceeds as set forth herein.
Section 5.4. Compliance with Laws. Each Credit Party shall, and shall cause each of its Subsidiaries to, comply with
all federal, state, and local laws and regulations (including Environmental Laws) which are applicable to the operations
and Property of any Credit Party and maintain all related permits necessary for the ownership and operation of each
Credit Party’s Property and business, except in any case where the failure to so comply could not reasonably be
expected to result in a Material Adverse Change; provided that this Section 5.4 shall not prevent any Credit Party
from, in good faith and with reasonable diligence, contesting the validity or application of any such laws or regulations
by appropriate legal proceedings for which adequate reserves have been established in compliance with GAAP.
Section 5.5. Taxes. Each Credit Party shall, and shall cause each of its Subsidiaries to pay and discharge all taxes,
assessments, and other charges and claims related thereto, in each case, which are material in amount, imposed on
the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries prior to the date on which penalties attach other than any tax, assessment,
charge, or claims which is being contested in good faith and for which adequate reserves have been established in
compliance with GAAP.
Section 5.6. New Subsidiaries. The Borrower shall deliver to the Administrative Agent each of the items set forth in
Schedule III attached hereto with respect to each Domestic Subsidiary of the Borrower created or acquired after the
Effective Date and within the time requirements set forth in Schedule III.
-57-
Section 5.7. Security. Each Credit Party agrees that at all times before the termination of this Agreement, payment in
full of the Obligations, the termination and return of all Letters of Credit (other than Letters of Credit as to which
arrangements satisfactory to the Issuing Lender in its sole discretion have been made) and termination in full of the
Commitments, the Administrative Agent shall have an Acceptable Security Interest in the Collateral to secure the
performance and payment of the Secured Obligations. Each Credit Party shall, and shall cause each of its Domestic
Subsidiaries to, grant to the Administrative Agent a Lien in any Collateral of such Credit Party or such Domestic
Subsidiary now owned or hereafter acquired (other than leased real property unless otherwise requested by the
Administrative Agent) promptly and to take such actions as may be required under the Security Documents to ensure
that the Administrative Agent has an Acceptable Security Interest in such Property; provided, however,
notwithstanding the foregoing or anything contained in this Agreement or any other Credit Document to the contrary, a
Credit Party or Domestic Subsidiary shall only be required to grant a Lien in Equity Interests of Subsidiaries owned or
acquired by such Credit Party or Domestic Subsidiary in accordance with the following: (i) in the case of Equity
Interests of a Domestic Subsidiary, 100% of the Equity Interests of such Domestic Subsidiary; (ii) in the case of
Equity Interests of a First-Tier Foreign Subsidiary; provided that, as to the Equity Interest of any Foreign Subsidiary,
solely 100% of the Equity Interests of such First-Tier Foreign Subsidiary that are not Voting Securities and no more
than 66% of the Equity Interests of such Foreign Subsidiary that are Voting Securities; and (iii) in the case of Equity
Interests of a Foreign Subsidiary that is not a First-Tier Foreign Subsidiary, 0% of the Equity Interests of such Foreign
Subsidiary shall be required to be pledged hereunder or in any other Credit Document.
Section 5.8. Deposit Accounts. Each Credit Party shall, and shall cause each of its Subsidiaries to, maintain their
principal operating accounts and other deposit accounts with a Lender or any other bank that is reasonably acceptable
to the Administrative Agent. Each Credit Party shall, and shall cause each of its Subsidiaries to, ensure such
accounts (other than accounts with the Lender serving as the Administrative Agent) are subject to Account Control
Agreements; provided that, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Agreement or the other Credit
Documents, the requirements of this Section 5.8 shall not apply to deposit accounts that (x) do not contain at any
time, deposits in an aggregate amount in excess of $50,000, (y) are designated solely as accounts for, and are used
solely for, payroll (and related payroll tax) funding, sales and other tax obligations or trust funds or (z) are operating
accounts used solely for the purpose of accruing overnight interest.
Section 5.9. Records; Inspection. Each Credit Party shall, and shall cause each of its Subsidiaries to maintain proper,
complete and consistent books of record with respect to such Person’s operations, affairs, and financial condition in
accordance with GAAP in all material respects. From time to time upon reasonable prior notice, each Credit Party
shall permit any Lender and shall cause each of its Subsidiaries to permit any Lender, at such reasonable times and
intervals and to a reasonable extent and under the reasonable guidance of officers of or employees delegated by
officers of such Credit Party or such Subsidiary, to, subject to any applicable confidentiality considerations, examine
and copy the books and records of such Credit Party or such Subsidiary, to visit and inspect the Property of such
Credit Party or such Subsidiary, and to discuss the business operations and Property of such Credit Party or such
Subsidiary with the officers and directors thereof; provided that, unless an Event of Default shall have occurred and
be continuing, (a) only the Administrative Agent on behalf of the Lenders may exercise inspection, examination or
audit rights under this Section 5.9 and (b) the Borrower shall bear the cost of only two (2) such inspections per fiscal
year.
Section 5.10. Maintenance of Property. Each Credit Party shall, and shall cause each of its Subsidiaries to, maintain
their material owned, leased, or operated Property necessary in the operation of its business in good condition and
repair, normal wear and tear and casualty and condemnation (excluding casualty and condemnation which could,
individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to cause a Material Adverse Change) excepted; and shall
abstain from, and cause each of its Subsidiaries to abstain from, knowingly or willfully permitting the commission of
waste or other injury, destruction, or loss of natural resources, or the occurrence of pollution, contamination, or any
other condition in, on or about the
-58-
owned or operated Property involving the Environment that could reasonably be expected to result in Response
activities and that could reasonably be expected to cause a Material Adverse Change; provided, however, that no
Credit Party shall be required to maintain any property if the preservation thereof is no longer desirable in the conduct
of the business of such Credit Party and the loss thereof is not adverse in any material respect to such Credit Party
or the Lenders.
Section 5.11. Royalty Agreements. The Borrower shall, and shall cause each of its Subsidiaries to, timely pay all
amounts owing pursuant to any royalty agreement to which the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries is a party except
where the failure to do so (a) does not materially impair the ability of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries to use the
Property subject to any Lien created by such royalty agreement in its business and (b) could not reasonably be
expected to result in a Material Adverse Change.
Section 5.12. Appraisal Reports; Sand Reserve Reports. The Borrower shall, and shall cause each of its Subsidiaries
to, permit the Administrative Agent or a third party selected by the Administrative Agent to, at any reasonable time,
and from time to time upon request by the Administrative Agent with reasonable notice, perform the following:
(a) an appraisal of the machinery, parts, equipment and other fixed assets of the Credit Parties; provided that, (i) if no
Event of Default has occurred and is continuing, the Borrower shall bear the costs of only one such appraisal to be
provided upon the completion of each facility of the Credit Parties constructed or acquired after the Effective Date,
and (ii) in any event, any appraisals performed at the request of the Borrower shall be performed at the Borrower’s
sole cost and expense;
(b) an Independent Engineering Report of the Sand Reserves of the Credit Parties; provided that, if no Event of
Default has occurred and is continuing, the Borrower shall bear the costs of only one (1) such Independent
Engineering Report to be provided upon the completion of each facility of the Credit Parties constructed or acquired
after the Effective Date.
If an Event of Default has occurred and is continuing, the Administrative Agent may perform any additional appraisals,
and all such appraisals shall be performed at the Borrower’s sole cost and expense.
Section 5.13. Legal Separateness. The Borrower (a) shall cause the management, business and affairs of the
Borrower and its Subsidiaries to be conducted in such a manner so that the Hi-Crush Proppants Entities will be
treated as entities separate and distinct from the Borrower and its Subsidiaries (including, without limitation, by
keeping separate books of account and by not permitting Property of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries to be
commingled with that of the Hi-Crush Proppants Entities); and (b) shall not, and shall not permit any of its
Subsidiaries to, incur, assume, guarantee or be or become liable for any Debt of the Hi-Crush Proppants Entities.
ARTICLE 6
NEGATIVE COVENANTS
So long as any Obligation (other than (a) Letter of Credit Obligations which are not yet due and payable in connection
with Letters of Credit which have been cash collateralized in accordance with this Agreement and (b) contingent
indemnification obligations which are not due and payable and which by their terms survive the termination or
expiration of this Agreement and the other Credit Documents) shall remain unpaid, any Lender shall have any
Commitment hereunder, or there shall exist any Letter of Credit Exposure (other than Letter of Credit Exposure which
has been cash collateralized in accordance with this Agreement), each Credit Party agrees to comply with the
following covenants.
-59-
Section 6.1. Debt. No Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, create, assume, incur, suffer to
exist, or in any manner become liable, directly, indirectly, or contingently in respect of, any Debt other than the
following (collectively, the “Permitted Debt”):
(a) the Obligations;
(b) intercompany Debt incurred in the ordinary course of business owed by any Credit Party to any other Credit Party;
provided that (i) if such Debt is secured by Liens, such Debt and any Liens securing such Debt are subordinated to
the Secured Obligations and the Liens securing the Secured Obligations on terms and conditions and pursuant to
documentation acceptable to the Administrative Agent in its sole discretion and (ii), if applicable, such Debt as an
investment is also permitted in Section 6.3;
(c) Debt in the form of accounts payable to trade creditors (including reimbursements made to Hi-Crush Services LLC
or other Persons in accordance with the Partnership Agreement) for goods or services and current operating liabilities
(other than for borrowed money) which in each case are not more than 90 days past due, in each case incurred in the
ordinary course of business, as presently conducted, unless contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings and
adequate reserves for such items have been made in accordance with GAAP;
(d) purchase money indebtedness or Capital Leases in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $2,500,000 at any
time;
(e) Hedging Arrangements permitted under Section 6.15;
(f) Debt arising from the endorsement of instruments for collection in the ordinary course of business;
(g) Debt arising from the financing of insurance premiums of any Credit Party in an aggregate amount not to exceed
$750,000 incurred to defer the cost of such insurance for the underlying term of such insurance policy;
(h) unsecured Debt under the Subordinated Notes and any Permitted Refinancing thereof; provided that (i) the
scheduled maturity date thereof is not earlier than 91 days after the Maturity Date, (ii) the holders of such Debt shall
have entered into a Subordination Agreement and (iii) the terms and provisions of such Debt shall be reasonably
satisfactory to the Administrative Agent;
(i) Debt under performance, stay, appeal and surety bonds or with respect to workers’ compensation or other like
employee benefit claims, in each case incurred in the ordinary course of business;
(j) Debt assumed in connection with any Permitted Investment or Acquisition and not incurred in contemplation thereof
in an aggregate principal amount not exceeding $500,000 at any time, and any Permitted Refinancing thereof;
(k) Debt owed to the seller of any property acquired in an Investment permitted under Section 6.3(k) or (l) or an
Acquisition permitted under Section 6.4 on an unsecured subordinated basis, which subordination agreement shall be
on terms substantially similar to the Subordination Agreement or otherwise satisfactory to the Administrative Agent in
its sole discretion; provided that the terms and provisions of such Debt shall be reasonably satisfactory to the
Administrative Agent;
-60-
(l) Debt incurred in an Investment permitted under Section 6.3(k) or (l), an Acquisition permitted under Section 6.4 or a
disposition of assets permitted under Section 6.8(j), in each case, pursuant to reasonable and customary agreements
providing for indemnification, the adjustment of purchase price or similar adjustments;
(m) guarantees of Debt of any Credit Party permitted under this Section 6.1;
(n) Debt arising from royalty agreements on customary terms entered into by the Borrower and its Subsidiaries in the
ordinary course of business in connection with the purchase of Sand Reserves;
(o) Debt existing on the date hereof and set forth on Schedule 6.1; and
(p) unsecured Debt not otherwise permitted under the preceding provisions of this Section 6.1; provided that, the
aggregate principal amount thereof shall not exceed $500,000 at any time.
Section 6.2. Liens. No Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, create, assume, incur, or suffer
to exist any Lien on the Property of any Credit Party or any Subsidiary, whether now owned or hereafter acquired, or
assign any right to receive any income, other than the following (collectively, the “Permitted Liens”):
(a) Liens securing the Secured Obligations pursuant to the Security Documents;
(b) Liens imposed by law, such as landlord’s, materialmen’s, mechanics’, carriers’, workmen’s and repairmen’s liens,
and other similar liens arising in the ordinary course of business securing obligations which if overdue for a period of
more than 30 days are being contested in good faith by appropriate procedures or proceedings and for which adequate
reserves have been established;
(c) Liens arising in the ordinary course of business out of pledges or deposits under workers compensation laws,
unemployment insurance, old age pensions, or other social security or retirement benefits, or similar legislation to
secure public or statutory obligations;
(d) Liens for taxes, assessment, or other governmental charges which are not yet due and payable or, if overdue,
which are being actively contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings and adequate reserves for such items
have been made in accordance with GAAP;
(e) Liens securing purchase money debt or Capital Lease obligations permitted under Section 6.1(d); provided that
each such Lien encumbers only the Property purchased in connection with the creation of any such purchase money
debt or the subject of any such Capital Lease, and all proceeds and products thereof (including insurance proceeds)
and accessions thereto, and the amount secured thereby is not increased;
(f) encumbrances consisting of minor easements, zoning restrictions, or other restrictions on the use of real property
that do not (individually or in the aggregate) materially affect the value of the assets encumbered thereby or materially
impair the ability of any Credit Party to use such assets in its business, and none of which is violated in any material
aspect by existing or proposed structures or land use;
(g) Liens arising solely by virtue of any statutory or common law provision relating to banker’s liens, rights of set-off or
similar rights and remedies and burdening only deposit accounts or other funds maintained with a depositary
institution;
-61-
(h) Liens on cash or securities pledged to secure performance of tenders, surety and appeal bonds, government
contracts, performance and return of money bonds, bids, trade contracts, leases, statutory obligations, regulatory
obligations and other obligations of a like nature incurred in the ordinary course of business;
(i) judgment and attachment Liens not giving rise to an Event of Default;
(j) Liens in favor a banking institution arising by operation of law encumbering deposits in accounts held by such
banking institution incurred in the ordinary course of business and which are within the general parameters customary
in the banking industry;
(k) Liens existing on any property or assets prior to the acquisition thereof by the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries
securing liabilities not exceeding $500,000 in the aggregate; provided that (i) such Lien is not created in contemplation
of or in connection with such acquisition, (ii) such Lien does not materially impair the ability of any Credit Party to use
such asset in its business and (iii) such Lien does not apply to any other Property of the Borrower or its Subsidiaries;
(l) Liens (i) on advances of cash or earnest money deposits in favor of the seller of any property to be acquired in
connection with a Capital Expenditure or Acquisition permitted hereunder, which advances shall be applied against the
purchase price for such permitted Capital Expenditure or Acquisition or (ii) or consisting of an agreement to dispose of
any Property in an asset sale permitted by Section 6.8 solely to the extent such asset sale would have been
permitted on the date of the creation of such Lien;
(m) Any interest or title of a lessor, sublessor, licensor or sublicensor under any lease or license entered into in the
ordinary course of business and covering only the asset so leased or licensed;
(n) Defects and irregularities in title to any Property which in the aggregate do not materially impair the fair market
value or use of the Property for the purposes for which it is or may reasonably be expected to be held;
(o) Liens on Property of the Borrower or its Subsidiaries existing on the date hereof and set forth in Schedule 6.2;
provided that such Liens shall secure only those obligations which they secure on the date hereof and refinancing,
extensions, renewals and replacements thereof permitted hereunder; and
(p) other Liens securing Debt or other obligations outstanding in an aggregate principal amount not in excess of
$200,000.
Section 6.3. Investments. No Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, make or hold any direct
or indirect investment (each, an “Investment”) in any Person, including capital contributions to the Person,
investments in or the acquisition of the debt or equity securities of the Person, or any loans, guaranties, trade credit,
or other extensions of credit to any Person, other than the following (collectively, the “Permitted Investments”):
(a) investments in the form of trade credit to customers of a Credit Party arising in the ordinary course of business
and represented by accounts from such customers;
(b) Liquid Investments;
-62-
(c) loans, advances, or capital contributions to, or investments in, or purchases or commitments to purchase any
stock or other securities or evidences of indebtedness of or interests in any Person and existing on the date hereof, in
each case as specified in the attached Schedule 6.3; provided that, the respective amounts of such loans, advances,
capital contributions, investments, purchases and commitments shall not be increased (other than appreciation);
(d) Investments by a Credit Party to any other Credit Party;
(e) creation of any additional Subsidiaries domiciled in the U.S. in compliance with Section 5.6;
(f) Investments received in connection with the bankruptcy or reorganization of, or settlement of delinquent accounts
and disputes with, customers and suppliers, in each case, arising in the ordinary course of business;
(g) promissory notes and other non-cash consideration received by the Borrower and its Subsidiaries in connection
with any asset sale permitted by Section 6.8(j);
(h) loans and advances to employees of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries in the ordinary course of business; provided
that the aggregate principal amount of all such loans and advances shall not exceed $100,000 at any one time
outstanding;
(i) guarantees of obligations (not in respect of Debt) of the Credit Parties incurred in the ordinary course of business;
(j) Investments consisting of Debt or Acquisitions permitted by Article 6;
(k) Investments consisting of Equity Interests of entities which are not Subsidiaries of any Credit Party; provided that,
(a) the aggregate amount of such Investments at any time outstanding does not exceed an amount equal to the sum
of $10,000,000 plus the aggregate amount of such Investments financed with Equity Issuance Proceeds, (b) such
Investment is substantially related to the business of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, and is not
hostile, (c) all of the Equity Interests of such joint venture entity owned by any Credit Party are pledged to the
Administrative Agent pursuant to the Security Agreement, except to the extent that such pledge would be prohibited
under such entity’s Organization Documents, (d) no Event of Default shall have occurred or be continuing or would
result from such Investment, and (e) the Borrower and its Subsidiaries shall be in pro forma compliance with the
financial covenants in Section 6.16 and 6.17 after giving effect to such Investment; and
(l) other Investments in an aggregate amount not to exceed $250,000 at any time outstanding.
Section 6.4. Acquisitions. No Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, make any Acquisition,
unless (a) such Acquisition is substantially related to the business of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries, taken as a
whole, and is not hostile, (b) if such Acquisition is an Acquisition of the Equity Interests of a Person, such Acquisition
is structured so that the acquired Person (or its successor in interest) shall become a direct or indirect Domestic
Subsidiary of the Borrower and comply with the requirements of Section 5.6, (c) if such Acquisition is an Acquisition
of assets, such Acquisition is structured so that a Credit Party shall acquire such assets, (d) no Event of Default shall
have occurred or be continuing or would result from such Acquisition, (e) the Borrower and its Subsidiaries shall be in
pro forma compliance with the financial covenants in Section 6.16 and 6.17 after giving effect to such Acquisition as
of the beginning of the period of four fiscal quarters most recently ended and (f) after giving effect to such Acquisition,
Liquidity would be greater than or equal to $15,000,000.
-63-
Section 6.5. Agreements Restricting Liens. No Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, create,
incur, assume or permit to exist any contract, agreement or understanding (other than (i) this Agreement, or the other
Credit Documents, (ii) agreements governing Debt permitted by Sections 6.1(d) or (j) to the extent such restrictions
govern only the Property (and all proceeds and products thereof and accessions thereto) financed pursuant to such
Debt, (iii) any prohibition or limitation that exists pursuant to applicable requirements of a Governmental Authority,
(iv) any prohibition or limitation that restricts subletting or assignment of leasehold interests contained in any lease
governing a leasehold interest of Borrower or its Subsidiaries and customary provisions in other contracts restricting
assignment thereof, (v) agreements in connection with a sale of assets permitted by Section 6.8, (vi) the
Subordinated Notes and (vii) any prohibition or limitation that exists in any contract to which a Credit Party is a party
on the date hereof so long as (x) such prohibition or limitation is generally applicable and does not specifically prohibit
any of the Debt or the Liens granted under the Credit Documents, and (y) the noncompliance of such prohibition or
limitation would not reasonably be expected to be adverse to the Administrative Agent or the Lenders) which in any
way prohibits or restricts the granting, conveying, creation or imposition of any Lien on any of its Property, whether
now owned or hereafter acquired, to secure the Secured Obligations or restricts any Subsidiary from paying Restricted
Payments to the Borrower, or which requires the consent of or notice to other Persons in connection therewith, which
consent or notice has not been obtained or given on a permanent and irrevocable basis such that no further consent
of or notice to such other Person is required to be given in connection with any such Lien or Restricted Payment.
Section 6.6. Use of Proceeds; Use of Letters of Credit. No Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries
to use the proceeds of the Revolving Advances, the Swing Line Advances or the Letters of Credit for any purposes
other than (a) working capital purposes of any Credit Party and (b) other general corporate purposes of any Credit
Party, including to make Restricted Payments permitted by Section 6.9. No Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any
of its Subsidiaries to, directly or indirectly, use any part of the proceeds of Advances or Letters of Credit for any
purpose which violates, or is inconsistent with, Regulations T, U, or X.
Section 6.7. Corporate Actions; Accounting Changes.
(a) No Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, merge or consolidate with or into any other
Person, except that (i) the Borrower may merge with any of its wholly-owned Subsidiaries and any Credit Party may
merge or be consolidated with or into any other Credit Party and (ii) any wholly-owned Subsidiary of the Borrower may
merge with another Person in order to consummate an Acquisition or Disposition permitted under Section 6.4 or 6.8,
respectively, so long as, in the case of any such permitted Acquisition, such wholly-owned Subsidiary is the surviving
entity; provided that immediately after giving effect to any such proposed transaction no Default would exist and, in
the case of any such merger to which the Borrower is a party, the Borrower is the surviving entity.
(b) No Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, (i) without 10 days prior written notice to the
Administrative Agent, change its name, change its state of incorporation, formation or organization, change its
organizational identification number or reorganize in another jurisdiction, (ii) create or suffer to exist any Subsidiary not
existing on the date of this Agreement, provided that, the Borrower may create or acquire a new Subsidiary if the
Credit Parties and such new Subsidiary complies with Section 5.6 and such transactions otherwise comply with the
terms of this Agreement and so long as such new Subsidiary is not a Foreign Subsidiary, (iii) without prior written
notice to, and prior consent of, the Administrative Agent, amend, supplement, modify or restate their articles or
certificate of incorporation or formation, limited partnership agreement (including, without limitation, the Partnership
Agreement), bylaws, limited liability company agreements, or other equivalent organizational documents in a manner
that could reasonably be expected to be materially adverse to the
-64-
interests of the Administrative Agent and the Lenders, or (iv) change the method of accounting employed in the
preparation of the Initial Financial Statements except in accordance with GAAP or change the fiscal year end of the
Borrower unless, in each case, approved in writing by the Administrative Agent.
Section 6.8. Sale of Assets. No Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, sell, convey, or
otherwise transfer any of its assets except that (a) any Credit Party may sell inventory in the ordinary course of
business; (b) any Credit Party may sell, convey, dispose or otherwise transfer any of its assets to any other Credit
Party; (c) dispositions of obsolete or worn out Property in the ordinary course of business, and dispositions of
Property no longer useful or used by the Borrower and its Subsidiaries in the conduct of its business; (d) dispositions
of equipment to the extent that such Property is exchanged for credit against the purchase price of similar
replacement Property or the proceeds of which are reasonably promptly applied to the purchase price of such
replacement Property; (e) dispositions of Liquid Investments; (f) dispositions of accounts receivable in connection
with the collection or compromise thereof in the ordinary course of business; (g) leases, subleases, licenses or
sublicenses or Property in the ordinary course of business and which do not materially interfere with the business of
the Borrower and its Subsidiaries; (h) transfers of property subject to Casualty Events, subject to the Borrower’s
compliance with Section 2.4(c)(ii); (i) dispositions permitted by Sections 6.3, 6.7 and 6.9; and (j) the Borrower and its
Subsidiaries may sell, convey, dispose or otherwise transfer any Properties not otherwise permitted under the
preceding clauses (a) through (i); provided that, (i) no Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing or
would be caused thereby, (ii) at least 80% of the proceeds of all such sales, conveyance, dispositions and transfers
shall consist of cash or Liquid Investments and shall be in an amount no less than the fair market value of such
Properties and (iii) the aggregate amount of all such sales, conveyance, dispositions and transfers shall not exceed
$2,000,000 in any fiscal year.
Section 6.9. Restricted Payments. No Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to make any
Restricted Payments except that:
(a) the Subsidiaries of the Borrower may make Restricted Payments to the Borrower or any other Credit Party that is a
Subsidiary of the Borrower;
(b) so long as no Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing, repurchases of Equity Interests or payments
in respect thereof not exceeding $250,000 in the aggregate during any fiscal year to officers, employees, consultants
or members of management of the General Partner, the Borrower or its Subsidiaries (or their respective estates, heirs,
family members, spouses or former spouses) upon the termination, death or disability of such Person or in connection
with the exercise of stock options or similar equity incentives pursuant to management incentive plans; and
(c) so long as no Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing, the Borrower may make cash distributions
to the holders of its Equity Interests from “Operating Surplus” (as such term is defined in the Partnership Agreement)
calculated on a cumulative basis from the Effective Date through the date of such distribution.
Section 6.10. Affiliate Transactions. No Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, directly or
indirectly, enter into or permit to exist any transaction or series of transactions (including, but not limited to, the
purchase, sale, lease or exchange of Property, the making of any investment, the giving of any guaranty, the
assumption of any obligation or the rendering of any service) with any of their Affiliates which are not Credit Parties
unless such transaction or series of transactions is on terms no less favorable to the Borrower or any Subsidiary, as
applicable, than those that could be obtained in a comparable arm’s length transaction with a Person that is not such
an affiliate except for (a) the Restricted Payments permitted under Section 6.9, (b) reasonable and customary director,
officer and
-65-
employee compensation, including bonuses and severance (which compensation may be paid to affiliates of such
directors, officers and employees at the direction of the applicable director, officer or employee), indemnification and
other benefits (including retirement, health, stock option and other benefit plans), (c) reasonable and customary Equity
Investor indemnification, (d) the payment of reasonable and customary reimbursement of out of pocket expenses of
Equity Investors and directors of the General Partner, the Borrower and its Subsidiaries, (e) any Drop Down
Acquisition approved by the Conflicts Committee (as such term is defined in the Partnership Agreement) of the
General Partner, (f) payments or transactions pursuant to the Partnership Agreement, (g) transactions effected in
accordance with the terms of indemnification, omnibus and other agreements with Hi-Crush Proppants and its
affiliates attached as exhibits to the Registration Statement, (h) the transactions set forth on Schedule 6.10, and
(i) the issuance by the Borrower of Equity Interests to any Affiliate (other than to a Subsidiary of the Borrower) or the
receipt by the Borrower of any equity contributions from an Affiliate (other than from a Subsidiary of the Borrower).
Section 6.11. Line of Business. No Credit Party shall, and shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, change the
character of the Borrower’s and its Subsidiaries collective business as conducted on the Effective Date, or engage in
any type of business not reasonably related to the Borrower’s and its Subsidiaries collective business as presently
and normally conducted.
Section 6.12. Hazardous Materials. No Credit Party (a) shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, create,
handle, transport, use, or dispose of any Hazardous Substance or Hazardous Waste, except in the ordinary course of
its business and except in compliance with Environmental Law other than to the extent that such non-compliance
could not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Change or in any
liability to the Lenders or the Administrative Agent, and (b) shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, Release
any Hazardous Substance or Hazardous Waste into the Environment and shall not permit any Credit Party’s or any
Subsidiary’s Property to be subjected to any Release of Hazardous Substance or Hazardous Waste, except in
compliance with Environmental Law other than to the extent that such non-compliance could not, individually or in the
aggregate, reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Change or in any liability on the Lenders or the
Administrative Agent.
Section 6.13. Compliance with ERISA. Except for matters that individually or in the aggregate could not reasonably be
expected to cause a Material Adverse Change, no Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to,
directly or indirectly: (a) engage in any transaction in connection with which the Borrower or any Subsidiary could be
subjected to either a civil penalty assessed pursuant to section 502(c), (i) or (l) of ERISA or a tax imposed by Chapter
43 of Subtitle D of the Code; (b) terminate, or permit any member of the Controlled Group to terminate, any Plan in a
manner, or take any other action with respect to any Plan, which could result in any liability to the Borrower, any
Subsidiary or any member of the Controlled Group to the PBGC; (c) fail to make, or permit any member of the
Controlled Group to fail to make, full payment when due of all amounts which, under the provisions of any Plan,
agreement relating thereto or applicable law, the Borrower, a Subsidiary or member of the Controlled Group is required
to pay as contributions thereto; (d) permit to exist, or allow any Subsidiary or any member of the Controlled Group to
permit to exist, any accumulated funding deficiency (or unpaid minimum required contribution for plan years after
December 31, 2007) within the meaning of Section 302 of ERISA or section 412 of the Code, whether or not waived,
with respect to any Plan; (e) permit, or allow any member of the Controlled Group to permit, the actuarial present
value of the benefit liabilities (as “actuarial present value of the benefit liabilities” shall have the meaning specified in
section 4041 of ERISA) under any Plan that is regulated under Title IV of ERISA to exceed the current value of the
assets (computed on a plan termination basis in accordance with Title IV of ERISA) of such Plan allocable to such
benefit liabilities; (f) contribute to or assume an obligation to contribute to, or permit any member of the Controlled
Group to contribute to or assume an obligation to contribute to, any Multiemployer Plan;
-66-
(g) acquire, or permit any member of the Controlled Group to acquire, an interest in any Person that causes such
Person to become a member of the Controlled Group if such Person sponsors, maintains or contributes to, or at any
time in the six-year period preceding such acquisition has sponsored, maintained, or contributed to, (1) any
Multiemployer Plan, or (2) any other Plan that is subject to Title IV of ERISA under which the actuarial present value
of the benefit liabilities under such Plan exceeds the current value of the assets (computed on a plan termination
basis in accordance with Title IV of ERISA) of such Plan allocable to such benefit liabilities; (h) incur, or permit any
member of the Controlled Group to incur, a liability to or on account of a Plan under sections 515, 4062, 4063, 4064,
4201 or 4204 of ERISA; or (i) contribute to or assume an obligation to contribute to any employee welfare benefit plan,
as defined in section 3(1) of ERISA, including, without limitation, any such plan maintained to provide benefits to
former employees of such entities, that may not be terminated by such entities in their sole discretion at any time
without any liability.
Section 6.14. Sale and Leaseback Transactions. No Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to,
sell or transfer to a Person any Property, whether now owned or hereafter acquired, if at the time or thereafter the
Borrower or a Subsidiary shall lease as lessee such Property or any part thereof or other Property which the Borrower
or a Subsidiary intends to use for substantially the same purpose as the Property sold or transferred.
Section 6.15. Limitation on Hedging. No Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, (a) purchase,
assume, or hold a speculative position in any commodities market or futures market or enter into any Hedging
Arrangement for speculative purposes; or (b) be party to or otherwise enter into any Hedging Arrangement which (i) is
entered into for reasons other than as a part of its normal business operations as a risk management strategy and/or
hedge against changes resulting from market conditions related to the Borrower’s or its Subsidiaries’ operations, or
(ii) obligates the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries to any margin call requirements or otherwise requires the Borrower
or any of its Subsidiaries to put up money, assets or other security (other than unsecured letters of credit).
Furthermore, no Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries be party to or otherwise enter into any
Hedging Arrangement which relate to interest rates if (A) such Hedging Arrangement relate to payment obligations on
Debt which is not permitted to be incurred under Section 6.1 above, (B) the aggregate notional amount of all such
Hedging Arrangements exceeds 100% of the anticipated outstanding principal balance of the Debt to be hedged by
such Hedging Arrangements or an average of such principal balances calculated using a generally accepted method
of matching interest swap contracts to declining principal balances, the floating rate index of each such contract
generally matches the index used to determine the floating rates of interest on the corresponding indebtedness to be
hedged by such contract, (C) such Hedging Arrangement is with a counterparty or has a guarantor of the obligation of
the counterparty who (unless such counterparty is a Lender or one of its Affiliates) at the time the Hedging
Arrangement is made is rated lower than A by S & P or A2 by Moody’s, or (D) the floating rate index of such Hedging
Arrangement does not generally match the index used to determine the floating rates of interest on the corresponding
Debt to be hedged by such Hedging Arrangement.
Section 6.16. Leverage Ratio. Borrower shall not permit the Leverage Ratio as of each fiscal quarter end, commencing
with the fiscal quarter ending September 30, 2012, to be more than 3.00 to 1.00; provided that, during an Acquisition
Adjustment Period, the Leverage Ratio shall not be greater than 3.50 to 1.00.
Section 6.17. Interest Coverage Ratio. Borrower shall not permit the Interest Coverage Ratio as of each fiscal quarter
end, commencing with the fiscal quarter ending September 30, 2012, to be less than 2.50 to 1.00.
-67-
Section 6.18. Capital Expenditures. If the Leverage Ratio as of the last day of the most recently ended fiscal quarter
is greater than 2.50 to 1.00, then no Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, make Capital
Expenditures (other than Maintenance Capital Expenditures or Capital Expenditures financed with Equity Issuance
Proceeds or the proceeds of Debt) unless after giving effect to such Capital Expenditures, Liquidity would be greater
than or equal to $15,000,000.
Section 6.19. Landlord Agreements. No Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to (a) hold, store
or otherwise maintain any equipment or inventory that is intended to constitute Collateral pursuant to the Security
Documents at premises within the U.S. which are not owned by a Credit Party unless (i) such equipment is located at
the job site under which such equipment is then currently under contract, (ii) such equipment or inventory is located at
premises within the U.S. that are leased by a Credit Party and which are covered by a lien waiver or subordination
agreement in form and substance satisfactory to the Administrative Agent, (iii) such equipment is office equipment,
(iv) such equipment or inventory is in transit, (v) such equipment is off location for servicing, repairs or modification,
(vi) such equipment is being held for delivery or (vii) the aggregate value of all equipment and inventory located at
premises which are not owned by a Credit Party and which are not covered by a lien waiver or subordination
agreement in form and substance satisfactory to the Administrative Agent does not exceed $250,000, or (b) after the
date hereof, enter into any new verbal or written leases for premises with any Person who has not executed a lien
waiver or subordination agreement in form and substance satisfactory to the Administrative Agent unless the
equipment or inventory located on such premises would fall under any of the provisions in the foregoing clause (a).
Section 6.20. Operating Leases. No Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, enter into any
lease that constitutes an operating lease under GAAP if the obligations of a Credit Party or such Subsidiary as lessee
under such lease would cause its lease payments (excluding payments for taxes, insurance, and other non-rental
expenses to the extent not included within the stated amount of the rental payments under such lease) in respect of
all such leases entered into by the Borrower and its Subsidiaries to exceed $4,000,000 during any fiscal year of the
Borrower.
Section 6.21. Prepayment of Certain Debt. No Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, prepay,
redeem, purchase, defease or otherwise satisfy prior to the scheduled maturity thereof in any manner, or make any
payment in violation of any subordination terms of, any Debt, except (a) the prepayment of the Obligations in
accordance with the terms of this Agreement, (b) regularly scheduled or required repayments or redemptions of
Permitted Debt (other than Permitted Subordinated Debt) and refinancings and refundings of such Permitted Debt so
long as such refinancings and refundings would otherwise comply with Section 6.1, (c) so long as no Event of Default
exists or would result therefrom, other prepayments of Permitted Debt not described in the immediately preceding
clauses (a) and (b), but specifically excluding any prepayments, redemptions, purchases, defeasance, or other
satisfaction of Permitted Subordinated Debt. No Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit any of its Subsidiaries to, make
any payments of principal, interest, fees or other amounts with respect to Permitted Subordinated Debt except as
permitted under the applicable Subordination Agreement.
Section 6.22. Amendment of the Subordinated Notes and Material Contracts. No Credit Party shall, nor shall it permit
any of its Subsidiaries to, amend, restate, supplement or otherwise modify any Subordinated Note or Material
Contract, in each case in a manner materially adverse to the interests of the Administrative Agent or the Lenders,
without the prior written consent of the Majority Lenders.
-68-
ARTICLE 7
DEFAULT AND REMEDIES
Section 7.1. Events of Default. The occurrence of any of the following events shall constitute an “Event of Default”
under this Agreement and any other Credit Document:
(a) Payment Failure. Any Credit Party (i) fails to pay any principal when due under this Agreement or (ii) fails to pay,
within three Business Days of when due, any interest or any other amount due under this Agreement or any other
Credit Document, including payments of fees, reimbursements, and indemnifications;
(b) False Representation or Warranties. Any representation or warranty made or deemed to be made by any Credit
Party or any officer thereof in this Agreement, in any other Credit Document or in any certificate delivered in
connection with this Agreement or any other Credit Document is incorrect, false or otherwise misleading in any
material respect at the time it was made or deemed made;
(c) Breach of Covenant. (i) Any breach by any Credit Party of any of the covenants in Section 5.1(a), Section 5.2(c),
Section 5.2(e), Section 5.3(a), Section 5.11 or Article 6 (other than Sections 6.12, 6.13 or 6.19) of this Agreement or
(ii) any breach by any Credit Party of any other covenant contained in this Agreement or any other Credit Document
and such breach shall remain unremedied for a period of thirty (30) days following the earlier of (A) the date on which
Administrative Agent gave notice of such failure to Borrower and (B) the date any Responsible Officer of the Borrower
or any Subsidiary acquires actual knowledge of such failure (such grace period to be applicable only in the event such
Default can be remedied by corrective action of the Borrower or any Subsidiary);
(d) Guaranties. Any provisions in the Guaranties shall at any time (before its expiration according to its terms) and for
any reason cease to be in full force and effect and valid and binding on the Guarantors party thereto or shall be
contested by any party thereto; any Guarantor shall deny it has any liability or obligation under such Guaranties;
(e) Security Documents. Any Security Document shall at any time and for any reason cease to create an Acceptable
Security Interest in Collateral with a fair value in excess of $250,000 in the aggregate purported to be subject to such
agreement in accordance with the terms of such agreement or any material provisions thereof shall cease to be in full
force and effect and valid and binding on the Credit Party that is a party thereto or any such Person shall so state in
writing (unless released or terminated pursuant to the terms of such Security Document), except as a result of the
Administrative Agent’s failure to (i) maintain possession of any stock certificates, promissory notes or other
instruments delivered to it under the Security Documents or (ii) file UCC continuation statements;
(f) Cross-Default. (i) The Borrower or any Guarantor shall fail to pay any principal of or premium or interest on its Debt
which is outstanding in a principal amount of at least $3,000,000 individually or when aggregated with all such Debt of
the Borrower and the Subsidiaries so in default (but excluding Debt hereunder) when the same becomes due and
payable (whether by scheduled maturity, required prepayment, acceleration, demand or otherwise), and such failure
shall continue after the applicable grace period, if any, specified in the agreement or instrument relating to such Debt;
or (ii) any other event shall occur or condition shall exist under any agreement or instrument relating to Debt which is
outstanding in a principal amount of at least $3,000,000 individually or when aggregated with all such Debt of the
Borrower and the Subsidiaries so in default (other than Debt hereunder), and shall continue after the applicable grace
period, if any, specified in such agreement or instrument, if the effect of such event or condition is to accelerate, or to
permit the acceleration of, the maturity of such Debt prior to the stated maturity thereof; provided that, for purposes of
this paragraph (f), the “principal amount” of the obligations in respect of Hedging Arrangements at any time shall be
the maximum aggregate amount (giving effect to any netting agreements) that would be required to be paid if such
Hedging Arrangements were terminated at such time;
-69-
(g) Bankruptcy and Insolvency. Any Credit Party (i) admits in writing its inability to pay its debts generally as they
become due; makes an assignment for the benefit of its creditors; consents to or acquiesces in the appointment of a
receiver, liquidator, fiscal agent, or trustee of itself or any of its Property; files a petition under bankruptcy or other
laws for the relief of debtors; or consents to any reorganization, arrangement, workout, liquidation, dissolution, or
similar relief or (ii) shall have had, without its consent: any court enter an order appointing a receiver, liquidator, fiscal
agent, or trustee of itself or any of its Property; any petition filed against it seeking reorganization, arrangement,
workout, liquidation, dissolution or similar relief under bankruptcy or other laws for the relief of debtors and such
petition shall not be dismissed, stayed, or set aside for an aggregate of 60 days, whether or not consecutive;
(h) Settlements; Adverse Judgment. The Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries enters into a settlement of any claim
against any of them when a suit has been filed or suffers final judgments against any of them since the date of this
Agreement in an aggregate amount, less (x) any insurance proceeds covering such settlements or judgments which
are received or as to which the insurance carriers have not denied liability and (y) with respect to settlements, any
portion of such settlement not required to be paid in cash during the term of this Agreement, greater than $3,000,000
and, in the case of final judgments, either (i) enforcement proceedings shall have been commenced by any creditor
upon such judgments or (ii) there shall be any period of 30 consecutive days during which a stay of enforcement of
such judgments, by reason of a pending appeal or otherwise, shall not be in effect;
(i) Termination Events. Any Termination Event with respect to a Plan shall have occurred, and, 30 days after notice
thereof shall have been given to the Borrower by the Administrative Agent, such Termination Event shall not have
been corrected and shall have created and caused to be continuing a material risk of Plan termination or liability for
withdrawal from the Plan as a “substantial employer” (as defined in Section 4001(a)(2) of ERISA), which termination
could reasonably be expect to result in a liability of, or liability for withdrawal could reasonably be expected to be,
greater than $3,000,000;
(j) Plan Withdrawals. The Borrower or any member of the Controlled Group as employer under a Multiemployer Plan
shall have made a complete or partial withdrawal from such Multiemployer Plan and such withdrawing employer shall
have incurred a withdrawal liability in an annual amount exceeding $1,500,000;
(k) Credit Documents. Any material provision of any Credit Document, except to the extent permitted by the terms
thereof, shall for any reason cease to be valid and binding on the Borrower or a Guarantor or any of their respective
Subsidiaries or any such Person shall so state in writing;
(l) Subordination Agreement. Any material provision of any Subordination Agreement shall cease to be in full force and
effect or shall be declared null and void by any court or the validity or enforceability thereof shall be contested or
challenged in any court by any holder of any Subordinated Note;
(m) Material Contracts. The occurrence of any breach or nonperformance by any Person under a Material Contract or
any early termination of any Material Contract, which breach, nonperformance or early termination could reasonably be
expected to cause a Material Adverse Change; or
(n) Change in Control. The occurrence of a Change in Control.
Section 7.2. Optional Acceleration of Maturity. If any Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing, then,
and in any such event,
-70-
(a) the Administrative Agent (i) shall at the request, or may with the consent, of the Majority Lenders, by notice to the
Borrower, declare that the obligation of each Lender to make Advances and the obligation of the Issuing Lender to
issue Letters of Credit shall be terminated, whereupon the same shall forthwith terminate, and (ii) shall at the request,
or may with the consent, of the Majority Lenders, by notice to the Borrower, declare the Notes, all accrued and unpaid
interest thereon, and all other amounts payable under this Agreement to be forthwith due and payable, whereupon the
Notes, all such interest, and all such amounts shall become and be forthwith due and payable in full, without
presentment, demand, protest or further notice of any kind (including, without limitation, any notice of intent to
accelerate or notice of acceleration), all of which are hereby expressly waived by each of the Credit Parties,
(b) the Borrower shall, on demand of the Administrative Agent at the request or with the consent of the Majority
Lenders, deposit with the Administrative Agent into the Cash Collateral Account an amount of cash equal to the
outstanding Letter of Credit Exposure as security for the Secured Obligations to the extent the Letter of Credit
Obligations are not otherwise paid or cash collateralized at such time, and
(c) the Administrative Agent shall at the request of, or may with the consent of, the Majority Lenders proceed to
enforce its rights and remedies under the Security Documents, the Guaranty, or any other Credit Document for the
ratable benefit of the Secured Parties by appropriate proceedings.
Section 7.3. Automatic Acceleration of Maturity. If any Event of Default pursuant to Section 7.1(g) shall occur,
(a) the obligation of each Lender to make Advances and the obligation of the Issuing Lender to issue Letters of Credit
shall immediately and automatically be terminated and the Notes, all accrued and unpaid interest on the Notes, and all
other amounts payable under this Agreement shall immediately and automatically become and be due and payable in
full, without presentment, demand, protest or any notice of any kind (including, without limitation, any notice of intent
to accelerate or notice of acceleration), all of which are hereby expressly waived by each of the Credit Parties,
(b) the Borrower shall, on demand of the Administrative Agent at the request or with the consent of the Majority
Lenders, deposit with the Administrative Agent into the Cash Collateral Account an amount of cash equal to the
outstanding Letter of Credit Exposure as security for the Secured Obligations to the extent the Letter of Credit
Obligations are not otherwise paid or cash collateralized at such time, and
(c) the Administrative Agent shall at the request of, or may with the consent of, the Majority Lenders proceed to
enforce its rights and remedies under the Security Documents, the Guaranty, or any other Credit Document for the
ratable benefit of the Secured Parties by appropriate proceedings.
Section 7.4. Set-off. Upon (a) the occurrence and during the continuance of any Event of Default and (b) the making
of the request or the granting of the consent, if any, specified by Section 7.2 to authorize the Administrative Agent to
declare the Notes and any other amount payable hereunder due and payable pursuant to the provisions of Section 7.2
or the automatic acceleration of the Notes and all amounts payable under this Agreement pursuant to Section 7.3, the
Administrative Agent and each Lender is hereby authorized at any time and from time to time, to the fullest extent
permitted by law, to set off and apply any and all deposits (general or special, time or demand, provisional or final) at
any time held and other indebtedness at any time owing by the Administrative Agent or such Lender to or for the
credit or the account of any Credit Party against any and all of the obligations of the Borrower now or hereafter
existing under this Agreement, the Notes held by the Administrative Agent or such Lender, and
-71-
the other Credit Documents, irrespective of whether or not the Administrative Agent or such Lender shall have made
any demand under this Agreement, such Note, or such other Credit Documents, and although such obligations may
be unmatured. Each Lender agrees to promptly notify the Borrower after any such set off and application made by
such Lender, provided that the failure to give such notice shall not affect the validity of such set off and application.
The rights of the Administrative Agent and each Lender under this Section 7.4 are in addition to any other rights and
remedies (including, without limitation, other rights of set off) which the Administrative Agent or such Lender may
have.
Section 7.5. Remedies Cumulative, No Waiver. No right, power, or remedy conferred to any Lender in this Agreement
or the Credit Documents, or now or hereafter existing at law, in equity, by statute, or otherwise shall be exclusive, and
each such right, power, or remedy shall to the full extent permitted by law be cumulative and in addition to every other
such right, power or remedy. No course of dealing and no delay in exercising any right, power, or remedy conferred to
any Lender in this Agreement and the Credit Documents or now or hereafter existing at law, in equity, by statute, or
otherwise shall operate as a waiver of or otherwise prejudice any such right, power, or remedy. Any Lender may cure
any Event of Default without waiving the Event of Default. No notice to or demand upon the Borrower or any other
Credit Party shall entitle the Borrower or any other Credit Party to similar notices or demands in the future.
Section 7.6. Application of Payments. Prior to an Event of Default, all payments made hereunder shall be applied by
the Administrative Agent as directed by the Borrower, but subject to the terms of this Agreement, including the
application of prepayments according to Section 2.4 and Section 2.11. During the existence of an Event of Default, all
payments and collections received by the Administrative Agent shall be applied to the Secured Obligations in
accordance with Section 2.11 and otherwise in the following order:
FIRST, to the payment of all documented out-of-pocket costs and expenses incurred by the Administrative Agent (in
its capacity as such hereunder or under any other Credit Document) in connection with and pursuant to the terms of
any Credit Document, the repayment of all advances made by the Administrative Agent as secured party hereunder or
under any other Credit Document on behalf of any Credit Party and any other costs or expenses incurred by the
Administrative Agent in connection with the exercise of any right or remedy hereunder or under any other Credit
Document;
SECOND, to the payment of all accrued and unpaid interest constituting part of the Secured Obligations (the amounts
so applied to be distributed ratably among the Lenders (and to the extent applicable to Hedging Arrangements, the
Swap Counterparties and to the extent applicable to Banking Services Obligations, the Lenders or their Affiliates that
is owed such obligations) pro rata in accordance with the amounts of the Secured Obligations owed to them on the
date of any such distribution);
THIRD, to the payment of any then due and owing principal constituting part of the Secured Obligations (the amounts
so applied to be distributed ratably among the Lenders (and to the extent applicable to Hedging Arrangements, the
Swap Counterparties and to the extent applicable to Banking Services Obligations, the Lenders or their Affiliates that
is owed such obligations) pro rata in accordance with the principal amounts of the Obligations owed to them on the
date of any such distribution), and when applied to make distributions by the Administrative Agent to pay the principal
amount of the outstanding Borrowings, pro rata to the Lenders;
FOURTH, to the payment of any then due and owing other amounts (including fees and expenses) constituting part of
the Secured Obligations (the amounts so applied to be distributed ratably among the Lenders (and to the extent
applicable to Hedging Arrangements, the Swap Counterparties and to the extent applicable to Banking Services
Obligations, the Lenders or its Affiliate that is owed such obligations) pro rata in accordance with such amounts owed
to them on the date of any such distribution), and when applied to make distributions by the Administrative Agent to
pay such amounts payable to the Lenders under this Credit Agreement, pro rata to the Lenders; and
-72-
FIFTH, to the Credit Parties, their successors or assigns, or as a court of competent jurisdiction may otherwise direct.
ARTICLE 8
THE ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT
Section 8.1. Appointment, Powers, and Immunities. Each Lender hereby irrevocably appoints and authorizes the
Administrative Agent to act as its agent under this Agreement and the other Credit Documents with such powers and
discretion as are specifically delegated to the Administrative Agent by the terms of this Agreement and the other
Credit Documents, together with such other powers as are reasonably incidental thereto. The Administrative Agent
(which term as used in this sentence and in Section 8.5 and the first sentence of Section 8.6 shall include its
Affiliates and its own and its Affiliates’ officers, directors, employees, and agents): (a) shall not have any duties or
responsibilities except those expressly set forth in this Agreement and shall not be a trustee or fiduciary for any
Lender; (b) shall not be responsible to the Lenders for any recital, statement, representation, or warranty (whether
written or oral) made in or in connection with any Credit Document or any certificate or other document referred to or
provided for in, or received by any of them under, any Credit Document, or for the value, validity, effectiveness,
genuineness, enforceability, or sufficiency of any Credit Document, or any other document referred to or provided for
therein or for any failure by any Credit Party or any other Person to perform any of its obligations thereunder; (c) shall
not be responsible for or have any duty to ascertain, inquire into, or verify the performance or observance of any
covenants or agreements by any Credit Party or the satisfaction of any condition or to inspect the Property (including
the books and records) of any Credit Party or any of its Subsidiaries or Affiliates; (d) shall not be required to initiate or
conduct any litigation or collection proceedings under any Credit Document unless requested by the Majority Lenders
in writing and it receives indemnification satisfactory to it from the Lenders; and (e) shall not be responsible for any
action taken or omitted to be taken by it under or in connection with any Credit Document, except for its own gross
negligence or willful misconduct. The Administrative Agent may employ agents and attorneys-in-fact and shall not be
responsible for the negligence or misconduct of any such agents or attorneys-in-fact selected by the Administrative
Agent with reasonable care.
Section 8.2. Reliance by Administrative Agent. The Administrative Agent shall be entitled to rely upon any
certification, notice, instrument, writing, or other communication (including, without limitation, any thereof by telephone
or telecopy) believed by it to be genuine and correct and to have been signed, sent or made by or on behalf of the
proper Person or Persons, and upon advice and statements of legal counsel (including counsel for any Credit Party),
independent accountants, and other experts selected by the Administrative Agent. The Administrative Agent may
deem and treat the payee of any Notes as the holder thereof for all purposes hereof unless and until the
Administrative Agent receives and accepts an Assignment and Acceptance executed in accordance with Section 9.7.
As to any matters not expressly provided for by this Agreement, the Administrative Agent shall not be required to
exercise any discretion or take any action, but shall be required to act or to refrain from acting (and shall be fully
protected in so acting or refraining from acting) upon the instructions of the Majority Lenders, and such instructions
shall be binding on all of the Lenders; provided, however, that the Administrative Agent shall not be required to take
any action that exposes the Administrative Agent to personal liability or that is contrary to any Credit Document or
applicable law or unless it shall first be indemnified to its satisfaction by the Lenders against any and all liability and
expense which may be incurred by it by reason of taking any such action.
-73-
Section 8.3. Defaults. The Administrative Agent shall not be deemed to have knowledge or notice of the occurrence of
a Default or Event of Default unless the Administrative Agent has received written notice from a Lender or the
Borrower specifying such Default or Event of Default and stating that such notice is a “Notice of Default”. In the event
that the Administrative Agent receives such a notice of the occurrence of a Default or Event of Default, the
Administrative Agent shall give prompt notice thereof to the Lenders. The Administrative Agent shall (subject to
Section 8.2) take such action with respect to such Default or Event of Default as shall reasonably be directed by the
Majority Lenders, provided that, unless and until the Administrative Agent shall have received such directions, the
Administrative Agent may (but shall not be obligated to) take such action, or refrain from taking such action, with
respect to such Default or Event of Default as it shall deem advisable in the best interest of the Lenders.
Section 8.4. Rights as Lender. With respect to its Commitments and the Advances made by it, Amegy (and any
successor acting as Administrative Agent) in its capacity as a Lender hereunder shall have the same rights and
powers hereunder as any other Lender and may exercise the same as though it were not acting as the Administrative
Agent, and the term “Lender” or “Lenders” shall, unless the context otherwise indicates, include the Administrative
Agent in its individual capacity. Amegy (and any successor acting as Administrative Agent) and its Affiliates may
(without having to account therefor to any Lender) accept deposits from, lend money to, make investments in, provide
services to, and generally engage in any kind of lending, trust, or other business with any Credit Party or any of its
Subsidiaries or Affiliates as if it were not acting as Administrative Agent, and Amegy (and any successor acting as
Administrative Agent) and its Affiliates may accept fees and other consideration from any Credit Party or any of its
Subsidiaries or Affiliates for services in connection with this Agreement or otherwise without having to account for the
same to the Lenders.
Section 8.5. Indemnification. THE LENDERS SEVERALLY AGREE TO INDEMNIFY THE ADMINISTRATIVE
AGENT, THE ISSUING LENDER AND EACH OF THEIR RESPECTIVE AFFILIATES AND THEIR RESPECTIVE
DIRECTORS, OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES, AND AGENTS (TO THE EXTENT NOT REIMBURSED BY THE
BORROWER), RATABLY ACCORDING TO THE RESPECTIVE PRINCIPAL AMOUNTS OF THE REVOLVING
ADVANCES THEN HELD BY EACH OF THEM (OR IF NO PRINCIPAL OF THE REVOLVING ADVANCES IS AT
THE TIME OUTSTANDING, RATABLY ACCORDING TO THE RESPECTIVE AMOUNTS OF THE COMMITMENTS
THEN HELD BY EACH OF THEM, OR, IF NO SUCH PRINCIPAL AMOUNTS ARE THEN OUTSTANDING AND NO
COMMITMENTS ARE THEN EXISTING, RATABLY ACCORDING TO THE COMMITMENTS HELD BY EACH OF
THEM IMMEDIATELY PRIOR TO THE TERMINATION OR EXPIRATION THEREOF), FROM AND AGAINST ANY
AND ALL LIABILITIES, OBLIGATIONS, LOSSES, DAMAGES, PENALTIES, ACTIONS, JUDGMENTS, SUITS,
COSTS, EXPENSES, OR DISBURSEMENTS OF ANY KIND OR NATURE WHATSOEVER WHICH MAY BE
IMPOSED ON, INCURRED BY, OR ASSERTED AGAINST THE ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT OR ISSUING LENDER
IN ANY WAY RELATING TO OR ARISING OUT OF THIS AGREEMENT OR ANY ACTION TAKEN OR OMITTED
BY THE ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT OR THE ISSUING LENDER UNDER THIS AGREEMENT OR ANY OTHER
CREDIT DOCUMENT (IN ALL CASES, WHETHER OR NOT CAUSED BY OR ARISING, IN WHOLE OR IN PART,
OUT OF THE COMPARATIVE, CONTRIBUTORY OR SOLE NEGLIGENCE OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT OR
THE ISSUING LENDER), AND INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITIES, PROVIDED
THAT NO LENDER SHALL BE LIABLE FOR ANY PORTION OF SUCH LIABILITIES, OBLIGATIONS, LOSSES,
DAMAGES, PENALTIES, ACTIONS, JUDGMENTS, SUITS, COSTS, EXPENSES, OR DISBURSEMENTS
RESULTING FROM THE ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT’S OR THE ISSUING LENDER’S GROSS NEGLIGENCE OR
WILLFUL MISCONDUCT. WITHOUT LIMITATION OF THE FOREGOING, EACH LENDER AGREES TO
REIMBURSE THE
-74-
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT AND THE ISSUING LENDER PROMPTLY UPON DEMAND FOR ITS RATABLE SHARE
(DETERMINED AS SET FORTH ABOVE IN THIS PARAGRAPH) OF ANY OUT OF POCKET EXPENSES
(INCLUDING COUNSEL FEES) INCURRED BY THE ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT OR THE ISSUING LENDER IN
CONNECTION WITH THE PREPARATION, EXECUTION, DELIVERY, ADMINISTRATION, MODIFICATION,
AMENDMENT, OR ENFORCEMENT (WHETHER THROUGH NEGOTIATIONS, LEGAL PROCEEDINGS, OR
OTHERWISE) OF, OR LEGAL ADVICE IN RESPECT OF RIGHTS OR RESPONSIBILITIES UNDER, THIS
AGREEMENT OR ANY OTHER CREDIT DOCUMENT, TO THE EXTENT THAT THE ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT OR
THE ISSUING LENDER IS NOT REIMBURSED FOR SUCH BY THE BORROWER.
Section 8.6. Non-Reliance on Administrative Agent and Other Lenders. Each Lender agrees that it has, independently
and without reliance on the Administrative Agent or any other Lender, and based on such documents and information
as it has deemed appropriate, made its own credit analysis of the Borrower and the other Credit Parties and decision
to enter into this Agreement and that it will, independently and without reliance upon the Administrative Agent or any
other Lender, and based on such documents and information as it shall deem appropriate at the time, continue to
make its own analysis and decisions in taking or not taking action under the Credit Documents. Except for notices,
reports, and other documents and information expressly required to be furnished to the Lenders by the Administrative
Agent hereunder and for other information in the Administrative Agent’s possession which has been requested by a
Lender and for which such Lender pays the Administrative Agent’s expenses in connection therewith, the
Administrative Agent shall not have any duty or responsibility to provide any Lender with any credit or other
information concerning the affairs, financial condition, or business of any Credit Party or any of its Subsidiaries or
Affiliates that may come into the possession of the Administrative Agent or any of its Affiliates.
Section 8.7. Resignation of Administrative Agent and Issuing Lender. The Administrative Agent or the Issuing Lender
may resign at any time by giving written notice thereof to the Lenders and the Borrower. Upon receipt of notice of any
such resignation, the Majority Lenders shall have the right to appoint a successor Administrative Agent or Issuing
Lender with, so long as no Event of Default has occurred and is continuing, the consent of the Borrower, which
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. If no successor Administrative Agent or Issuing Lender shall have been
so appointed by the Majority Lenders with the consent of the Borrower, and shall have accepted such appointment,
within 30 days after the retiring Administrative Agent’s or Issuing Lender’s giving of notice of resignation, then the
retiring Administrative Agent or Issuing Lender may, on behalf of the Lenders and the Borrower (subject to
consultation with the Borrower), appoint a successor Administrative Agent or Issuing Lender, which shall be, in the
case of a successor agent, a commercial bank organized under the laws of the United States of America or of any
State thereof and having a combined capital and surplus of at least $250,000,000 and, in the case of the Issuing
Lender, a Lender; provided that, if the Administrative Agent or Issuing Lender shall notify the Borrower and the
Lenders that no qualifying Person has accepted such appointment, then such resignation shall nonetheless become
effective in accordance with such notice and (1) the retiring Administrative Agent or Issuing Lender shall be
discharged from its duties and obligations hereunder and under the other Credit Documents (except that (A) in the
case of any collateral security held by the Administrative Agent on behalf of the Lenders or the Issuing Lender under
any of the Credit Documents, the retiring Administrative Agent shall continue to hold such collateral security until
such time as a successor Administrative Agent is appointed and (B) the retiring Issuing Lender shall remain the
Issuing Lender with respect to any Letters of Credit outstanding on the effective date of its resignation or removal and
the provisions affecting the Issuing Lender with respect to such Letters of Credit shall inure to the benefit of the
retiring Issuing Lender until the termination of all such Letters of Credit) and (2) all payments, communications and
determinations provided to be made by, to or through the retiring Administrative Agent shall instead be made by or to
each Lender and the Issuing Lender directly, until
-75-
such time as the Majority Lenders appoint a successor Administrative Agent or Issuing Lender, as applicable, as
provided for above in this paragraph. Upon the acceptance of any appointment as Administrative Agent or Issuing
Lender by a successor Administrative Agent or Issuing Lender, such successor Administrative Agent or Issuing
Lender shall thereupon succeed to and become vested with all the rights, powers, privileges, and duties of the retiring
Administrative Agent or Issuing Lender, and the retiring Administrative Agent or Issuing Lender shall be discharged
from its duties and obligations under this Agreement and the other Credit Documents, except that the retiring Issuing
Lender shall remain the Issuing Lender with respect to any Letters of Credit outstanding on the effective date of its
resignation or removal and the provisions affecting the Issuing Lender with respect to such Letters of Credit shall inure
to the benefit of the retiring Issuing Lender until the termination of all such Letters of Credit. After any retiring
Administrative Agent’s or Issuing Lender’s resignation as Administrative Agent or Issuing Lender, the provisions of
this Article 8 shall inure to its benefit as to any actions taken or omitted to be taken by it while it was Administrative
Agent or Issuing Lender under this Agreement and the other Credit Documents.
Section 8.8. Collateral Matters.
(a) The Administrative Agent is authorized on behalf of the Secured Parties, without the necessity of any notice to or
further consent from such Secured Parties, from time to time, to take any actions with respect to any Collateral or
Security Documents which may be necessary to perfect and maintain the Liens upon the Collateral granted pursuant
to the Security Documents. The Administrative Agent is further authorized (but not obligated) on behalf of the Secured
Parties, without the necessity of any notice to or further consent from the Secured Parties, from time to time, to take
any action in exigent circumstances as may be reasonably necessary to preserve any rights or privileges of the
Secured Parties under the Credit Documents or applicable Legal Requirements. By accepting the benefit of the Liens
granted pursuant to the Security Documents, each Secured Party hereby agrees to the terms of this paragraph (a).
(b) The Lenders hereby, and any other Secured Party by accepting the benefit of the Liens granted pursuant to the
Security Documents, irrevocably authorize the Administrative Agent to (i) release any Lien granted to or held by the
Administrative Agent upon any Collateral (a) upon termination of this Agreement, termination of all Hedging
Agreements with such Persons (other than Hedging Agreements as to which arrangements satisfactory to the
applicable counterparty in its sole discretion have been made), termination of all Letters of Credit (other than Letters of
Credit as to which arrangements satisfactory to the Issuing Lender in its sole discretion have been made), and the
payment in full of all outstanding Advances, Letter of Credit Obligations and all other Secured Obligations payable
under this Agreement and under any other Credit Document; (b) constituting property sold or to be sold or disposed of
as part of or in connection with any disposition permitted under this Agreement or any other Credit Document;
(c) constituting property in which no Credit Party owned an interest at the time the Lien was granted or at any time
thereafter; or (d) constituting property leased to any Credit Party under a lease which has expired or has been
terminated in a transaction permitted under this Agreement or is about to expire and which has not been, and is not
intended by such Credit Party to be, renewed or extended; and (ii) release a Guarantor from its obligations under a
Guaranty and any other applicable Credit Document if such Person ceases to be a Subsidiary as a result of a
transaction permitted under this Agreement. Upon the request of the Administrative Agent at any time, the Secured
Parties will confirm in writing the Administrative Agent’s authority to release particular types or items of Collateral
pursuant to this Section 8.8.
(c) Notwithstanding anything contained in any of the Credit Documents to the contrary, the Credit Parties, the
Administrative Agent, and each Secured Party hereby agree that no Secured Party shall have any right individually to
realize upon any of the Collateral or to enforce the Guaranty, it being
-76-
understood and agreed that all powers, rights and remedies hereunder and under the Security Documents may be
exercised solely by Administrative Agent on behalf of the Secured Parties in accordance with the terms hereof and
the other Credit Documents. By accepting the benefit of the Liens granted pursuant to the Security Documents, each
Secured Party not party hereto hereby agrees to the terms of this paragraph (c).
Section 8.9. No Other Duties, etc. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the Lead Arranger and Sole
Bookrunner listed on the cover page hereof shall not have any powers, duties or responsibilities under this Agreement
or any of the other Credit Documents, except in its capacity, as applicable, as the Administrative Agent, a Lender or
the Issuing Lender hereunder.
Section 8.10. Flood Laws. The Administrative Agent has adopted internal policies and procedures that address
requirements placed on federally regulated lenders under the National Flood Insurance Reform Act of 1994 and related
legislation (the “Flood Laws”). Upon request of any Lender, the Administrative Agent will provide to such Lender any
documents that the Administrative Agent receives in connection with the Flood Laws. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
each Lender and participant is responsible for assuring its own compliance with requirements under Flood Laws.
ARTICLE 9
MISCELLANEOUS
Section 9.1. Costs and Expenses. The Borrower agrees to pay promptly (and in any event within ten (10) days after
written demand therefor (accompanied by detailed invoices)):
(a) all reasonable and documented out-of-pocket costs and expenses of Administrative Agent (but not of other
Lenders) in connection with the preparation, execution, delivery, administration, modification, and amendment of this
Agreement, the Notes, and the other Credit Documents including costs associated with field examinations, appraisals,
and the reasonable fees and out of pocket expenses of one outside counsel for Administrative Agent (but not of other
Lenders) and one local counsel for Administrative Agent (but not of other Lenders) in each relevant jurisdiction, with
respect to advising the Administrative Agent as to its rights and responsibilities under this Agreement, and
(b) all documented out-of-pocket costs and expenses, if any, of the Administrative Agent and each Lender (including
fees and expenses of one outside counsel and, if reasonably necessary, one local counsel in each relevant
jurisdiction for the Administrative Agent and the Lenders and, in the case of an actual or perceived conflict of interest,
one additional counsel for each affected party) in connection with the enforcement (whether through negotiations, legal
proceedings, or otherwise) of this Agreement, the Notes, and the other Credit Documents.
Section 9.2. Indemnification; Waiver of Damages.
(a) INDEMNIFICATION. EACH CREDIT PARTY HERETO AGREES TO, JOINTLY AND SEVERALLY, INDEMNIFY
AND HOLD HARMLESS THE ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT, THE ISSUING LENDER AND EACH LENDER AND EACH
OF THEIR AFFILIATES AND THEIR RESPECTIVE OFFICERS, DIRECTORS, EMPLOYEES, AGENTS, AND
ADVISORS (EACH, AN “INDEMNITEE”) FROM AND AGAINST ANY AND ALL CLAIMS, DAMAGES, LOSSES,
LIABILITIES, COSTS, AND EXPENSES (INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, REASONABLE ATTORNEYS’
FEES) THAT MAY BE INCURRED BY OR ASSERTED OR AWARDED AGAINST ANY INDEMNITEE, IN EACH
CASE ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH OR BY REASON OF (INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION,
IN CONNECTION WITH ANY INVESTIGATION, LITIGATION, OR PROCEEDING OR PREPARATION OF
DEFENSE IN
-77-
CONNECTION THEREWITH) THE CREDIT DOCUMENTS, ANY OF THE TRANSACTIONS CONTEMPLATED
HEREIN OR THE ACTUAL OR PROPOSED USE OF THE PROCEEDS OF THE ADVANCES, IN ALL CASES,
WHETHER OR NOT CAUSED BY OR ARISING, IN WHOLE OR IN PART, OUT OF THE COMPARATIVE,
CONTRIBUTORY OR SOLE NEGLIGENCE OF THE APPLICABLE INDEMNITEE, EXCEPT TO THE EXTENT
SUCH CLAIM, DAMAGE, LOSS, LIABILITY, COST, OR EXPENSE IS FOUND IN A FINAL, NON-APPEALABLE
JUDGMENT BY A COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION TO HAVE RESULTED FROM SUCH INDEMNITEE’S
GROSS NEGLIGENCE OR WILLFUL MISCONDUCT. IN THE CASE OF AN INVESTIGATION, LITIGATION OR
OTHER PROCEEDING TO WHICH THE INDEMNITY IN THIS SECTION 9.2 APPLIES, SUCH INDEMNITY SHALL
BE EFFECTIVE WHETHER OR NOT SUCH INVESTIGATION, LITIGATION OR PROCEEDING IS BROUGHT BY
ANY CREDIT PARTY, ITS DIRECTORS, SHAREHOLDERS OR CREDITORS OR AN INDEMNITEE OR ANY
OTHER PERSON OR ANY INDEMNITEE IS OTHERWISE A PARTY THERETO AND WHETHER OR NOT THE
TRANSACTIONS CONTEMPLATED HEREBY ARE CONSUMMATED. THE FOREGOING INDEMNITY AND HOLD
HARMLESS PROVISIONS SHALL NOT APPLY TO ANY CLAIMS, DAMAGES, LOSSES, LIABILITIES, COSTS OR
EXPENSES THAT IS INCURRED BY OR ASSERTED OR AWARDED AGAINST ANY INDEMNITEE DIRECTLY
FOR, OR AS A DIRECT CONSEQUENCE OF, SUCH INDEMNITEE BEING A DEFAULTING LENDER UNDER
CLAUSE (A) OR (B) OF THE DEFINITION OF “DEFAULTING LENDER”, WHETHER ASSERTED BY ANY CREDIT
PARTY, THE ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT, THE SWING LINE LENDER OR THE ISSUING LENDER. NO CREDIT
PARTY SHALL, WITHOUT THE PRIOR WRITTEN CONSENT OF EACH INDEMNITEE AFFECTED THEREBY
(WHICH CONSENT WILL NOT BE UNREASONABLY WITHHELD), SETTLE ANY THREATENED OR PENDING
CLAIM OR ACTION THAT WOULD GIVE RISE TO THE RIGHT OF ANY INDEMNITEE TO CLAIM
INDEMNIFICATION HEREUNDER UNLESS SUCH SETTLEMENT (X) INCLUDES A FULL AND UNCONDITIONAL
RELEASE OF ALL LIABILITIES ARISING OUT OF SUCH CLAIM OR ACTION AGAINST SUCH INDEMNITEE AND
(Y) DOES NOT INCLUDE ANY STATEMENT AS TO OR AN ADMISSION OF FAULT, CULPABILITY OR FAILURE
TO ACT BY OR ON BEHALF OF ANY INDEMNITEE.
(b) Waiver of Consequential Damages, Etc. To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, no Credit Party shall
assert, agrees not to assert, and hereby waives, any claim against any Indemnitee on any theory of liability, for
special, indirect, consequential or punitive damages (as opposed to direct or actual damages) arising out of, in
connection with, or as a result of, this Agreement, any other Credit Document or any agreement or instrument
contemplated hereby, the transactions contemplated hereby or thereby, any Advance or Letter of Credit or the use of
the proceeds thereof. No Indemnitee referred to in subsection (a) above shall be liable for any damages arising from
the use by unintended recipients of any information or other materials distributed to such unintended recipients by
such Indemnitee through telecommunications, electronic or other information transmission systems in connection with
this Agreement or the other Credit Documents or the transactions contemplated hereby or thereby other than for direct
or actual damages resulting from the gross negligence or willful misconduct of such Indemnitee as determined by a
final and nonappealable judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(c) Payments. All payments required to be made under this Section 9.2 shall be made within 10 days of demand
therefor.
(d) Survival. Without prejudice to the survival of any other agreement of the Credit Parties hereunder, the agreements
and obligations of the Credit Parties contained in this Section 9.2 shall survive the termination of this Agreement, the
termination of all Commitments, and the payment in full of the Advances and all other amounts payable under this
Agreement.
-78-
Section 9.3. Waivers and Amendments. No amendment or waiver of any provision of this Agreement, the Notes, or
any other Credit Document (other than the Fee Letter), nor consent to any departure by the Borrower or any Guarantor
therefrom, shall in any event be effective unless the same shall be in writing and signed by the Majority Lenders and
the Borrower, and then such waiver or consent shall be effective only in the specific instance and for the specific
purpose for which given; provided that:
(a) no amendment, waiver, or consent shall, unless in writing and signed by all the affected Lenders and the Borrower,
do any of the following: (i) waive any of the conditions specified in Section 3.1 or Section 3.2, (ii) reduce any principal,
interest, fees or other amounts payable hereunder or under any other Credit Document (provided that the waiver of
default interest shall only require the consent of the Majority Lenders), (iii) postpone or extend any date fixed for any
payment of any principal, interest, fees or other amounts payable hereunder, including, without limitation, the Maturity
Date (it being understood and agreed that a waiver of a mandatory prepayment shall only require the consent of the
Majority Lenders), (iv) amend Section 2.11(e), Section 7.6, this Section 9.3 or any other provision in any Credit
Document which expressly requires the consent of, or action or waiver by, all of the Lenders, amend the definition of
“Majority Lenders”, or change the number of Lenders which shall be required for the Lenders to take any action
hereunder or under any other Credit Document, or (v) except as specifically provided in the Credit Documents and as
a result of transactions permitted by the terms of this Agreement, release any Guarantor from its obligation under any
Guaranty or release all or a material portion of the Collateral;
(b) no Commitment of a Lender or any obligations of a Lender may be increased without such Lender’s written
consent;
(c) no amendment, waiver, or consent shall, unless in writing and signed by the Administrative Agent in addition to the
Lenders required above to take such action, affect the rights or duties of the Administrative Agent under this
Agreement or any other Credit Document;
(d) no amendment, waiver or consent shall, unless in writing and signed by an Issuing Lender in addition to the
Lenders required above to take such action, affect the rights or duties of such Issuing Lender under this Agreement or
any other Credit Document; and
(e) no amendment, waiver or consent shall, unless in writing and signed by the Swing Line Lender in addition to the
Lenders required above to take such action, affect the rights or duties of the Swing Line Lender under this Agreement
or any other Credit Document.
Section 9.4. Severability. In case one or more provisions of this Agreement or the other Credit Documents shall be
invalid, illegal or unenforceable in any respect under any applicable law, the validity, legality, and enforceability of the
remaining provisions contained herein or therein shall not be affected or impaired thereby.
Section 9.5. Survival of Representations and Obligations. All representations and warranties contained in this
Agreement or made in writing by or on behalf of the Credit Parties in connection herewith shall survive the execution
and delivery of this Agreement and the other Credit Documents, the making of the Advances or the issuance of any
Letters of Credit and any investigation made by or on behalf of the Lenders, none of which investigations shall
diminish any Lender’s right to rely on such representations and warranties. All obligations of the Borrower or any other
Credit Party provided for in Sections 2.9, 2.10, 2.12(c), 9.1 and 9.2 and all of the obligations of the Lenders in
Section 8.5 shall survive any termination of this Agreement and repayment in full of the Obligations.
-79-
Section 9.6. Binding Effect. This Agreement shall become effective when it shall have been executed by the Borrower
and the Administrative Agent, and when the Administrative Agent shall have, as to each Lender, either received a
counterpart hereof executed by such Lender or been notified by such Lender that such Lender has executed it and
thereafter shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the Borrower, the Administrative Agent, and each Lender
and their respective successors and permitted assigns, except that neither the Borrower nor any other Credit Party
shall have the right to assign its rights or delegate its duties under this Agreement or any interest in this Agreement
without the prior written consent of each Lender.
Section 9.7. Lender Assignments and Participations.
(a) Each Lender may assign to one or more Eligible Assignees all or a portion of its rights and obligations under this
Agreement (including, without limitation, all or a portion of its Advances, its Notes, and its Commitments); provided,
however, that (i) each such assignment shall be to an Eligible Assignee; (ii) except in the case of an assignment to
another Lender or an assignment of all of a Lender’s rights and obligations under this Agreement, any such partial
assignment shall be in an amount at least equal to $5,000,000 unless the Administrative Agent and, so long as no
Event of Default has occurred and is continuing, the Borrower otherwise consents to a lower amount (each such
consent not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed); provided that the Borrower shall be deemed to have consented
to such lower amount unless it shall have objected thereto by written notice to the Administrative Agent within five
(5) Business Days after having received notice thereof; (iii) each assignment of a Lender’s rights and obligations with
respect to Advances and its Commitments shall be of a constant, and not varying, percentage of all of its rights and
obligations under this Agreement as a Lender and the Notes (other than rights of reimbursement and indemnity arising
before the effective date of such assignment); and (iv) the parties to such assignment shall execute and deliver to the
Administrative Agent for its acceptance an Assignment and Acceptance, together with any Notes subject to such
assignment and the assignor or assignee Lender shall pay a processing fee of $3,500; provided that such processing
fee shall not be required for the initial assignments made by Amegy as a Lender in connection with the initial
syndication of its Commitments hereunder and such processing fee may be waived at the sole discretion of the
Administrative Agent. Upon execution, delivery, and acceptance of such Assignment and Acceptance and payment of
the processing fee, the assignee thereunder shall be a party hereto and, to the extent of such assignment, have the
obligations, rights, and benefits of a Lender hereunder and the assigning Lender shall, to the extent of such
assignment, relinquish its rights and be released from its obligations under this Agreement. Upon the consummation
of any assignment pursuant to this Section 9.7, the assignor, the Administrative Agent and the Borrower shall make
appropriate arrangements so that, if requested, new Notes are issued to the assignor and the assignee. The assignee
shall deliver to the Borrower and the Administrative Agent any applicable forms or certifications in accordance with
Section 2.12(e).
(b) The Administrative Agent, acting solely for this purpose as an agent of the Borrower for tax purposes, shall
maintain at its address referred to in Section 9.9 a copy of each Assignment and Acceptance delivered to and
accepted by it and a register for the recordation of the names and addresses of the Lenders and the Commitments of,
and principal amount (and stated interest) of the Advances owing to, each Lender from time to time (the “Register”).
The entries in the Register shall be conclusive and binding for all purposes, absent manifest error, and the Credit
Parties, the Administrative Agent and the Lenders may treat each Person whose name is recorded in the Register as
a Lender hereunder for all purposes of this Agreement. The Register shall be available for inspection by the Borrower
or any Lender at any reasonable time and from time to time upon reasonable prior notice.
-80-
(c) Upon its receipt of an Assignment and Acceptance executed by the parties thereto, together with any Notes
subject to such assignment and payment of the processing fee, the Administrative Agent shall, if such Assignment
and Acceptance has been completed, (i) accept such Assignment and Acceptance, (ii) record the information
contained therein in the Register, and (iii) give prompt notice thereof to the parties thereto.
(d) Each Lender may sell participations to one or more Persons in all or a portion of its rights and/or obligations under
this Agreement (including all or a portion of its Commitments or its Advances) provided, however, that (i) such
Lender’s obligations under this Agreement shall remain unchanged, (ii) such Lender shall remain solely responsible to
the other parties hereto for the performance of such obligations, (iii) the participant shall be entitled to the benefit of
the yield protection provisions contained in Sections 2.9 and 2.10 (but with respect to any particular participant, to no
greater extent than the Lender that sold the participation to such participant) and the right of set-off contained in
Section 7.4, and (iv) the Borrower shall continue to deal solely and directly with such Lender in connection with such
Lender’s rights and obligations under this Agreement, and such Lender shall retain the sole right to enforce the
obligations of the Borrower relating to its Advances and its Notes and to approve any amendment, modification, or
waiver of any provision of this Agreement (other than amendments, modifications, or waivers decreasing the amount
of principal of or the rate at which interest is payable on such Advances or Notes, extending any scheduled principal
payment date or date fixed for the payment of interest on such Advances or Notes, or extending its Commitment).
(e) Notwithstanding any other provision set forth in this Agreement, any Lender may at any time assign and pledge all
or any portion of its Advances and its Notes to any Federal Reserve Bank as collateral security pursuant to
Regulation A and any Operating Circular issued by such Federal Reserve Bank. No such assignment shall release the
assigning Lender from its obligations hereunder.
(f) Any Lender may furnish any information concerning the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries in the possession of
such Lender from time to time to assignees and participants (including prospective assignees and participants),
subject, however, to the provisions of the following Section 9.8.
Section 9.8. Confidentiality. The Administrative Agent, the Swing Line Lender, each Issuing Lender, and each Lender
(each a “Lending Party”) agree to keep confidential any information furnished or made available to it by any Credit
Party pursuant to this Agreement and identified by such Credit Party as proprietary or confidential; provided that
nothing herein shall prevent any Lending Party from disclosing such information (a) to any other Lending Party or any
Affiliate of any Lending Party, or any officer, director, employee, agent, or advisor of any Lending Party or Affiliate of
any Lending Party for purposes of administering, negotiating, considering, processing, implementing, syndicating,
assigning, or evaluating the credit facilities provided herein and the transactions contemplated hereby (it being
understood that the Persons to whom such disclosure is made will be informed of the confidential nature of such
information and will be instructed to keep such information confidential), (b) to any other Person if directly incidental to
the administration of the credit facilities provided herein (it being understood that the Persons to whom such
disclosure is made will be informed of the confidential nature of such information and will be instructed to keep such
information confidential), (c) as required by any Legal Requirement (with, to the extent permitted by applicable law,
prompt notice to the Borrower), (d) upon the order of any court or administrative agency (with, to the extent permitted
by applicable law, prompt notice to the Borrower), (e) upon the request or demand of any regulatory agency or
authority, (f) that is or becomes available to the public (other than as a result of a breach of this Section by such
Lending Party) or that is or becomes available to any Lending Party on a non-confidential basis as a result of a
disclosure by any Person other than a Credit Party, (g) in connection with any litigation relating to this Agreement or
any other Credit Document to which such Lending Party or any of its Affiliates may be a party (with, to the extent
permitted by applicable law, prompt notice to the Borrower), (h) to the extent necessary in connection with the
exercise of any right or remedy under this Agreement or any other Credit Document, and (i) to any actual or proposed
participant or Eligible Assignee, in each case, subject
-81-
to provisions similar to those contained in this Section 9.8 and, in the event such participant or Eligible Assignee is a
direct competitor of the Borrower or its Subsidiaries and no Event of Default has occurred and is continuing, with the
prior written consent of the Borrower. NOTWITHSTANDING ANYTHING TO THE CONTRARY CONTAINED HEREIN,
nothing in this Agreement shall (a) restrict any Lending Party from providing information to any bank or other
regulatory or governmental authorities, including the Federal Reserve Board and its supervisory staff;
(b) require or permit any Lending Party to disclose to any Credit Party that any information will be or was
provided to the Federal Reserve Board or any of its supervisory staff; or (c) require or permit any Lending
Party to inform any Credit Party of a current or upcoming Federal Reserve Board examination or any
nonpublic Federal Reserve Board supervisory initiative or action. In the event that any of the terms of this
Section 9.8 conflict with any non-disclosure agreement executed by a Lending Party prior to the date hereof,
then the terms of this Section 9.8 shall govern and control.
Section 9.9. Notices, Etc.
(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) below, all notices and other communications (other than Notices of Borrowing
and Notices of Continuation or Conversion, which are governed by Article 2 of this Agreement) shall be in writing and
hand delivered with written receipt, telecopied, sent by facsimile (with a hard copy sent as otherwise permitted in this
Section 9.9), sent by a nationally recognized overnight courier, or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested as
follows: if to a Credit Party, as specified on Schedule II, if to the Swing Line Lender, the Administrative Agent or the
Issuing Lender, at its credit contact specified under its name on Schedule II, and if to any Lender at is credit contact
specified in its Administrative Questionnaire. Each party may change its notice address by written notification to the
other parties. All such notices and communications shall be effective when delivered, except that notices and
communications to any Lender, the Swing Line Lender or the Issuing Lender pursuant to Article 2 shall not be
effective until received and, in the case of telecopy, such receipt is confirmed by the Swing Line Lender, such Lender
or Issuing Lender, as applicable, verbally or in writing. Notices delivered through electronic communications to the
extent provided in paragraph (b) below, shall be effect as provided in said paragraph (b).
(b) Notices and other communications to the Administrative Agent and each Lender hereunder may be delivered or
furnished by electronic communication (including e-mail, internet or intranet websites) pursuant to procedures
approved by the Administrative Agent; provided that (x) such communication is followed promptly by an original
delivered in accordance with paragraph (a) above and (y) the foregoing shall not apply to notices to the Administrative
Agent or any Lender pursuant to Article 2 if such person has notified the Borrower that it is incapable of receiving
notices under such article by electronic communication. Unless the Administrative Agent otherwise prescribes,
(i) notices and other communications sent to an e-mail address shall be deemed received upon sender’s receipt of an
acknowledgment from the recipient (such as by the “Return Receipt Requested” function, as available, return e-mail or
other written acknowledgment), and (ii) notices or communications posted to an internet or intranet website shall be
deemed received upon the deemed receipt by the intended recipient at its e-mail address as described in the
foregoing clause (1) of notification that such notice or communication is available and identifying the website address
therefor.
Section 9.10. Usury Not Intended. It is the intent of each Credit Party and each Lender in the execution and
performance of this Agreement and the other Credit Documents to contract in strict compliance with applicable usury
laws, including conflicts of law concepts, governing the Advances of each Lender including such applicable laws of
the State of Texas, if any, and the United States of America from time to time in effect. In furtherance thereof, the
Lenders and the Credit Parties stipulate and agree that none of the terms and provisions contained in this Agreement
or the other Credit Documents shall ever be construed to create a contract to pay, as consideration for the use,
forbearance or
-82-
detention of money, interest at a rate in excess of the Maximum Rate and that for purposes of this Agreement
“interest” shall include the aggregate of all charges which constitute interest under such laws that are contracted for,
charged or received under this Agreement; and in the event that, notwithstanding the foregoing, under any
circumstances the aggregate amounts taken, reserved, charged, received or paid on the Advances, include amounts
which by applicable law are deemed interest which would exceed the Maximum Rate, then such excess shall be
deemed to be a mistake and each Lender receiving same shall credit the same on the principal of its Notes (or if such
Notes shall have been paid in full, refund said excess to the Borrower). In the event that the maturity of the Notes are
accelerated by reason of any election of the holder thereof resulting from any Event of Default under this Agreement
or otherwise, or in the event of any required or permitted prepayment, then such consideration that constitutes interest
may never include more than the Maximum Rate, and excess interest, if any, provided for in this Agreement or
otherwise shall be canceled automatically as of the date of such acceleration or prepayment and, if theretofore paid,
shall be credited on the applicable Notes (or, if the applicable Notes shall have been paid in full, refunded to the
Borrower of such interest). In determining whether or not the interest paid or payable under any specific contingencies
exceeds the Maximum Rate, the Credit Parties and the Lenders shall to the maximum extent permitted under
applicable law amortize, prorate, allocate and spread in equal parts during the period of the full stated term of the
Notes all amounts considered to be interest under applicable law at any time contracted for, charged, received or
reserved in connection with the Obligations. The provisions of this Section shall control over all other provisions of
this Agreement or the other Credit Documents which may be in apparent conflict herewith.
Section 9.11. Usury Recapture. In the event the rate of interest chargeable under this Agreement at any time is
greater than the Maximum Rate, the unpaid principal amount of the Advances shall bear interest at the Maximum
Rate until the total amount of interest paid or accrued on the Advances equals the amount of interest which would
have been paid or accrued on the Advances if the stated rates of interest set forth in this Agreement had at all times
been in effect. In the event, upon payment in full of the Advances, the total amount of interest paid or accrued under
the terms of this Agreement and the Advances is less than the total amount of interest which would have been paid or
accrued if the rates of interest set forth in this Agreement had, at all times, been in effect, then the Borrower shall, to
the extent permitted by applicable law, pay the Administrative Agent for the account of the Lenders an amount equal
to the difference between (i) the lesser of (A) the amount of interest which would have been charged on its Advances
if the Maximum Rate had, at all times, been in effect and (B) the amount of interest which would have accrued on its
Advances if the rates of interest set forth in this Agreement had at all times been in effect and (ii) the amount of
interest actually paid under this Agreement on its Advances. In the event the Lenders ever receive, collect or apply as
interest any sum in excess of the Maximum Rate, such excess amount shall, to the extent permitted by law, be
applied to the reduction of the principal balance of the Advances, and if no such principal is then outstanding, such
excess or part thereof remaining shall be paid to the Borrower.
Section 9.12. Governing Law; Service of Process. This Agreement, the Notes and the other Credit Documents (unless
otherwise expressly provided therein) shall be deemed a contract under, and shall be governed by, and construed and
enforced in accordance with, the laws of the State of Texas without regard to conflicts of laws principles. Without
limiting the intent of the parties set forth above, (a) Chapter 346 of the Texas Finance Code, as amended (relating to
revolving loans and revolving tri-party accounts), shall not apply to this Agreement, the Notes, or the transactions
contemplated hereby and (b) to the extent that any Lender may be subject to Texas law limiting the amount of interest
payable for its account, such Lender shall utilize the indicated (weekly) rate ceiling from time to time in effect. Each
Letter of Credit shall be governed by either (i) the Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary Credits (2007
Revision), International Chamber of Commerce Publication No. 600, or (ii) the International Standby Practices
(ISP98), International Chamber of Commerce Publication No. 590, in either case, including any subsequent revisions
thereof approved by a Congress of the International
-83-
Chamber of Commerce and adhered to by the Issuing Lender. The Borrower hereby agrees that service of copies of
the summons and complaint and any other process which may be served in any such action or proceeding may be
made by mailing or delivering a copy of such process to the Borrower at the address set forth for the Borrower in this
Agreement. Nothing in this Section shall affect the rights of any Lender to serve legal process in any other manner
permitted by the law or affect the right of any Lender to bring any action or proceeding against the Borrower or its
Property in the courts of any other jurisdiction.
Section 9.13. Submission to Jurisdiction. Each party hereto hereby irrevocably submits to the jurisdiction of any
Texas state or federal court sitting in Houston, Texas in any action or proceeding arising out of or relating to this
Agreement or the other Credit Documents, and each party hereto hereby irrevocably agrees that all claims in respect
of such action or proceeding may be heard and determined in such court. Each party hereto hereby unconditionally
and irrevocably waives, to the fullest extent it may effectively do so, any right it may have to the defense of an
inconvenient forum to the maintenance of such action or proceeding. Each party hereto hereby agrees that service of
copies of the summons and complaint and any other process which may be served in any such action or proceeding
may be made by mailing or delivering a copy of such process to such Person at its address set forth in this
Agreement. Each party hereto hereby agrees that a final judgment in any such action or proceeding shall be
conclusive and may be enforced in other jurisdictions by suit on the judgment or in any other manner provided by law.
Nothing in this Section shall affect the rights of the Administrative Agent or any Lender to serve legal process in any
other manner permitted by the law or affect the right of the Administrative Agent or any Lender to bring any action or
proceeding against any Credit Party or its Property in the courts of any other jurisdiction.
Section 9.14. Execution in Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in any number of counterparts and by
different parties hereto in separate counterparts, each of which when so executed shall be deemed to be an original
and all of which taken together shall constitute one and the same agreement.
Section 9.15. Dispute Resolution. This section contains a jury waiver, arbitration clause, and a class action waiver.
READ IT CAREFULLY.
This dispute resolution provision shall supersede and replace any prior “Jury Waiver,” “Judicial Reference,” “Class
Action Waiver,” “Arbitration,” “Dispute Resolution,” or similar alternative dispute agreement or provision between or
among the parties.
JURY TRIAL WAIVER; CLASS ACTION WAIVER. As permitted by applicable law, each party waives their respective
rights to a trial before a jury in connection with any Dispute (as “Dispute” is hereinafter defined), and Disputes shall be
resolved by a judge sitting without a jury. If a court determines that this provision is not enforceable for any reason
and at any time prior to trial of the Dispute, but not later than 30 days after entry of the order determining this
provision is unenforceable, the Administrative Agent or any Credit Party shall be entitled to move the court for an
order compelling arbitration and staying or dismissing such litigation pending arbitration (“Arbitration Order”). If
permitted by applicable law, each party also waives the right to litigate in court or an arbitration proceeding any
Dispute as a class action, either as a member of a class or as a representative, or to act as a private attorney
general.
ARBITRATION. If a claim, dispute, or controversy arises with respect to this Agreement, related agreements, or any
other agreement or business relationship whether or not related to the subject matter of this Agreement (all of the
foregoing, a “Dispute”), and only if a jury trial waiver is not permitted by applicable law or ruling by a court, either party
may require that the Dispute be resolved by binding arbitration before a single arbitrator. By agreeing to arbitrate a
Dispute, each party gives up any right that party may have to a jury trial, as well as other rights that party
would have in court that are not available or are more limited in arbitration, such as the rights to discovery
and to appeal.
-84-
Arbitration shall be commenced by filing a petition with, and in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules of,
JAMS or National Arbitration Forum (“Administrator”) as selected by the initiating party. If the parties agree, arbitration
may be commenced by appointment of a licensed attorney who is selected by the parties and who agrees to conduct
the arbitration without an Administrator. Disputes include matters (i) relating to a deposit account, application for or
denial of credit, enforcement of any of the obligations any party has to another party, compliance with applicable laws
and/or regulations, performance or services provided under any agreement by any party, (ii) based on or arising from
an alleged tort, or (iii) involving any party’s employees, agents, affiliates, or assigns. However, Disputes do not
include the validity, enforceability, meaning, or scope of this arbitration provision and such matters may be
determined only by a court. If a third party is a party to a Dispute, each party consents to including the third party in
the arbitration proceeding for resolving the Dispute with the third party. Venue for the arbitration proceeding shall be at
a location determined by mutual agreement of the parties or, if no agreement, in the city and state where lender or the
bank is headquartered.
If a court orders arbitration of a Dispute, the party to the Dispute that did not seek the Arbitration Order shall
commence arbitration. The party that sought the Arbitration Order may commence arbitration, but shall have no
obligation to do so, and shall not in any way be adversely prejudiced by initiating or participating in litigation or electing
not to commence arbitration. The arbitrator shall (i) hear and rule on appropriate dispositive motions for judgment on
the pleadings, for failure to state a claim, or for full or partial summary judgment; (ii) render a decision and any award
applying applicable law; (iii) give effect to any limitations period in determining any Dispute or defense; (iv) enforce the
doctrines of compulsory counterclaim, res judicata, and collateral estoppel, if applicable; (v) with regard to motions
and the arbitration hearing, apply rules of evidence governing civil cases; and (vi) apply the law of the state specified
in the agreement giving rise to the Dispute. Filing of a petition for arbitration shall not prevent any party from
(i) seeking and obtaining from a court of competent jurisdiction (notwithstanding ongoing arbitration) provisional or
ancillary remedies including but not limited to injunctive relief, property preservation orders, foreclosure, eviction,
attachment, replevin, garnishment, and/or the appointment of a receiver, (ii) pursuing non-judicial foreclosure, or
(iii) availing itself of any self-help remedies such as setoff and repossession. The exercise of such rights shall not
constitute a waiver of the right to submit any Dispute to arbitration.
Judgment upon an arbitration award may be entered in any court having jurisdiction, except that, if the arbitration
award exceeds $4,000,000, any party shall be entitled to a de novo appeal of the award before a panel of three
arbitrators. To allow for such appeal, if the award (including Administrator, arbitrator, and attorney’s fees and costs)
exceeds $4,000,000, the arbitrator will issue a written, reasoned decision supporting the award, including a statement
of authority and its application to the Dispute. A request for de novo appeal must be filed with the arbitrator within 30
days following the date of the arbitration award; if such a request is not made within that time period, the arbitration
decision shall become final and binding. On appeal, the arbitrators shall review the award de novo, meaning that they
shall reach their own findings of fact and conclusions of law rather than deferring in any manner to the original
arbitrator. Appeal of an arbitration award shall be pursuant to the rules of the Administrator or, if the Administrator has
no such rules, then the JAMS arbitration appellate rules shall apply.
Arbitration under this provision concerns a transaction involving interstate commerce and shall be governed by the
Federal Arbitration Act, 9 U.S.C. § 1 et seq. This arbitration provision shall survive any termination, amendment, or
expiration of this Agreement. If the terms of this provision vary from the Administrator’s rules, this arbitration provision
shall control.
RELIANCE. Each party (i) certifies that no one has represented to such party that any other party would not seek to
enforce jury and class action waivers in the event of suit, and (ii) acknowledges that it and each other party have been
induced to enter into this Agreement by, among other things, the mutual waivers, agreements, and certifications in
this section.
Section 9.16. Subordination Agreements. The Administrative Agent is hereby authorized on behalf of the Lenders, the
Swing Line Lender and the Issuing Lender to enter into the Subordination Agreements. A copy of each such
Subordination Agreement will be made available to each Secured Party upon request. Each Secured Party (by
receiving the benefits thereunder and of the Collateral) acknowledges and agrees to the terms of each such
Subordination Agreement and agrees that the terms thereof shall be binding on such Secured Party and its
successors and assigns, as if it were a party thereto.
-85-
Section 9.17. USA Patriot Act. Each Lender that is subject to the Patriot Act and the Administrative Agent (for itself
and not on behalf of any Lender) hereby notifies each Credit Party that pursuant to the requirements of the Patriot Act
it is required to obtain, verify and record information that identifies such Credit Party, which information includes the
name and address of such Credit Party and other information that will allow such Lender or the Administrative Agent,
as applicable, to identify such Credit Party in accordance with the Patriot Act.
Section 9.18. Business Loans. The Borrower warrants and represents that the Advances are and shall be for
business, commercial, investment, or other similar purposes and not primarily for personal, family, household, or
agricultural use, as such terms are used in Chapter One (“Chapter One”) of the Texas Credit Code. At all such times,
if any, as Chapter One shall establish a Maximum Rate, the Maximum Rate shall be the “indicated rate ceiling” (as
such term is defined in Chapter One) from time to time in effect.
Section 9.19. Integration. THIS WRITTEN AGREEMENT AND THE CREDIT DOCUMENTS, AS DEFINED IN THIS
AGREEMENT, REPRESENT THE FINAL AGREEMENT AMONG THE PARTIES AND SUPERSEDE ALL PRIOR
UNDERSTANDINGS AND AGREEMENTS, WHETHER WRITTEN OR ORAL, RELATING TO THE TRANSACTIONS
PROVIDED FOR HEREIN AND THEREIN. ADDITIONALLY, THIS AGREEMENT AND THE CREDIT DOCUMENTS
MAY NOT BE CONTRADICTED BY EVIDENCE OF PRIOR, CONTEMPORANEOUS, OR SUBSEQUENT ORAL
AGREEMENTS OF THE PARTIES.
THERE ARE NO ORAL AGREEMENTS AMONG THE PARTIES.
IN EXECUTING THIS AGREEMENT, EACH CREDIT PARTY HEREBY WARRANTS AND REPRESENTS IT IS NOT
RELYING ON ANY STATEMENT OR REPRESENTATION OTHER THAN THOSE IN THIS AGREEMENT AND IS
RELYING UPON ITS OWN JUDGMENT AND ADVICE OF ITS ATTORNEYS.
[Remainder of this page intentionally left blank. Signature pages follow.]
-86-
EXECUTED as of the date first above written.
BORROWER:
HI-CRUSH PARTNERS LP
By: Hi-Crush GP LLC, its general partner
By:  
Name: James M. Whipkey
Title: Co-Chief Executive Officer and President
Signature Page to Credit Agreement
(Hi-Crush Partners LP)
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT/LENDERS:
AMEGY BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION,
as Administrative Agent, Issuing Lender,
Swing Line Lender, and a Lender
By:
Name:  
Title:
Signature Page to Credit Agreement
(Hi-Crush Partners LP)
[                                                                  
           ],
as a Lender
By:
Name:  
Title:
Signature Page to Credit Agreement
(Hi-Crush Partners LP)
SCHEDULE I
Pricing Schedule
The Applicable Margin with respect to Commitment Fee, Revolving Advances, and Swing Line Advances (if
applicable) shall be determined in accordance with the following Table based on the Borrower’s Leverage Ratio as
reflected in the Compliance Certificate delivered in connection with the Financial Statements most recently delivered
pursuant to Section 5.2. Adjustments, if any, to such Applicable Margin shall be effective on the date the
Administrative Agent receives the applicable Financial Statements and corresponding Compliance Certificate as
required by the terms of this Agreement. If the Borrower fails to deliver the Financial Statements and corresponding
Compliance Certificate to the Administrative Agent at the time required pursuant to Section 5.2, then effective as of
the date such Financial Statements and Compliance Certificate were required to the delivered pursuant to Section 5.2,
the Applicable Margin with respect to Commitment Fee, Revolving Advances, and Swing Line Advances (if applicable)
shall be determined at Level III and shall remain at such level until the date such Financial Statements and
corresponding Compliance Certificate are so delivered by the Borrower. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Borrower
shall be deemed to be at Level I until delivery of its unaudited Financial Statements and corresponding Compliance
Certificate for the fiscal quarter ending September 30, 2012. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
herein, the determination of the Applicable Margin for any period shall be subject to the provisions of Section 2.7(c).
For the avoidance of doubt, the levels on the pricing grid set forth below are set forth from highest (Level III) to the
lowest (Level I).
Commitment
Fee
0.500% 
0.500% 
0.375%
Applicable
Margin
Level III
Level II
Level I
Leverage Ratio
Is equal to or greater than 2.00
Is equal to or greater than 1.00 but less than 2.00
Is less than 1.00
Eurodollar
Advances
3.50%  
3.00%  
2.50%
Base Rate
Advances
2.50%  
2.00%  
1.50%
Schedule I
SCHEDULE II
Commitments, Contact Information
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT/ISSUING LENDER/SWING LINE LENDER
Amegy Bank National Association
Address for
Notices:
Attn:
4400 Post Oak Parkway
Houston, Texas 77027
Special Processing: Dana Chargois
Telephone:
(713) 232-6395
Facsimile:
(713) 693-7467
Email:
With a copy to:
Attn:
special.processing@amegybank.com
4400 Post Oak Parkway
Houston, Texas 77027
Wendy Schneider
Telephone:
(713) 232-1564
Facsimile:
(713) 693-7467
Email:
With a copy to:
Attn:
wendy.schneider@amegybank.com
4400 Post Oak Parkway
Houston, Texas 77027
Brad Ellis
Telephone:
(713) 232-1212
Facsimile:
(713) 693-7467
Email:
Brad.Ellis@amegybank.com
CREDIT PARTIES
Address for
Notices:
Attn:
Three Riverway, Suite 1550
Houston, TX 77056
James Whipkey
Telephone:
(713) 963-0099
Facsimile:
(713) 963-0088
Lender
Amegy Bank National Association
[_____________]
Total:
Commitment
$ [___________]
$ [___________]
$ 100,000,000.00
Borrower/Guarantors
Schedule II
Page 1 of 1
Schedule III
Additional Conditions and Requirements for New Domestic Subsidiaries
Within 30 days (or such longer period of time as the Administrative Agent shall agree) of creating a new Domestic
Subsidiary or acquiring a new Domestic Subsidiary, the Administrative Agent shall have received each of the
following:
(a) Guaranty. A joinder and supplement to the Guaranty executed by such Subsidiary;
(b) Security Agreement. A joinder and supplement to the Security Agreement executed by such Subsidiary, in any
event, together with stock certificates, stock powers executed in blank, UCC-1 financing statements, and any other
documents, agreements, or instruments necessary to create and perfect an Acceptable Security Interest in the
Collateral described in the Security Agreement, as so supplemented;
(c) Mortgages. If such Subsidiary owns any real property and if and as requested by the Administrative Agent, a fully
executed Mortgage covering such real properties, together with (i) a copy of an existing owner’s policy of title
insurance reflecting no Liens on such real property other than Permitted Liens, (ii) if such property is designated to be
in a “flood hazard area” (as evidenced by a flood determination certificate issued by the appropriate Governmental
Authority or third party obtained by the Administrative Agent), evidence of flood insurance on such property obtained
by the applicable Credit Party in such total amount as required by Regulation H of the Federal Reserve Board, and all
official rulings and interpretations thereunder or thereof, and otherwise in compliance with the National Flood Insurance
Program as set forth in the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, and (iii) such evidence of corporate authority to
enter into such Guaranty, Security Agreement, and Mortgage as the Administrative Agent may reasonably request;
(d) Pledges. A pledge agreement executed by the equity holders of such Subsidiary pledging 100% of the Equity
Interest owned by such equity holder of such Subsidiary and such evidence of corporate, limited liability company or
partnership authority to enter into such pledge agreement as the Administrative Agent may reasonably request, along
with share certificates pledged thereby and appropriately executed stock powers in blank, if applicable;
(e) Real Estate. (i) If and as requested by the Administrative Agent, a Responsible Officer’s certificate from such new
Subsidiary certifying a complete listing of all real property owned or leased by such new Subsidiary and including a
notation as to all locations where any equipment of such new Subsidiary is kept, and (ii) if and as requested by the
Administrative Agent, lien waivers or subordination agreements in form and substance satisfactory to the
Administrative Agent and executed by the landlords or lessors identified in, and covering each of the leased real
properties listed on such officer’s certificate;
(f) Corporate Documents. A secretary’s certificate from such new Subsidiary certifying such Subsidiary’s
(i) Responsible Officer’s incumbency, (ii) authorizing resolutions, (iii) organizational documents, (iv) necessary
governmental approvals, and (v) certificate of good standing in such Subsidiary’s state of organization dated a date
not earlier than 30 days prior to date of delivery or otherwise in effect on the date of delivery;
(g) Patriot Act. All documentation and other information that is required by regulatory authorities under applicable
“know your customer” and anti-money-laundering rules and regulations, including, without limitation, the Patriot Act;
and
Schedule III
Page 1 of 2
(h) Opinion of Counsel. If requested by the Administrative Agent, an opinion of counsel in form and substance
reasonably acceptable to the Administrative Agent related to such new Subsidiary and substantially similar to the
legal opinion delivered at the Effective Date with respect to the other Domestic Subsidiaries in existence on the
Effective Date.
Schedule III
Page 2 of 2