
EX-99.3 4 v393766_ex99-3.htm EXHIBIT 99.3
Exhibit 99.3
Form 52-109F2
Certification of Interim Filings
Full Certificate
I, ERFAN KAZEMI, Chief Financial Officer of SANDSTORM GOLD LTD., certify the following:
1.
Review: I have reviewed the interim financial report and interim MD&A (together, the “Interim
Filings”) of SANDSTORM GOLD LTD. (the “Issuer”) for the interim period ended
SEPTEMBER 30, 2014.
2.
No misrepresentations: Based on my knowledge, having exercised reasonable diligence, the
Interim Filings do not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material
fact required to be stated or that is necessary to make a statement not misleading in light of the
circumstances under which it was made, with respect to the period covered by the Interim
Filings.
3.
Fair presentation: Based on my knowledge, having exercised reasonable diligence, the
interim financial report together with the other financial information included in the Interim
Filings fairly present in all material respects the financial condition, financial performance and
cash flows of the Issuer, as of the date of and for the periods presented in the Interim Filings.
4.
Responsibility: The Issuer’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing
and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (DC&P) and internal control over financial
reporting (ICFR), as those terms are defined in National Instrument 52-109 Certification of
Disclosure in Issuers’ Annual and Interim Filings, for the Issuer.
5.Design: Subject to the limitations, if any, described in paragraphs 5.2 and 5.3, the Issuer’s
other certifying officer(s) and I have, as at the end of the period covered by the Interim Filings
(a)
designed DC&P, or caused it to be designed under our supervision, to provide reasonable
assurance that
(i)
material information relating to the Issuer is made known to us by others, particularly during the
period in which the Interim Filings are being prepared; and
(ii)
information required to be disclosed by the Issuer in its annual filings, interim filings or other
reports filed or submitted by it under securities legislation is recorded, processed, summarized
and reported within the time periods specified in securities legislation; and
(b)
designed ICFR, or caused it to be designed under our supervision, to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with the Issuer’s GAAP.
5.1
Control framework: The control framework the Issuer’s other certifying officer(s) and I used to
design the Issuer’s ICFR is Internal Control – Integrated Framework (1992) issued by the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission.
5.2 ICFR – material weakness relating to design: N/A.
5.3 Limitation on scope of design: The Issuer has disclosed in its interim MD&A
(a)
the fact that the Issuer’s other certifying officer(s) and I have limited the scope of our design of
DC&P and ICFR to exclude controls, policies and procedures of a business that the Issuer
acquired not more than 365 days before the last day of the period covered by the Interim
Filings; and
(b)
summary financial information about the proportionately consolidated entity, special purpose
entity or business that the Issuer acquired that has been proportionately consolidated or
consolidated in the Issuer’s financial statements.
6.
Reporting changes in ICFR: The Issuer has disclosed in its interim MD&A any change in the
Issuer’s ICFR that occurred during the period beginning on July 1, 2014 and ended on
September 30, 2014 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the
Issuer’s ICFR.
Date: NOVEMBER 12, 2014.
“Erfan Kazemi”
ERFAN KAZEMI
Chief Financial Officer