
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, DC 20549
FORM 6-K
REPORT OF FOREIGN PRIVATE ISSUER 
PURSUANT TO RULE 13a-16 OR 15d-16 OF 
THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
Report on Form 6-K dated August 18, 2014
Commission File Number 1-14846
AngloGold Ashanti Limited
(Name of registrant)
76 Jeppe Street 
Newtown, 2001
(P.O. Box 62117, Marshalltown, 2107)
South Africa
(Address of principal executive offices)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant files or will file annual reports under cover of Form 
20-F or Form 40-F.
Form 20-F X      Form 40-F
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper as permitted by 
Regulation S-T Rule 101(b)(1):
Yes
No X
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper as permitted by 
Regulation S-T Rule 101(b)(7):
Yes
No X
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant by furnishing the information contained in this Form 
is also thereby furnishing the information to the Commission pursuant to Rule 12g3-2(b) under the 
Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Yes
No X
Enclosure: Press release Intended Delisting and Cancellation of Securities from the London
Stock Exchange
AngloGold Ashanti Limited 
(Incorporated in the Republic of South Africa) 
Reg. No. 1944/017354/06) 
ISIN No. ZAE000043485 – JSE share code: ANG   
CUSIP: 035128206 – NYSE share code: AU
18 August 2014
NEWS RELEASE
Intended Delisting and Cancellation of Securities from the London Stock Exchange
(JOHANNESBURG)  AngloGold  Ashanti  Limited  ("AngloGold"  or "the  Company")  announces  that  its 
board  of  directors  has  resolved  to  request the  cancellation  of  the  listing  of the  Company's  ordinary 
shares and depositary interests of ZAR 0.25 each (ISIN: ZAE000043485) (together, the "Securities") 
on the Official List of the UK Listing Authority and the cancellation of the admission to trading of the 
Securities on the Main Market of the London Stock Exchange plc (the "LSE").
In connection with the proposed delisting, the board of AngloGold has also resolved to terminate the 
Company’s UK depositary interest programme.  This programme was established in 2012 to facilitate 
trading of the Company’s shares on the LSE.
Reasons for the delisting 
AngloGold  has  decided  to  apply  for  the  voluntary  delisting  of  its  Securities  because  of  the  lack  of 
liquidity  on  the  LSE  and  the  minimum  number  of  Securities  held  in  the  UK.    The  vast  majority  of 
trading in AngloGold stock takes place through the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (the “JSE”) and 
New  York  Stock  Exchange  (the  “NYSE”),  and  AngloGold  has  further  listings  on  the  Ghana  Stock 
Exchange  (the  “GhSE”)  and  Australian  Securities  Exchange  (the  “ASX”).      AngloGold  wishes  to 
streamline  its  administrative  procedures  and  reduce  costs  arising  from  listings  on  multiple  stock 
exchanges.
As the volume of trading on the Securities on the LSE is low and the Company’s shares will continue 
to be traded on the JSE, the NYSE, the GhSE and the ASX, AngloGold believes the impact on its 
shareholders of delisting from the LSE will be minimal. During the past five years, for similar reasons, 
the Company has also cancelled its respective listings in Brussels and Paris.
1
Effect of the delisting and termination of the depositary interest programme 
It  is  intended  that  on  22  September  2014  (the  “Effective  Date”),  the  Securities  will  cease  to  be 
admitted to the Official List of the UK Listing Authority and cease to be admitted to trading on the Main 
Market  of  the  LSE.    Holders  of  Securities  which  are  admitted  to  trading  on  the  LSE  (“UK 
Shareholders”) will be able to continue to deal as usual in the Company’s Securities on the LSE until 
19 September 2014.  From and including the Effective Date, UK Shareholders will no longer be able 
to trade their Securities on the LSE.
AngloGold has directed Computershare Investor Services PLC (“Computershare”), as depositary, to 
terminate  AngloGold’s  depositary  interest  programme  with  effect  from  15  October  2014  (the  “DI 
Programme Termination Date”).  Consequently, and in accordance with the terms of the depositary
interest trust deed, Computershare will provide 30 days’ notice of termination to all depositary interest 
holders.
As set out above, depositary interest holders will be able to trade their depositary interests on the LSE 
up to and including 19 September 2014.  From and including the Effective Date, holders of depositary 
interests will no longer be able to trade their depositary interests on the LSE.
Prior to the DI Programme Termination Date, any depositary interest holder may direct their broker to 
complete  a  CREST  Stock  Withdrawal  Form,  in  order  for  their  holding  to  be  replaced  with  the 
equivalent  number  of  fully  paid  ordinary  shares  in  the  Company  and  transferred  to  the  Company’s 
Jersey register.
Any  depositary  interests  remaining  on  the  Company’s  UK  depositary  interest  register  as  at  the  DI 
Programme Termination  Date  will  be  cancelled  and  replaced  on  or  shortly  after  the  DI  Programme 
Termination Date with the equivalent number of fully paid ordinary shares in the Company and the 
holders of such shares will be entered onto the Company’s Jersey register.
It is the intention of the Company that the Jersey register will remain in place for approximately 12 
months after the Effective Date.  All holders of ordinary shares held on the Company’s Jersey register 
as  at  the  Effective  Date,  together  with  previous  holders  of  depositary  interests  whose  depositary 
interests have been replaced after the Effective Date with shares of the Company in certificated form, 
will  remain  on  the  Jersey  register  after  the  delisting.    For  further  information  regarding  the  Jersey 
register, please contact Computershare at the address or on the telephone number below.
Shareholders on the Jersey register after the Effective Date will be able to trade their shares on any of 
the  stock  exchanges  on  which  the  Company  is  listed,  however,  the  most  liquid  exchanges  for  the 
Company’s stock are the JSE and the NYSE.
(cid:120)  Shareholders on the Jersey register who wish to trade their shares on the JSE will be required 
to dematerialise their shareholding. For further information on the steps that need to be taken 
to  trade  on  the  JSE,  please  contact  the  Company’s  South  African  Transfer  Secretaries, 
Computershare Investor Services (Pty) Limited at the address or telephone number below.
(cid:120)  Shareholders  on  the  Jersey  register  who  wish  to  trade  their  shares  on  the  NYSE  will  be 
required to convert their shareholding to ADRs. For further information on the steps that need 
to be taken to trade on the NYSE, please contact AngloGold's Depository Bank, Bank of New 
York Mellon at the address or telephone number below.
(cid:120)  Shareholders on the Jersey register who wish to trade their shares on the GhSE or the ASX
should speak to their broker.
The Company is aware that, until the close of business on 19 September 2014, Redmayne-Bentley 
Stockbrokers is willing to provide a sale only dealing service (on the LSE) to UK resident individuals 
holding  certificated  shares  on  the  Jersey  register,  subject to  their  normal  terms  and  conditions  and 
market availability.  Following the delisting and cancellation of trading on the LSE, Redmayne-Bentley 
Stockbrokers may be able to assist UK resident individuals holding certificated shares on the Jersey 
register with dematerialising their shareholding to allow such shareholders to trade (sale only) on the 
JSE.  Any  shareholder  who  is  interested  in  utilising  either  service  should  contact  Matthew  Burke  or 
Colin  Day  of  Redmayne-Bentley  Stockbrokers  either  by  telephone  on  01132006400  or  by  email  at 
southafricandealing@redmayne.co.uk.
All holders of shares held on the Company’s Jersey register on the date on which the Jersey register 
is closed will then be migrated to the Company’s shareholder register in South Africa and such shares 
will be listed on the JSE.
Expected delisting timetable 
Application  has  been  made  to  the  UK  Listing  Authority  for  the  Securities  to  be  removed  from  the 
Official List, and to the LSE for the Securities to be removed from trading. The last day of dealings in 
the Securities on the LSE is expected to be 19 September 2014. The cancellation of the listing and of 
trading  in  the  Securities  on  the  LSE  is  expected  to take  effect  at  or  about  08:00  on  22  September 
2014.
ENDS
Sponsor to AngloGold Ashanti 
UBS South Africa (Pty) Limited
Contact details for enquiries relating to this announcement 
AngloGold Ashanti Limited 
Stewart Bailey 
Senior Vice President: Investor Relations 
Tel +27 11 637 6031
South African Transfer Secretaries                                              
Computershare Investor Services (Pty) Limited                                    
(Registration number 2004/003647/07)                                             
70 Marshall Street                                                               
Johannesburg 2001                                                                
South Africa                                                                     
(P O Box 61051, Marshalltown 2107, South Africa)                              
Tel +27 11 370 5000 
E-mail: web.queries@computershare.co.za
Computershare Investor Services PLC
PO Box 82 
The Pavilions 
Bridgwater Road 
Bristol BS99 7NH 
England 
Telephone: +44 870 889 3177 
Fax: +44 870 703 6101
ADR Depositary
The Bank of New York 
Investor Services, P O Box 11258 
Church Street Station 
New York, NY 10286-1258 
United States of America 
Telephone: +1 888 269 2377 (Toll free in USA) or +9 610 382 7836 (outside USA) 
E-mail: shareowners@bankofny.com
GENERAL ENQUIRIES
Media
Chris Nthite                                     
Stewart Bailey                                
General inquiries
+27 (0) 11 637 6388/+27 (0) 83 301 2481                             
+27 81 032 2563 / +27 11 637 6031
Investors
Stewart Bailey                                
Sabrina Brockman (US & Canada)    
Fundisa Mgidi (South Africa)
+27 81 032 2563 / +27 11 637 6031          
+1 (212) 858 7702 / +1 646 379 2555     
+27 11 6376763 / +27 82 821 5322
cnthite@anglogoldashanti.com 
sbailey@anglogoldashanti.com 
media@anglogoldashanti.com
sbailey@anglogoldashanti.com 
sbrockman@anglogoldashanti.com    
fmgidi@anglogoldashanti.com
Certain statements contained in this document, other than statements of historical fact, including, without limitation, those concerning the economic outlook for 
the gold mining industry, expectations regarding gold prices, production, cash costs, all-in sustaining costs, cost savings and other operating results, return on 
equity, productivity improvements, growth prospects and outlook of AngloGold Ashanti’s operations, individually or in the aggregate, including the achievement 
of project milestones, commencement and completion of commercial operations of certain of AngloGold Ashanti’s exploration and production projects and the
completion of acquisitions and dispositions, AngloGold Ashanti’s liquidity and capital resources and capital expenditures and the outcome and consequences of 
any potential or pending litigation or regulatory proceedings or environmental, health, and safety issues, are forward-looking statements regarding AngloGold 
Ashanti’s  operations,  economic  performance  and  financial  condition.  These  forward-looking  statements  or  forecasts  involve  known  and  unknown  risks, 
uncertainties and other factors that may cause AngloGold Ashanti’s actual results, performance or achievements to differ materially from the anticipated results, 
performance or achievements expressed or implied in these forward-looking statements. Although AngloGold Ashanti believes that the expectations reflected in 
such forward-looking statements and forecasts are reasonable, no assurance can be given that such expectations will prove to have been correct. Accordingly, 
results could differ materially from those set out in the forward-looking statements as a result of, among other factors, changes in economic, social and political 
and  market  conditions,  the  success  of  business  and  operating  initiatives,  changes  in  the  regulatory  environment  and  other  government  actions,  including 
environmental approvals, fluctuations in gold prices and exchange rates, the outcome of pending or future litigation proceedings, and business and operational 
risk management. For a discussion of such risk factors, refer to AngloGold Ashanti’s annual report on Form 20-F for the year ended 31 December 2013 which  
was filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) on 14 April 2014. These factors are not necessarily all of the important factors 
that could cause AngloGold Ashanti’s actual results to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statements. Other unknown or unpredictable 
factors  could  also  have  material  adverse  effects  on  future  results.  Consequently,  readers  are  cautioned  not  to  place  undue  reliance  on  forward-looking 
statements.  AngloGold  Ashanti  undertakes  no  obligation  to  update  publicly  or  release  any  revisions  to  these  forward-looking  statements  to  reflect  events  or 
circumstances after the date hereof or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events, except to the extent required by applicable law. All subsequent written or 
oral forward-looking statements attributable to AngloGold Ashanti or any person acting on its behalf are qualified by the cautionary statements herein.
This communication may contain certain “Non-GAAP” financial measures. AngloGold Ashanti utilises certain Non-GAAP performance measures and ratios in 
managing its business. Non-GAAP financial measures should be viewed in addition to, and not as an alternative for, the reported operating results or cash flow 
from  operations  or  any  other  measures  of  performance  prepared  in  accordance  with  IFRS.  In  addition,  the  presentation  of  these  measures  may  not  be 
comparable to similarly titled measures other companies may use. AngloGold Ashanti posts information that is important to investors on the main page of its 
website at www.anglogoldashanti.com and under the “Investors” tab on the main page. This information is updated regularly. Investors should visit this website 
to obtain important information about AngloGold Ashanti.
AngloGold Ashanti Limited 
Incorporated in the Republic of South Africa Reg No: 1944/017354/06 
ISIN No. ZAE000043485 – JSE share code: ANG CUSIP: 035128206 – NYSE share code: AU 
Website: www.anglogoldashanti.com
SIGNATURES
Pursuant  to  the  requirements  of  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  the  registrant  has  duly 
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
AngloGold Ashanti Limited 
Date: August 18, 2014
/s/ M E SANZ PEREZ________
By: 
Name:  M E Sanz Perez 
Title:
EVP: Group Legal, Commercial & Governance