
EX-3.2 3 d236362dex32.htm EX-3.2 EX-3.2
Exhibit 3.2
BY-LAWS
OF
SEVENTY SEVEN ENERGY INC.,
a Delaware corporation
(the “Corporation”)
(Adopted as of August 1, 2016)
BY-LAWS
OF
SEVENTY SEVEN ENERGY INC.
ARTICLE I.
OFFICES
Section 1.1. Registered Office. The registered office of the Corporation within the State of
Delaware shall be located at either (a) the principal place of business of the Corporation in the
State of Delaware or (b) the office of the corporation or individual acting as the Corporation’s
registered agent in Delaware.
Section 1.2. Additional Offices. The Corporation may, in addition to its registered office in the
State of Delaware, have such other offices and places of business, both within and outside the
State of Delaware, as the Board of Directors of the Corporation (the “Board”) may from time to
time determine or as the business and affairs of the Corporation may require.
ARTICLE II.
STOCKHOLDERS MEETINGS
Section 2.1. Annual Meetings. Unless directors are elected by written consent in lieu of an
annual meeting as permitted by applicable law or an annual meeting is otherwise not required by
applicable law, an annual meeting of stockholders shall be held at such place and time and on
such date as shall be determined by the Board and stated in the notice of the meeting, provided
that the Board may in its sole discretion determine that the meeting shall not be held at any place,
but may instead be held solely by means of remote communication pursuant to Section 9.5(a). At
each annual meeting, subject to the terms of the Stockholder Agreement, the stockholders shall
elect directors of the Corporation then up for election and may transact any other business as
may properly be brought before the meeting. Stockholders may, unless the Corporation’s
Certificate of Incorporation, as the same may be amended or restated from time to time (the
“Certificate of Incorporation”), provides otherwise, act by written consent to elect directors;
provided, however, that if such consent is less than unanimous, such action by written consent
may be in lieu of holding an annual meeting only if all of the directorships to which directors
could be elected at an annual meeting held at the effective time of such action are vacant and are
filled by such action.
Section 2.2. Special Meetings. Except as otherwise required by applicable law or provided in
the Certificate of Incorporation, special meetings of stockholders, for any purpose or purposes,
may be called only by the Chairman of the Board or the President, by the Board, or by the
Secretary at the request in writing of stockholders holding shares representing at least 20% of the
voting power of the outstanding shares entitled to vote on the matter for which such meeting is to
be called. The Secretary shall call such a meeting upon receiving such a request. Special
meetings of stockholders shall be held at such place and time and on such date as shall be
determined by the Board and stated in the Corporation’s notice of the meeting, provided that the
Board may in its sole discretion determine that the meeting shall not be held at any place, but
may instead be held solely by means of remote communication pursuant to Section 9.5(a).
Section 2.3. Notices. Notice of each stockholders meeting stating the place, if any, date and
time of the meeting, the means of remote communication, if any, by which stockholders and
proxyholders may be deemed to be present in person and vote at such meeting, and the record
date for determining the stockholders entitled to vote at the meeting if such date is different from
the record date for determining stockholders entitled to notice of the meeting shall be given in the
manner permitted by Section 9.3 to each stockholder entitled to vote thereat as of the record date
for determining the stockholders entitled to notice of the meeting. Such notice shall be given by
the Corporation not less than 10 nor more than 60 days before the date of the meeting. If said
notice is for a stockholders meeting other than an annual meeting, it shall in addition state the
purpose or purposes for which the meeting is called, and the business transacted at such
meeting shall be limited to the matters so stated in the Corporation’s notice of meeting (or any
supplement thereto).
Section 2.4. Quorum. Except as otherwise provided by applicable law, the Certificate of
Incorporation or these By-Laws, the presence, in person or by proxy, at a stockholders meeting of
the holders of shares of outstanding capital stock of the Corporation representing a majority of the
voting power of all outstanding shares of capital stock of the Corporation entitled to vote at such
meeting shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at such meeting, except that
when specified business is to be voted on by a class or series of stock voting as a class, the
holders of shares representing a majority of the voting power of the outstanding shares of such
class or series shall constitute a quorum of such class or series for the transaction of such
business. If a quorum shall not be present at any meeting of the stockholders, the chairman of the
meeting or the stockholders entitled to vote thereat so present, by a majority in voting power
thereof, may adjourn the meeting from time to time in the manner provided in Section 2.6 until a
quorum shall attend. The stockholders present at a duly convened meeting may continue to
transact business until adjournment, notwithstanding the withdrawal of enough stockholders to
leave less than a quorum. Shares of its own stock belonging to the Corporation or to another
corporation, if a majority of the voting power of the shares entitled to vote in the election of
directors of such other corporation is held, directly or indirectly, by the Corporation, shall neither
be entitled to vote nor be counted for quorum purposes; provided, however, that the foregoing
shall not limit the right of the Corporation or any such other corporation to vote shares held by it in
a fiduciary capacity.
Section 2.5. Voting of Shares.
(a) Voting Lists. The Secretary shall prepare, or shall cause the officer or agent who has charge
of the stock ledger of the Corporation to prepare, at least 10 days before each meeting of
stockholders, a complete list of the stockholders of record entitled to vote at the meeting
(provided, however, if the record date for determining the stockholders entitled to vote is less than
10 days before the meeting date, the list shall reflect the stockholders entitled to vote as of the
tenth day before the meeting date), arranged in alphabetical order for each class of stock and
showing the address and the number of shares registered in the name of each
stockholder. Nothing contained in this Section 2.5(a) shall require the Corporation to include
electronic mail addresses or other electronic contact information on such list. Such list shall be
open to the examination of any stockholder, for any purpose germane to the meeting, during
ordinary business hours for a period of at least 10 days prior to the meeting: (i) on a reasonably
accessible electronic network, provided that the information required to gain access to such list is
provided
2
with the notice of the meeting, or (ii) during ordinary business hours, at the principal place of
business of the Corporation. If the Corporation determines to make the list available on an
electronic network, the Corporation may take reasonable steps to ensure that such information is
available only to stockholders of the Corporation. If the meeting is to be held at a place, then the
list of stockholders entitled to vote at the meeting shall be produced and kept at the time and
place of the meeting during the whole time thereof, and may be examined by any stockholder
who is present. If a meeting of stockholders is to be held solely by means of remote
communication as permitted by Section 9.5(a), then such list shall be open to the examination of
any stockholder during the whole time of the meeting on a reasonably accessible electronic
network, and the information required to access such list shall be provided with the notice of
meeting. The stock ledger shall be the only evidence as to who are the stockholders entitled to
examine the list required by this Section 2.5(a) or to vote in person or by proxy at any meeting of
stockholders.
(b) Manner of Voting. At any stockholders meeting, every stockholder entitled to vote may vote in
person or by proxy. If authorized by the Board, the voting by stockholders or proxyholders at any
meeting conducted by remote communication may be effected by a ballot submitted by electronic
transmission (as defined in Section 9.3(c)), provided that any such electronic transmission must
either set forth or be submitted with information from which the Corporation can determine that
the electronic transmission was authorized by the stockholder or proxyholder. The Board, in its
discretion, or the chairman of the meeting of stockholders, in such person’s discretion, may
require that any votes cast at such meeting shall be cast by written ballot.
(c) Proxies. Each stockholder entitled to vote at a meeting of stockholders or to express consent
or dissent to corporate action in writing without a meeting may authorize another person or
persons to act for such stockholder by proxy, but no such proxy shall be voted or acted upon after
three years from its date, unless the proxy provides for a longer period. Proxies need not be filed
with the Secretary until the meeting is called to order, but shall be filed with the Secretary before
being voted. Without limiting the manner in which a stockholder may authorize another person or
persons to act for such stockholder as proxy, either of the following shall constitute a valid means
by which a stockholder may grant such authority:
(i) A stockholder may execute a writing authorizing another person or persons to act for such
stockholder as proxy. Execution may be accomplished by the stockholder or such stockholder’s
authorized officer, director, employee or agent signing such writing or causing such person’s
signature to be affixed to such writing by any reasonable means, including, but not limited to, by
facsimile signature.
(ii) A stockholder may authorize another person or persons to act for such stockholder as proxy
by transmitting or authorizing the transmission of an electronic transmission to the person who
will be the holder of the proxy, provided that any such electronic transmission must either set forth
or be submitted with information from which it can be determined that the electronic transmission
was authorized by the stockholder.
Any copy, facsimile telecommunication or other reliable reproduction of the writing or
transmission authorizing another person or persons to act as proxy for a stockholder may be
3
substituted or used in lieu of the original writing or transmission for any and all purposes for
which the original writing or transmission could be used; provided that such copy, facsimile
telecommunication or other reproduction shall be a complete reproduction of the entire original
writing or transmission.
(d) Required Vote. Subject to the terms of that certain Stockholders Agreement dated August 1,
2016, by and among the Corporation and the stockholders party thereto, as the same may be
amended in accordance with its terms (the “Stockholders Agreement”), and to the rights of the
holders of one or more series of preferred stock of the Corporation (“Preferred Stock”), voting
separately by class or series, to elect directors pursuant to the terms of one or more series of
Preferred Stock, the election of directors shall be determined by a plurality of the votes cast by
the stockholders present in person or represented by proxy at the meeting and entitled to vote
thereon. Subject to the terms of the Stockholders Agreement, all other matters shall be
determined by the vote of a majority of the votes cast by the stockholders present in person or
represented by proxy at the meeting and entitled to vote thereon, unless the matter is one upon
which, by applicable law, the rules or regulations of any stock exchange applicable to the
Corporation, the Certificate of Incorporation or these By-Laws, a different vote is required, in
which case such provision shall govern and control the decision of such matter.
(e) Inspectors of Election. The Board may, and shall if required by law, in advance of any meeting
of stockholders, appoint one or more persons as inspectors of election, who may be employees
of the Corporation or otherwise serve the Corporation in other capacities, to act at such meeting
of stockholders or any adjournment thereof and to make a written report thereof. The Board may
appoint one or more persons as alternate inspectors to replace any inspector who fails to act. If
no inspectors of election or alternates are appointed by the Board, the chairman of the meeting
shall appoint one or more inspectors to act at the meeting. Each inspector, before discharging his
or her duties, shall take and sign an oath faithfully to execute the duties of inspector with strict
impartiality and according to the best of his or her ability. The inspectors shall ascertain and
report the number of outstanding shares and the voting power of each; determine the number of
shares present in person or represented by proxy at the meeting and the validity of proxies and
ballots; count all votes and ballots and report the results; determine and retain for a reasonable
period a record of the disposition of any challenges made to any determination by the inspectors;
and certify their determination of the number of shares represented at the meeting and their count
of all votes and ballots. No person who is a candidate for an office at an election may serve as an
inspector at such election. Each report of an inspector shall be in writing and signed by the
inspector or by a majority of them if there is more than one inspector acting at such meeting. If
there is more than one inspector, the report of a majority shall be the report of the inspectors.
Section 2.6. Adjournments. Any meeting of stockholders, annual or special, may be adjourned
by the chairman of the meeting or by the stockholders present and entitled to vote thereat, by a
majority in voting power thereof, from time to time, whether or not there is a quorum, to reconvene
at the same or some other place. Notice need not be given of any such adjourned meeting if the
date, time, place, if any, thereof, and the means of remote communication, if any, by which
stockholders and proxyholders may be deemed to be present in person and vote at such
adjourned meeting are announced at the meeting at which the
4
adjournment is taken. At the adjourned meeting the stockholders, or the holders of any class or
series of stock entitled to vote separately as a class, as the case may be, may transact any
business that might have been transacted at the original meeting. If the adjournment is for more
than 30 days, notice of the adjourned meeting shall be given to each stockholder of record
entitled to vote at the meeting. If after the adjournment a new record date for stockholders entitled
to vote is fixed for the adjourned meeting, the Board shall fix a new record date for notice of such
adjourned meeting in accordance with Section 2.3 and shall give notice of the adjourned meeting
to each stockholder of record entitled to vote at such adjourned meeting as of the record date
fixed for notice of such adjourned meeting.
Section 2.7. Conduct of Meetings. The chairman of each annual and special meeting of
stockholders shall be the Chairman of the Board or, in the absence (or inability or refusal to act)
of the Chairman of the Board, the President (if he or she shall be a director) or, in the absence (or
inability or refusal to act) of the President or if the President is not a director, such other person as
shall be appointed by the Board, or in the absence of such appointment, a chairman chosen at
the meeting. The date and time of the opening and the closing of the polls for each matter upon
which the stockholders will vote at a meeting shall be announced at the meeting by the chairman
of the meeting. The Board may adopt such rules and regulations for the conduct of the meeting of
stockholders as it shall deem appropriate. Except to the extent inconsistent with these By-Laws
or such rules and regulations as adopted by the Board, the chairman of any meeting of
stockholders shall have the right and authority to convene and to adjourn the meeting, to
prescribe such rules, regulations and procedures and to do all such acts as, in the judgment of
such chairman, are appropriate for the proper conduct of the meeting. Unless and to the extent
determined by the Board or the chairman of the meeting, meetings of stockholders shall not be
required to be held in accordance with the rules of parliamentary procedure. The secretary of
each annual and special meeting of stockholders shall be the Secretary or, in the absence (or
inability or refusal to act) of the Secretary, an Assistant Secretary so appointed to act by the
chairman of the meeting. In the absence (or inability or refusal to act) of the Secretary and all
Assistant Secretaries, the chairman of the meeting may appoint any person to act as secretary of
the meeting.
Section 2.8. Consents in Lieu of Meeting. Unless otherwise provided by the Certificate of
Incorporation, any action required or permitted to be taken at any annual or special meeting of
stockholders may be taken without a meeting, without prior notice and without a vote, if a consent
or consents in writing, setting forth the action so taken, shall be signed by the holders of
outstanding stock having not less than the minimum voting power that would be necessary to
authorize or take such action at a meeting at which all shares entitled to vote thereon were
present and voted and shall be delivered to the Corporation to its registered office in the State of
Delaware, the Corporation’s principal place of business, or the Secretary. Every written consent
shall bear the date of signature of each stockholder who signs the consent and no written
consent shall be effective to take the corporate action referred to therein unless, within 60 days of
the date the earliest dated consent is delivered to the Corporation, a written consent or consents
signed by a sufficient number of holders to take such action are delivered to the Corporation by
delivery to the Corporation’s registered office in the State of Delaware, the Corporation’s
principal place of business, or the Secretary. Delivery made to the Corporation’s registered office
shall be by hand or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. An electronic
transmission consenting to the action to be taken and transmitted by a stockholder, proxyholder
5
or a person or persons authorized to act for a stockholder or proxyholder shall be deemed to be
written, signed and dated for purposes hereof if such electronic transmission sets forth or is
delivered with information from which the Corporation can determine that such transmission was
transmitted by a stockholder or proxyholder (or by a person authorized to act for a stockholder or
proxyholder) and the date on which such stockholder, proxyholder or authorized person
transmitted such transmission. The date on which such electronic transmission is transmitted
shall be deemed to be the date on which such consent was signed. No consent given by
electronic transmission shall be deemed to have been delivered until such consent is reproduced
in paper form and delivered to the Corporation by delivery either to the Corporation’s registered
office in the State of Delaware, the Corporation’s principal place of business, or the
Secretary. Delivery made to the Corporation’s registered office shall be made by hand or by
certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. Notwithstanding the limitations on delivery in
the previous sentence, consents given by electronic transmission may be otherwise delivered to
the Corporation’s principal place of business or to the Secretary if, to the extent, and in the
manner provided by resolution of the Board. Any copy, facsimile or other reliable reproduction of
a consent in writing may be substituted or used in lieu of the original writing for any and all
purposes for which the original writing could be used; provided that such copy, facsimile or other
reproduction shall be a complete reproduction of the entire original writing. Prompt notice of the
taking of the corporate action without a meeting by less than unanimous written consent shall be
given to those stockholders who have not consented in writing and who, if the action had been
taken at a meeting, would have been entitled to notice of the meeting if the record date for notice
of such meeting had been the date that written consents signed by a sufficient number of holders
were delivered to the Corporation as provided in this Section 2.8.
ARTICLE III.
DIRECTORS
Section 3.1. Powers. The business and affairs of the Corporation shall be managed by or under
the direction of the Board, which may exercise all such powers of the Corporation and do all such
lawful acts and things as are not by statute or by the Certificate of Incorporation or by these By-
Laws required to be exercised or done by the stockholders, subject to the terms of the
Stockholders Agreement. Directors need not be stockholders or residents of the State of
Delaware.
Section 3.2. Number; Term. The number of directors of the Corporation initially shall be
7. Thereafter, subject to the terms of the Stockholders Agreement, the number of directors, other
than those who may be elected by the holders of one or more series of Preferred Stock voting
separately by class or series, may be determined from time to time by the Board. No decrease in
the number of directors shall shorten the term of any incumbent director. Subject to the terms of
the Stockholders Agreement, each director shall serve for a term ending on the date of the next
annual meeting following the annual meeting at which such director was elected; provided,
however, that the term of each director shall continue until the election and qualification of a
successor and be subject to such director’s earlier death, resignation or removal. A director
elected to fill a vacancy or a newly created directorship shall hold office until the next election of
directors, subject to the election and qualification of a successor and to such director’s earlier
death, resignation or removal.
6
Section 3.3. Newly Created Directorships and Vacancies. Except as otherwise provided in
the Certificate of Incorporation and subject to the terms of the Stockholders Agreement,
vacancies resulting from death, resignation, retirement, disqualification, removal or other cause
and newly created directorships resulting from an increase in the number of directors elected by
all of the stockholders having the right to vote as a single class may be filled by a majority vote of
the directors then in office, even if less than a quorum, by a sole remaining director, or by the
stockholders. Except as otherwise provided in the Certificate of Incorporation, and subject to the
terms of the Stockholders Agreement, if the holders of any class or classes of stock or series
thereof are entitled to elect one or more directors by the Certificate of Incorporation, vacancies
and newly created directorships of such class or classes or series may be filled only by a majority
of the directors elected by such class or classes or series thereof then in office, by a sole
remaining director so elected, or by the stockholders of such class or classes or series
thereof. Except as otherwise provided in the Certificate of Incorporation, any director elected or
chosen in accordance with this Section 3.3 shall hold office for the remainder of the applicable
term and until his or her successor shall have been elected and qualified, subject to such
director’s earlier death, resignation, retirement, disqualification or removal.
Section 3.4. Compensation. Unless otherwise restricted by the Certificate of Incorporation or
these By-Laws, the Board shall have the authority to fix the compensation of directors. The
directors may be reimbursed their expenses, if any, of attendance at each meeting of the Board
and may be paid either a fixed sum for attendance at each meeting of the Board or other
compensation as director. No such payment shall preclude any director from serving the
Corporation in any other capacity and receiving compensation therefor. Members of committees
of the Board may be allowed like compensation and reimbursement of expenses for attending
committee meetings.
Section 3.5. Removal. Subject to the terms of the Stockholders Agreement, directors of the
Corporation may be removed with or without cause by the stockholders as provided in the
Delaware General Corporation Law (“DGCL”).
ARTICLE IV.
BOARD MEETINGS
Section 4.1. Annual Meetings. The Board shall meet as soon as practicable after the
adjournment of each annual stockholders meeting at the place of the annual stockholders
meeting unless the Board shall fix another time and place and give notice thereof in the manner
required herein for special meetings of the Board. No notice to the directors shall be necessary to
legally convene this meeting, except as provided in this Section 4.1.
Section 4.2. Regular Meetings. Regularly scheduled, periodic meetings of the Board may be
held without notice at such times, dates and places as shall from time to time be determined by
the Board.
Section 4.3. Special Meetings. Special meetings of the Board (a) may be called by the
Chairman of the Board and (b) shall be called by the Chairman of the Board or Secretary on the
written request of any director then in office and shall be held at such time, date and place as
may be determined by the person calling the meeting or, if called upon the request of a director,
7
as specified in such written request. Notice of each special meeting of the Board shall be given,
as provided in Section 9.3, to each director (i) at least 24 hours before the meeting if such notice
is oral notice given personally or by telephone or written notice given by hand delivery or by
means of a form of electronic transmission and delivery; (ii) at least two days before the meeting if
such notice is sent by a nationally recognized overnight delivery service; and (iii) at least five
days before the meeting if such notice is sent through the United States mail. If the Secretary
shall fail or refuse to give such notice, then the notice may be given by the officer who called the
meeting or the directors who requested the meeting. Any and all business that may be transacted
at a regular meeting of the Board may be transacted at a special meeting. Except as may be
otherwise expressly provided by applicable law, the Certificate of Incorporation, or these By-
Laws, neither the business to be transacted at, nor the purpose of, any special meeting need be
specified in the notice or waiver of notice of such meeting. A special meeting may be held at any
time without notice if all the directors are present or if those not present waive notice of the
meeting in accordance with Section 9.4.
Section 4.4. Quorum; Required Vote. Subject to the terms of the Stockholders Agreement, a
majority of the Board, but in any event not less than one-third of the Whole Board (as defined
below), shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting of the Board, and
the act of a majority of the directors present at any meeting at which there is a quorum shall be
the act of the Board, except as may be otherwise specifically provided by applicable law, the
Certificate of Incorporation or these By-Laws. If a quorum shall not be present at any meeting, a
majority of the directors present may adjourn the meeting from time to time, without notice other
than announcement at the meeting, until a quorum is present. “Whole Board” shall mean the
total number of directors that the Corporation would have if there were no vacancies.
Section 4.5. Consent In Lieu of Meeting. Unless otherwise restricted by the Certificate of
Incorporation or these By-Laws, any action required or permitted to be taken at any meeting of
the Board or any committee thereof may be taken without a meeting if all members of the Board
or committee, as the case may be, consent thereto in writing or by electronic transmission, and
the writing or writings or electronic transmission or transmissions (or paper reproductions thereof)
are filed with the minutes of proceedings of the Board or committee. Such filing shall be in paper
form if the minutes are maintained in paper form and shall be in electronic form if the minutes are
maintained in electronic form.
Section 4.6. Organization. The chairman of each meeting of the Board shall be the Chairman of
the Board or, in the absence (or inability or refusal to act) of the Chairman of the Board, the
President (if he or she shall be a director) or in the absence (or inability or refusal to act) of the
President or if the President is not a director, a chairman elected from the directors present. The
Secretary shall act as secretary of all meetings of the Board. In the absence (or inability or refusal
to act) of the Secretary, an Assistant Secretary shall perform the duties of the Secretary at such
meeting. In the absence (or inability or refusal to act) of the Secretary and all Assistant
Secretaries, the chairman of the meeting may appoint any person to act as secretary of the
meeting.
8
ARTICLE V.
COMMITTEES OF DIRECTORS
Section 5.1. Establishment. Subject to the terms of the Stockholders Agreement, (i) the Board
may designate one or more committees, each committee to consist of one or more of the directors
of the Corporation, (ii) each committee shall keep regular minutes of its meetings and report the
same to the Board when required and (iii) the Board shall have the power at any time to fill
vacancies in, to change the membership of, or to dissolve any such committee.
Section 5.2. Available Powers. Subject to the Stockholders Agreement, any committee
established pursuant to Section 5.1 hereof, to the extent permitted by applicable law and by
resolution of the Board, shall have and may exercise all of the powers and authority of the Board
in the management of the business and affairs of the Corporation, and may authorize the seal of
the Corporation to be affixed to all papers that may require it.
Section 5.3. Alternate Members. The Board may designate one or more directors as alternate
members of any committee, who may replace any absent or disqualified member at any meeting
of such committee.
Section 5.4. Procedures. Unless the Board otherwise provides, the time, date, place, if any, and
notice of meetings of a committee shall be determined by such committee. At meetings of a
committee, a majority of the number of members of the committee (but not including any alternate
member, unless such alternate member has replaced any absent or disqualified member at the
time of, or in connection with, such meeting) shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. The act of a majority of the members present at any meeting at which a quorum is
present shall be the act of the committee, except as otherwise specifically provided by applicable
law, the Certificate of Incorporation, these By-Laws or the Board. If a quorum is not present at a
meeting of a committee, the members present may adjourn the meeting from time to time, without
notice other than an announcement at the meeting, until a quorum is present. Unless the Board
otherwise provides and except as provided in these By-Laws, each committee designated by the
Board may make, alter, amend and repeal rules for the conduct of its business. In the absence of
such rules each committee shall conduct its business in the same manner as the Board is
authorized to conduct its business pursuant to Article III and Article IV of these By-Laws.
ARTICLE VI.
OFFICERS
Section 6.1. Officers. The officers of the Corporation elected by the Board shall be a President,
a Treasurer, a Secretary and such other officers (including without limitation a Chief Executive
Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Vice Presidents, Assistant Secretaries and Assistant Treasurers)
as the Board from time to time may determine. Officers elected by the Board shall each have
such powers and duties as generally pertain to their respective offices, subject to the specific
provisions of this Article VI. Such officers shall also have such powers and duties as from time to
time may be conferred by the Board. The President may also appoint such other officers
(including without limitation one or more Vice Presidents and Controllers) as may be necessary
or desirable for the conduct of the business of the Corporation. Such other officers shall have
such powers and duties and shall hold their offices for such terms as may be provided in these
By-Laws or as may be prescribed by the Board or, if such officer has been appointed by the
President, as may be prescribed by the appointing officer.
9
Section 6.2. Term of Office; Removal; Vacancies. The elected officers of the Corporation shall
be elected or appointed by the Board from time to time in its discretion. All officers elected or
appointed by the Board shall hold office in accordance for such term as may be prescribed by the
Board. Any officer may be removed, with or without cause, at any time by the Board. Any officer
appointed by the President may also be removed, with or without cause, by the President unless
the Board otherwise provides. Any vacancy occurring in any elected office of the Corporation
may be filled by the Board.
Section 6.3. Other Officers. The Board may delegate the power to appoint such other officers
and agents, and may also remove such officers and agents or delegate the power to remove
same, as it shall from time to time deem necessary or desirable.
Section 6.4. Multiple Officeholders; Stockholder and Director Officers. Any number of offices
may be held by the same person unless the Certificate of Incorporation or these By-Laws
otherwise provide. Officers need not be stockholders or residents of the State of Delaware.
ARTICLE VII.
SHARE CERTIFICATES
Section 7.1. Certificates for Shares. Shares of stock in the Corporation need not be
certificated. The Corporation may, at its election, issue to any stockholder of record a certificate
certifying the number and class of shares owned by him in the Corporation, which shall be in
such form as shall be prescribed by the Board.
Section 7.2. Multiple Classes of Stock. If the Corporation shall be authorized to issue more
than one class of stock or more than one series of any class, the Corporation shall (a) cause the
powers, designations, preferences and relative, participating, optional or other special rights of
each class of stock or series thereof and the qualifications, limitations or restrictions of such
preferences or rights to be set forth in full or summarized on the face or back of any certificate that
the Corporation issues to represent shares of such class or series of stock or (b) in the case of
uncertificated shares, within a reasonable time after the issuance or transfer of such shares, send
to the registered owner thereof a written notice containing the information required to be set forth
on certificates as specified in clause (a) above; provided, however, that, except as otherwise
provided by applicable law, in lieu of the foregoing requirements, there may be set forth on the
face or back of such certificate or, in the case of uncertificated shares, on such written notice a
statement that the Corporation will furnish without charge to each stockholder who so requests
the powers, designations, preferences and relative, participating, optional or other special rights
of each class of stock or series thereof and the qualifications, limitations or restrictions of such
preferences or rights.
Section 7.3. Signatures. Each certificate representing capital stock of the Corporation shall be
signed by or in the name of the Corporation by (a) the Chairman of the Board, the President or a
Vice President and (b) the Treasurer, an Assistant Treasurer, the Secretary or an
10
Assistant Secretary of the Corporation. Any or all the signatures on the certificate may be a
facsimile. In case any officer, transfer agent or registrar who has signed or whose facsimile
signature has been placed upon a certificate shall have ceased to be such officer, transfer agent
or registrar before such certificate is issued, such certificate may be issued by the Corporation
with the same effect as if such person were such officer, transfer agent or registrar on the date of
issue.
Section 7.4. Consideration and Payment for Shares.
(a) Subject to applicable law, the Certificate of Incorporation and the Stockholders Agreement,
shares of stock may be issued for such consideration, having in the case of shares with par value
a value not less than the par value thereof, and to such persons, as determined from time to time
by the Board. The consideration may consist of any tangible or intangible property or benefit to
the Corporation including cash, promissory notes, services performed, contracts for services to
be performed or other securities.
(b) Subject to applicable law and the Certificate of Incorporation, shares may not be issued until
the full amount of the consideration has been paid, unless upon the face or back of each
certificate issued to represent any partly paid shares of capital stock or upon the books and
records of the Corporation in the case of partly paid uncertificated shares, there shall have been
set forth the total amount of the consideration to be paid therefor and the amount paid thereon up
to and including the time said certificate representing certificated shares or said uncertificated
shares are issued.
Section 7.5. Lost, Destroyed or Wrongfully Taken Certificates.
(a) If an owner of a certificate representing shares claims that such certificate has been lost,
destroyed or wrongfully taken, the Corporation shall issue a new certificate representing such
shares or such shares in uncertificated form if the owner: (i) requests such a new certificate
before the Corporation has notice that the certificate representing such shares has been acquired
by a protected purchaser; (ii) if requested by the Corporation, delivers to the Corporation a bond
sufficient to indemnify the Corporation against any claim that may be made against the
Corporation on account of the alleged loss, wrongful taking or destruction of such certificate or
the issuance of such new certificate or uncertificated shares; and (iii) satisfies other reasonable
requirements imposed by the Corporation.
(b) If a certificate representing shares has been lost, apparently destroyed or wrongfully taken,
and the owner fails to notify the Corporation of that fact within a reasonable time after the owner
has notice of such loss, apparent destruction or wrongful taking and the Corporation registers a
transfer of such shares before receiving notification, the owner shall be precluded from asserting
against the Corporation any claim for registering such transfer or a claim to a new certificate
representing such shares or such shares in uncertificated form.
Section 7.6. Transfer of Stock.
(a) In respect of certificated shares of stock, such shares of stock of the Corporation shall be
transferable only on the books of the Corporation by the holders thereof in person or by their duly
authorized attorneys or legal representatives upon surrender and cancellation of certificates for a
like number of shares. Upon surrender to the Corporation or a
11
transfer agent of the Corporation of such certificate for shares duly endorsed or accompanied by
proper evidence of succession, assignment or authority to transfer, it shall be the duty of the
Corporation to issue a new certificate to the person entitled thereto, cancel the old certificate and
record the transaction upon its books. In respect of uncertificated shares of stock, such shares of
stock of the Corporation shall be transferable only on the books of the Corporation by the holders
thereof in person or by their duly authorized attorneys or legal representatives upon the
compliance with such rules and procedures as may be proscribed by the Board, the Chairman of
the Board, the Chief Executive Officer, the President or such other officer as designated by the
Board.
(b) Whenever any transfer of shares of stock shall be made for collateral security and not
absolutely, the Corporation shall so record such fact in the entry of transfer if, when the certificate
for such shares is presented to the Corporation for transfer or, if such shares are uncertificated,
when the instruction for registration of transfer thereof is presented to the Corporation, both the
transferor and transferee request the Corporation to do so.
Section 7.7. Registered Stockholders. Before due presentment for registration of transfer of a
certificate representing shares of the Corporation or of an instruction requesting registration of
transfer of uncertificated shares, the Corporation may treat the registered owner as the person
exclusively entitled to inspect for any proper purpose the stock ledger and the other books and
records of the Corporation, vote such shares, receive dividends or notifications with respect to
such shares and otherwise exercise all the rights and powers of the owner of such shares, except
that a person who is the beneficial owner of such shares (if held in a voting trust or by a nominee
on behalf of such person) may, upon providing documentary evidence of beneficial ownership of
such shares and satisfying such other conditions as are provided under applicable law, may also
so inspect the books and records of the Corporation.
Section 7.8. Effect of the Corporation’s Restriction on Transfer. A written restriction on the
transfer or registration of transfer of shares of the Corporation or on the amount of shares of the
Corporation that may be owned by any person or group of persons, if permitted by the DGCL and
noted conspicuously on the certificate representing such shares or, in the case of uncertificated
shares, contained in a notice sent by the Corporation to the registered owner of such shares
within a reasonable time after the issuance or transfer of such shares, may be enforced against
the holder of such shares or any successor or transferee of the holder including an executor,
administrator, trustee, guardian or other fiduciary entrusted with like responsibility for the person
or estate of the holder.
Section 7.9. Transfer Agents. The Board may appoint one or more transfer agents or registrars
and may require for the validity thereof that certificates representing shares bear the signature of
any transfer agent or registrar so appointed.
ARTICLE VIII.
INDEMNIFICATION
Section 8.1. Right to Indemnification. Each person who was or is made a party or is threatened
to be made a party to or is otherwise involved in any threatened, pending or completed action,
suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative
12
(hereinafter a “proceeding”), by reason of the fact that he or she is or was a director or officer of
the Corporation or, while a director or officer of the Corporation, is or was serving at the request of
the Corporation as a director, officer, employee or agent of another corporation or of a
partnership, joint venture, trust, other enterprise or nonprofit entity, including service with respect
to an employee benefit plan (hereinafter a “Covered Person”), whether the basis of such
proceeding is alleged action in an official capacity as a director, officer, employee or agent, or in
any other capacity while serving as a director, officer, employee or agent, shall be indemnified
and held harmless by the Corporation to the fullest extent authorized or permitted by applicable
law, as the same exists or may hereafter be amended, against all expenses, liability and loss
(including, without limitation, attorneys’ fees, judgments, fines, ERISA excise taxes and penalties
and amounts paid in settlement) reasonably incurred or suffered by such Covered Person in
connection with such proceeding; provided, however, that, except as provided in Section 8.3 with
respect to proceedings to enforce rights to indemnification and advancement of expenses, the
Corporation shall indemnify a Covered Person in connection with a proceeding (or part thereof)
initiated by such Covered Person only if such proceeding (or part thereof) was authorized by the
Board.
Section 8.2. Right to Advancement of Expenses. In addition to the right to indemnification
conferred in Section 8.1, a Covered Person shall also have the right to be paid by the
Corporation the expenses (including, without limitation, attorneys’ fees) incurred in defending,
testifying, or otherwise participating in any such proceeding in advance of its final disposition
(hereinafter an “advancement of expenses”); provided, however, that, if the DGCL requires, an
advancement of expenses incurred by a Covered Person in his or her capacity as a director or
officer of the Corporation (and not in any other capacity in which service was or is rendered by
such Covered Person, including, without limitation, service to an employee benefit plan) shall be
made only upon delivery to the Corporation of an undertaking (hereinafter an “undertaking”), by
or on behalf of such Covered Person, to repay all amounts so advanced if it shall ultimately be
determined by final judicial decision from which there is no further right to appeal (hereinafter a
“final adjudication”) that such Covered Person is not entitled to be indemnified for such
expenses under this Article VIII or otherwise.
Section 8.3. Right of Indemnitee to Bring Suit. If a claim under Section 8.1 or Section 8.2 is not
paid in full by the Corporation within 60 days after a written claim therefor has been received by
the Corporation, except in the case of a claim for an advancement of expenses, in which case the
applicable period shall be 20 days, the Covered Person may at any time thereafter bring suit
against the Corporation to recover the unpaid amount of the claim. If successful in whole or in
part in any such suit, or in a suit brought by the Corporation to recover an advancement of
expenses pursuant to the terms of an undertaking, the Covered Person shall also be entitled to
be paid the expense of prosecuting or defending such suit. In any suit brought by (a) the Covered
Person to enforce a right to indemnification hereunder (but not in a suit brought by a Covered
Person to enforce a right to an advancement of expenses) it shall be a defense that, and (b) the
Corporation to recover an advancement of expenses pursuant to the terms of an undertaking, the
Corporation shall be entitled to recover such expenses upon a final adjudication that, the
Covered Person has not met any applicable standard for indemnification set forth in the
DGCL. Neither the failure of the Corporation (including its directors who are not parties to such
action, a committee of such directors, independent legal counsel, or its stockholders) to have
made a determination prior to the commencement of such suit that
13
indemnification of the Covered Person is proper in the circumstances because the Covered
Person has met the applicable standard of conduct set forth in the DGCL, nor an actual
determination by the Corporation (including a determination by its directors who are not parties to
such action, a committee of such directors, independent legal counsel, or its stockholders) that
the Covered Person has not met such applicable standard of conduct, shall create a presumption
that the Covered Person has not met the applicable standard of conduct or, in the case of such a
suit brought by the Covered Person, shall be a defense to such suit. In any suit brought by the
Covered Person to enforce a right to indemnification or to an advancement of expenses
hereunder, or by the Corporation to recover an advancement of expenses pursuant to the terms
of an undertaking, the burden of proving that the Covered Person is not entitled to be
indemnified, or to such advancement of expenses, under this Article VIII or otherwise shall be on
the Corporation.
Section 8.4. Non-Exclusivity of Rights. The rights provided to Covered Persons pursuant to
this Article VIII shall not be exclusive of any other right that any Covered Person may have or
hereafter acquire under applicable law, the Certificate of Incorporation, these By-Laws, an
agreement, a vote of stockholders or disinterested directors, or otherwise.
Section 8.5. Insurance. The Corporation may maintain insurance, at its expense, to protect itself
and/or any director, officer, employee or agent of the Corporation or another corporation,
partnership, joint venture, trust or other enterprise against any expense, liability or loss, whether
or not the Corporation would have the power to indemnify such person against such expense,
liability or loss under the DGCL.
Section 8.6. Indemnification of Other Persons. This Article VIII shall not limit the right of the
Corporation to the extent and in the manner authorized or permitted by law to indemnify and to
advance expenses to persons other than Covered Persons. Without limiting the foregoing, the
Corporation may, to the extent authorized from time to time by the Board, grant rights to
indemnification and to the advancement of expenses to any employee or agent of the
Corporation and to any other person who is or was serving at the request of the Corporation as a
director, officer, employee or agent of another corporation or of a partnership, joint venture, trust
or other enterprise, including service with respect to an employee benefit plan, to the fullest
extent of the provisions of this Article VIII with respect to the indemnification and advancement of
expenses of Covered Persons under this Article VIII.
Section 8.7. Amendments. Any repeal or amendment of this Article VIII by the Board or the
stockholders of the Corporation or by changes in applicable law, or the adoption of any other
provision of these By-Laws inconsistent with this Article VIII, shall, to the extent permitted by
applicable law, be prospective only (except to the extent such amendment or change in
applicable law permits the Corporation to provide broader indemnification rights to Covered
Persons on a retroactive basis than permitted prior thereto), and will not in any way diminish or
adversely affect any right or protection existing hereunder in respect of any act or omission
occurring prior to such repeal or amendment or adoption of such inconsistent provision.
Section 8.8. Certain Definitions. For purposes of this Article VIII, (a) references to “other
enterprise” shall include any employee benefit plan; (b) references to “fines” shall include any
excise taxes assessed on a person with respect to an employee benefit plan; (c) references to
14
“serving at the request of the Corporation” shall include any service that imposes duties on, or
involves services by, a person with respect to any employee benefit plan, its participants, or
beneficiaries; and (d) a person who acted in good faith and in a manner such person reasonably
believed to be in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries of an employee benefit plan
shall be deemed to have acted in a manner “not opposed to the best interest of the Corporation”
for purposes of Section 145 of the DGCL.
Section 8.9. Contract Rights. The rights provided to Covered Persons pursuant to this Article
VIII (a) shall be contract rights based upon good and valuable consideration, pursuant to which a
Covered Person may bring suit as if the provisions of this Article VIII were set forth in a separate
written contract between the Covered Person and the Corporation, (b) shall fully vest at the time
the Covered Person first assumes his or her position as a director or officer of the Corporation,
(c) are intended to be retroactive and shall be available with respect to any act or omission
occurring prior to the adoption of this Article VIII, (d) shall continue as to a Covered Person who
has ceased to be a director or officer of the Corporation, and (e) shall inure to the benefit of the
Covered Person’s heirs, executors and administrators.
Section 8.10. Severability. If any provision or provisions of this Article VIII shall be held to be
invalid, illegal or unenforceable for any reason whatsoever: (a) the validity, legality and
enforceability of the remaining provisions of this Article VIII shall not in any way be affected or
impaired thereby; and (b) to the fullest extent possible, the provisions of this Article VIII (including,
without limitation, each such portion of this Article VIII containing any such provision held to be
invalid, illegal or unenforceable) shall be construed so as to give effect to the intent manifested
by the provision held invalid, illegal or unenforceable.
ARTICLE IX.
MISCELLANEOUS
Section 9.1. Place of Meetings. If the place of any meeting of stockholders, the Board or
committee of the Board for which notice is required under these By-Laws is not designated in the
notice of such meeting, such meeting shall be held at the principal business office of the
Corporation; provided, however, if the Board has, in its sole discretion, determined that a meeting
shall not be held at any place, but instead shall be held by means of remote communication
pursuant to Section 9.5 hereof, then such meeting shall not be held at any place.
Section 9.2. Fixing Record Dates.
(a) In order that the Corporation may determine the stockholders entitled to notice of any meeting
of stockholders or any adjournment thereof, the Board may fix a record date, which record date
shall not precede the date upon which the resolution fixing the record date is adopted by the
Board, and which record date shall not be more than 60 nor less than 10 days before the date of
such meeting. If the Board so fixes a record date, such date shall also be the record date for
determining the stockholders entitled to vote at such meeting unless the Board determines, at the
time it fixes such record date, that a later date on or before the date of the meeting shall be the
date for making such determination. If no record date is fixed by the Board, the record date for
determining stockholders entitled to notice of or to vote at a meeting of stockholders shall be at
the close of business on the business day next preceding the day on
15
which notice is given, or, if notice is waived, at the close of business on the business day next
preceding the day on which the meeting is held. A determination of stockholders of record
entitled to notice of or to vote at a meeting of stockholders shall apply to any adjournment of the
meeting; provided, however, that the Board may fix a new record date for determination of
stockholders entitled to vote at the adjourned meeting, and in such case shall also fix as the
record date for stockholders entitled to notice of such adjourned meeting the same or an earlier
date as that fixed for determination of stockholders entitled to vote in accordance with the
foregoing provisions of this Section 9.2 at the adjourned meeting.
(b) In order that the Corporation may determine the stockholders entitled to receive payment of
any dividend or other distribution or allotment of any rights or the stockholders entitled to exercise
any rights in respect of any change, conversion or exchange of stock, or for the purpose of any
other lawful action, the Board may fix a record date, which record date shall not precede the date
upon which the resolution fixing the record date is adopted, and which record date shall be not
more than 60 days prior to such action. If no record date is fixed, the record date for determining
stockholders for any such purpose shall be at the close of business on the day on which the
Board adopts the resolution relating thereto.
(c) In order that the Corporation may determine the stockholders entitled to consent to corporate
action in writing without a meeting, the Board may fix a record date, which record date shall not
precede the date upon which the resolution fixing the record date is adopted by the Board, and
which date shall not be more than 10 days after the date upon which the resolution fixing the
record date is adopted by the Board. If no record date has been fixed by the Board, the record
date for determining stockholders entitled to consent to corporate action in writing without a
meeting, when no prior action by the Board is otherwise required, shall be the first date on which
a signed written consent setting forth the action taken or proposed to be taken is delivered to the
Corporation by delivery to its registered office in the State of Delaware, its principal place of
business, or the Secretary. Delivery made to the Corporation’s registered office shall be by hand
or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. If no record date has been fixed by the
Board and prior action by the Board is otherwise required, the record date for determining
stockholders entitled to consent to corporate action in writing without a meeting shall be at the
close of business on the day on which the Board adopts the resolution taking such prior action.
Section 9.3. Means of Giving Notice.
(a) Notice to Directors. Whenever under applicable law, the Certificate of Incorporation or these
By-Laws notice is required to be given to any director, such notice shall be given either (i) in
writing and sent by hand delivery, through the United States mail, or by a nationally recognized
overnight delivery service for next day delivery, (ii) by means of facsimile telecommunication or
other form of electronic transmission, or (iii) by oral notice given personally or by telephone. A
notice to a director will be deemed given as follows: (i) if given by hand delivery, orally, or by
telephone, when actually received by the director, (ii) if sent through the United States mail, when
deposited in the United States mail, with postage and fees thereon prepaid, addressed to the
director at the director’s address appearing on the records of the Corporation, (iii) if sent for next
day delivery by a nationally recognized overnight delivery service, when deposited with such
service, with fees thereon prepaid, addressed to the director at
16
the director’s address appearing on the records of the Corporation, (iv) if sent by facsimile
telecommunication, when sent to the facsimile transmission number for such director appearing
on the records of the Corporation, (v) if sent by electronic mail, when sent to the electronic mail
address for such director appearing on the records of the Corporation, or (vi) if sent by any other
form of electronic transmission, when sent to the address, location or number (as applicable) for
such director appearing on the records of the Corporation.
(b) Notice to Stockholders. Whenever under applicable law, the Certificate of Incorporation or
these By-Laws notice is required to be given to any stockholder, such notice may be given (i) in
writing and sent either by hand delivery, through the United States mail, or by a nationally
recognized overnight delivery service for next day delivery, or (ii) by means of a form of electronic
transmission consented to by the stockholder, to the extent permitted by, and subject to the
conditions set forth in, Section 232 of the DGCL. A notice to a stockholder shall be deemed given
as follows: (i) if given by hand delivery, when actually received by the stockholder, (ii) if sent
through the United States mail, when deposited in the United States mail, with postage and fees
thereon prepaid, addressed to the stockholder at the stockholder’s address appearing on the
stock ledger of the Corporation, (iii) if sent for next day delivery by a nationally recognized
overnight delivery service, when deposited with such service, with fees thereon prepaid,
addressed to the stockholder at the stockholder’s address appearing on the stock ledger of the
Corporation, and (iv) if given by a form of electronic transmission consented to by the stockholder
to whom the notice is given and otherwise meeting the requirements set forth above, (A) if by
facsimile transmission, when directed to a number at which the stockholder has consented to
receive notice, (B) if by electronic mail, when directed to an electronic mail address at which the
stockholder has consented to receive notice, (C) if by a posting on an electronic network together
with separate notice to the stockholder of such specified posting, upon the later of (1) such
posting and (2) the giving of such separate notice, and (D) if by any other form of electronic
transmission, when directed to the stockholder. A stockholder may revoke such stockholder’s
consent to receiving notice by means of electronic communication by giving written notice of
such revocation to the Corporation. Any such consent shall be deemed revoked if (1) the
Corporation is unable to deliver by electronic transmission two consecutive notices given by the
Corporation in accordance with such consent and (2) such inability becomes known to the
Secretary or an Assistant Secretary or to the Corporation’s transfer agent, or other person
responsible for the giving of notice; provided, however, the inadvertent failure to treat such
inability as a revocation shall not invalidate any meeting or other action.
(c) Electronic Transmission. “Electronic transmission” means any form of communication, not
directly involving the physical transmission of paper, that creates a record that may be retained,
retrieved and reviewed by a recipient thereof, and that may be directly reproduced in paper form
by such a recipient through an automated process, including but not limited to transmission by
telex, facsimile telecommunication, electronic mail, telegram and cablegram.
(d) Notice to Stockholders Sharing Same Address. Without limiting the manner by which notice
otherwise may be given effectively by the Corporation to stockholders, any notice to stockholders
given by the Corporation under any provision of the DGCL, the Certificate of Incorporation or
these By-Laws shall be effective if given by a single written notice to stockholders who share an
address if consented to by the stockholders at that address to
17
whom such notice is given. A stockholder may revoke such stockholder’s consent by delivering
written notice of such revocation to the Corporation. Any stockholder who fails to object in writing
to the Corporation within 60 days of having been given written notice by the Corporation of its
intention to send such a single written notice shall be deemed to have consented to receiving
such single written notice.
(e) Exceptions to Notice Requirements. Whenever notice is required to be given, under the
DGCL, the Certificate of Incorporation or these By-Laws, to any person with whom
communication is unlawful, the giving of such notice to such person shall not be required and
there shall be no duty to apply to any governmental authority or agency for a license or permit to
give such notice to such person. Any action or meeting that shall be taken or held without notice
to any such person with whom communication is unlawful shall have the same force and effect
as if such notice had been duly given. If the action taken by the Corporation is such as to require
the filing of a certificate with the Secretary of State of Delaware, the certificate shall state, if such
is the fact and if notice is required, that notice was given to all persons entitled to receive notice
except such persons with whom communication is unlawful.
Whenever notice is required to be given by the Corporation, under any provision of the DGCL,
the Certificate of Incorporation or these By-Laws, to any stockholder to whom (1) notice of two
consecutive annual meetings of stockholders and all notices of stockholder meetings or of the
taking of action by written consent of stockholders without a meeting to such stockholder during
the period between such two consecutive annual meetings, or (2) all, and at least two payments
(if sent by first-class mail) of dividends or interest on securities during a 12-month period, have
been mailed addressed to such stockholder at such stockholder’s address as shown on the
records of the Corporation and have been returned undeliverable, the giving of such notice to
such stockholder shall not be required. Any action or meeting that shall be taken or held without
notice to such stockholder shall have the same force and effect as if such notice had been duly
given. If any such stockholder shall deliver to the Corporation a written notice setting forth such
stockholder’s then current address, the requirement that notice be given to such stockholder shall
be reinstated. If the action taken by the Corporation is such as to require the filing of a certificate
with the Secretary of State of Delaware, the certificate need not state that notice was not given to
persons to whom notice was not required to be given pursuant to Section 230(b) of the
DGCL. The exception in subsection (1) of the first sentence of this paragraph to the requirement
that notice be given shall not be applicable to any notice returned as undeliverable if the notice
was given by electronic transmission.
Section 9.4. Waiver of Notice. Whenever any notice is required to be given under applicable
law, the Certificate of Incorporation, the Stockholders Agreement, or these By-Laws, a written
waiver of such notice, signed before or after the date of such meeting by the person or persons
entitled to said notice, or a waiver by electronic transmission by the person entitled to said notice,
shall be deemed equivalent to such required notice. All such waivers shall be kept with the
books of the Corporation. Attendance at a meeting shall constitute a waiver of notice of such
meeting, except where a person attends for the express purpose of objecting to the transaction of
any business on the ground that the meeting was not lawfully called or convened.
18
Section 9.5. Meeting Attendance via Remote Communication Equipment.
(a) Stockholder Meetings. If authorized by the Board in its sole discretion, and subject to such
guidelines and procedures as the Board may adopt, stockholders and proxyholders not
physically present at a meeting of stockholders may, by means of remote communication:
(i) participate in a meeting of stockholders; and
(ii) be deemed present in person and vote at a meeting of stockholders, whether such meeting is
to be held at a designated place or solely by means of remote communication, provided that
(A) the Corporation shall implement reasonable measures to verify that each person deemed
present and permitted to vote at the meeting by means of remote communication is a stockholder
or proxyholder, (B) the Corporation shall implement reasonable measures to provide such
stockholders and proxyholders a reasonable opportunity to participate in the meeting and to vote
on matters submitted to the stockholders, including an opportunity to read or hear the
proceedings of the meeting substantially concurrently with such proceedings, and (C) if any
stockholder or proxyholder votes or takes other action at the meeting by means of remote
communication, a record of such votes or other action shall be maintained by the Corporation.
(b) Board Meetings. Unless otherwise restricted by applicable law, the Certificate of
Incorporation, or these By-Laws, members of the Board or any committee thereof may participate
in a meeting of the Board or any committee thereof by means of conference telephone or other
communications equipment by means of which all persons participating in the meeting can hear
each other. Such participation in a meeting shall constitute presence in person at the meeting,
except where a person participates in the meeting for the express purpose of objecting to the
transaction of any business on the ground that the meeting was not lawfully called or convened.
Section 9.6. Dividends. The Board may from time to time declare, and the Corporation may pay,
dividends (payable in cash, property or shares of the Corporation’s capital stock) on the
Corporation’s outstanding shares of capital stock, subject to applicable law, the Certificate of
Incorporation and the Stockholders Agreement.
Section 9.7. Reserves. The Board may set apart out of the funds of the Corporation available for
dividends a reserve or reserves for any proper purpose and may abolish any such reserve.
Section 9.8. Contracts and Negotiable Instruments. Except as otherwise provided by
applicable law, the Certificate of Incorporation or these By-Laws, any contract, bond, deed, lease,
mortgage or other instrument may be executed and delivered in the name and on behalf of the
Corporation by such officer or officers or other employee or employees of the Corporation as the
Board may from time to time authorize. Such authority shall be subject to the Stockholders
Agreement and may be general or confined to specific instances as the Board may
determine. The Chairman of the Board, the President or any Vice President may execute and
deliver any
19
contract, bond, deed, lease, mortgage or other instrument in the name and on behalf of the
Corporation. Subject to any restrictions imposed by the Board, the Chairman of the Board,
President or any Vice President may delegate powers to execute and deliver any contract, bond,
deed, lease, mortgage or other instrument in the name and on behalf of the Corporation to other
officers or employees of the Corporation under such person’s supervision and authority, it being
understood, however, that any such delegation of power shall not relieve such officer of
responsibility with respect to the exercise of such delegated power.
Section 9.9. Fiscal Year. The fiscal year of the Corporation shall be fixed by the Board.
Section 9.10. Seal. The Board may adopt a corporate seal which shall be in such form as the
Board determines. The seal may be used by causing it or a facsimile thereof to be impressed,
affixed or otherwise reproduced.
Section 9.11. Books and Records. The books and records of the Corporation may be kept
within or outside the State of Delaware at such place or places as may from time to time be
designated by the Board.
Section 9.12. Resignation. Any director, committee member or officer may resign by giving
notice thereof in writing or by electronic transmission to the Chairman of the Board, the President
or the Secretary. The resignation shall take effect at the time specified therein, or at the time of
receipt of such notice if no time is specified or the specified time is earlier than the time of such
receipt. Unless otherwise specified therein, the acceptance of such resignation shall not be
necessary to make it effective.
Section 9.13. Surety Bonds. Such officers, employees and agents of the Corporation (if any) as
the Chairman of the Board, President or the Board may direct, from time to time, shall be bonded
for the faithful performance of their duties and for the restoration to the Corporation, in case of
their death, resignation, retirement, disqualification or removal from office, of all books, papers,
vouchers, money and other property of whatever kind in their possession or under their control
belonging to the Corporation, in such amounts and by such surety companies as the Chairman of
the Board, President or the Board may determine. The premiums on such bonds shall be paid by
the Corporation and the bonds so furnished shall be in the custody of the Secretary.
Section 9.14. Securities of Other Corporations. Powers of attorney, proxies, waivers of notice
of meeting, consents in writing and other instruments relating to securities owned by the
Corporation may be executed in the name of and on behalf of the Corporation by the Chairman of
the Board, President or any Vice President. Any such officer may, in the name of and on behalf of
the Corporation, take all such action as any such officer may deem advisable to vote in person or
by proxy at any meeting of security holders of any corporation in which the Corporation may own
securities, or to consent in writing, in the name of the Corporation as such holder, to any action by
such corporation, and at any such meeting or with respect to any such consent shall possess and
may exercise any and all rights and power incident to the ownership of such securities and
which, as the owner thereof, the Corporation might have exercised and possessed. The Board
may from time to time confer like powers upon any other person or persons.
20
Section 9.15. Forum for Adjudication of Disputes. Unless the Corporation consents in writing
to the selection of an alternative forum, the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware shall be
the sole and exclusive forum for (i) any derivative action or proceeding brought on behalf of the
Corporation, (ii) any action asserting a claim of breach of a fiduciary duty owed by any director,
officer or other employee of the Corporation to the Corporation or the Corporation’s stockholders,
(iii) any action asserting a claim arising pursuant to any provision of the DGCL, or (iv) any action
asserting a claim governed by the internal affairs doctrine. Any person or entity purchasing or
otherwise acquiring any interest in shares of capital stock of the Corporation shall be deemed to
have notice of and consented to the provisions of this Section 9.15.
Section 9.16. Amendments. The Board shall have the power to adopt, amend, alter or repeal
the By-Laws, subject to the Stockholders Agreement. The By-Laws also may be adopted,
amended, altered or repealed by the stockholders, subject to the Stockholders Agreement.
*        *        *         *        *
21