
6-K 1 dp68050_6k.htm FORM 6-K
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 6-K
REPORT OF FOREIGN PRIVATE ISSUER PURSUANT TO RULE 13a-16 OR 15d-16 UNDER
THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the month of August 2016
Commission File Number: 001-36298
GeoPark Limited
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Nuestra Señora de los Ángeles 179
Las Condes, Santiago, Chile
(Address of principal executive office)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant files or will file annual reports under cover of
Form 20-F or Form 40-F:
X
Form 20-F
X
Form 40-F
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper as permitted by
Regulation S-T Rule 101(b)(1):
Yes NoX
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper as permitted by
Regulation S-T Rule 101(b)(7):
Yes NoX
GEOPARK LIMITED
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ITEM
Press Release dated August 22, 2016 titled “GeoPark announces successful new appraisal
drilling and field extension results in the Jacana oil field in Colombia”
1.
Item 1
FOR IMMEDIATE DISTRIBUTION
GEOPARK ANNOUNCES SUCCESSFUL NEW APPRAISAL DRILLING
AND FIELD EXTENSION RESULTS IN THE JACANA OIL FIELD IN COLOMBIA
Santiago, Chile – August 22, 2016 - GeoPark Limited (“GeoPark” or the “Company”) (NYSE:
“GPRK”), a leading independent Latin American oil and gas explorer, operator and consolidator
with operations and growth platforms in Colombia, Chile, Brazil, Argentina, and Peru1, today
announced the successful testing of the Jacana 5 appraisal well in the Jacana oil field in the
Llanos 34 Block (GeoPark operated with a 45% working interest) in Colombia.
GeoPark drilled and completed the Jacana 5 appraisal well to a total depth of 11,467 feet. A test
conducted with an electric submersible pump in the Guadalupe formation resulted in a
production rate of approximately 2,500 barrels of oil per day of 15.5 degrees API, with less than
1% water cut, through a choke of 41/64 mm and wellhead pressure of 90 pounds per square inch.
Additional production history is required to determine stabilized flow rates of the well. Surface
facilities are in place and the well is already in production.
The Jacana 5 well followed the recent successful Jacana 4 and Jacana 3 wells which had
expanded the size of the Jacana field by extending the north-western limit of the field. The
Jacana 5 well was drilled 780 meters north of the Jacana 3 appraisal well further down dip to a
bottom-hole location below the previous lowest-known oil. It encountered oil in the Guadalupe
formation and did not encounter the oil-water contact. With these results, the successful test of
the Jacana 5 well further extends the limits of the field. GeoPark expects to continue exploring
and appraising the Tigana/Jacana oil trend to determine the full extent of the oil accumulation.
Once the testing of the Jacana 5 well is completed, the drilling rig will move north-east along the
trend to the Tigana field, followed by other locations, to continue GeoPark’s program of five more
wells in the Llanos 34 Block before the end of the year.
James F. Park, Chief Executive Officer of GeoPark, said: “Congratulations to our team for the
strong test results from the Jacana 5 well - and another important development in the expanding
Llanos 34 Block success story. Although test rates are preliminary, it highlights the reserve
potential of the Jacana field - where further appraisal and development drilling is required to
delineate and understand the full extent of this productive field.”
For further information please contact:
INVESTORS:
 
Pablo Ducci – Director Capital Markets pducci@geo-park.com
Santiago, Chile
T: +562 2242 9600 
 
 
Dolores Santamarina – Investor Manager
Buenos Aires, Argentina
dsantamarina@geo-park.com
T: +5411 4312 9400
1 Transaction executed with Petroperu on October 1, 2014 with final closing subject to Peru
Government approval.
MEDIA:
 
Jared Levy – Sard Verbinnen & Co
New York, USA
T: +1 (212) 687-8080
 
Kelsey Markovich – Sard Verbinnen & Co
New York, USA
T: +1 (212) 687-8080
jlevy@sardverb.com
kmarkovich@sardverb.com
GeoPark can be visited online at www.geo-park.com
NOTICE
Additional information about GeoPark can be found in the “Investor Support” section on the
website at www.geo-park.com.
Rounding amounts and percentages: Certain amounts and percentages included in this press
release have been rounded for ease of presentation. Percentage figures included in this press
release have not in all cases been calculated on the basis of such rounded figures, but on the
basis of such amounts prior to rounding. For this reason, certain percentage amounts in this
press release may vary from those obtained by performing the same calculations using the
figures in the financial statements. In addition, certain other amounts that appear in this press
release may not sum due to rounding.
CAUTIONARY STATEMENTS RELEVANT TO FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION
This press release contains statements that constitute forward-looking statements. Many of the
forward looking statements contained in this press release can be identified by the use of
forward-looking words such as ‘‘anticipate,’’ ‘‘believe,’’ ‘‘could,’’ ‘‘expect,’’ ‘‘should,’’ ‘‘plan,’’
‘‘intend,’’ ‘‘will,’’ ‘‘estimate’’ and ‘‘potential,’’ among others.
Forward-looking statements that appear in a number of places in this press release include, but
are not limited to, statements regarding the intent, belief or current expectations, regarding
various matters, including the drilling plan. Forward-looking statements are based on
management’s beliefs and assumptions, and on information currently available to the
management. Such statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, and actual results may
differ materially from those expressed or implied in the forward-looking statements due to various
factors.
Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are made, and the Company does not
undertake any obligation to update them in light of new information or future developments or to
release publicly any revisions to these statements in order to reflect later events or
circumstances, or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events. For a discussion of the risks
facing the Company which could affect whether these forward-looking statements are realized,
see filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
2
APPENDIX: Jacana Field Structural Map, Top Guadalupe Formation
3
SIGNATURE
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
Date: August 22, 2016
GeoPark Limited
By:/s/ Andrés Ocampo
     Name:Andrés Ocampo
     Title: Chief Financial Officer