
EX-10.1 2 d834976dex101.htm EX-10.1 EX-10.1
Exhibit 10.1
PARSLEY ENERGY OPERATIONS, LLC
AMENDED AND RESTATED EMPLOYMENT, CONFIDENTIALITY, AND NON-
COMPETITION AGREEMENT
For good and valuable consideration set forth herein, this Amended and Restated Employment,
Confidentiality, and Non-Competition Agreement (“Agreement”) is effective as of the date set forth
below (the “Effective Date”), by and between: (i) Parsley Energy Operations, LLC (“Parsley”)
and (ii) Colin Roberts, a natural person (“Employee”) (Employee and Parsley each a “Party” and
collectively “Parties” herein).
PREAMBLE
WHEREAS, Parsley and Employee entered into an offer letter executed on February 19, 2013
and an Employment, Confidentiality, and Non-Competition Agreement on January 24, 2013 (the
“Prior Agreements”);
WHEREAS, the Parties believe it is appropriate to enter into this Agreement, which will cancel
and supersede the Prior Agreements, in order to more precisely outline the terms of employment
between Parsley and Employee; and
WHEREAS, in the course of Employee’s employment, Parsley has provided and will continue to
provide Employee with internal confidential information, commercially obtained information,
research resources, and other valuable and proprietary materials. Further, Employee’s position
will be to develop and obtain such confidential information for the benefit of Parsley and its
affiliates and subsidiaries (the “Parsley Group” and each individual entity, a “member of the
Parsley Group”). This information will include trade secrets, and other confidential information,
including, without limitation, strategic goals and plans of Parsley or another member of the
Parsley Group, employment information, maps, leasing locations, geophysical data, engineering
data and compilations, well logs, well production records, well files and the like.
THEREFORE, the Parties agree as follows:
I. EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT
1.01 Initial Term. This Agreement hereby cancels and supersedes the Prior Agreements. The
term of this Agreement shall begin on the Effective Date and continue for a period of one year
(the “Initial Term”) unless earlier terminated pursuant to this Section 1, provided that, on such
one-year anniversary of the Effective Date, and each annual anniversary thereafter (such date
and each annual anniversary thereof, a “Renewal Date”), the term of this Agreement shall be
deemed to be automatically extended, upon the same terms and conditions, for successive
periods of one year, unless either of the Parties provides written notice of its intention not to
extend the term of the Agreement at least 60 days prior to the applicable Renewal Date. The
Initial Term and all periods beyond the Initial Term while this Agreement remains in effect shall
collectively be referred to herein as the “Term.”
1.02 Base Salary. During the Term, Parsley will pay Employee a base salary of at least
$300,000 per year, in periodic installments in accordance with Parsley’s customary payroll
practices as may exist from time to time, but no less frequently than monthly. During the Term,
Parsley may not decrease Employee’s salary below the base salary enumerated in this
Section 1.02, but may, in Parsley’s sole discretion, increase Employee’s salary as it sees fit from
time to time. Employee’s annual base salary, as in effect from time to time, is hereinafter referred
to as Employee’s “Base Salary.”
1.03 Annual Bonus; Relocation.
(i) Annual Bonus. Employee shall be eligible to earn an annual bonus (the “Annual Bonus”).
However, the decision to provide any Annual Bonus and the amount and terms of any Annual
Bonus shall be in the sole and absolute discretion of the Compensation Committee (the
“Compensation Committee”) of the Board of Directors of Parsley (the “Board”). For the avoidance
of doubt, Employee shall not be entitled to any Annual Bonus if Employee is not employed by
Parsley on the date any such Annual Bonus is paid.
(ii) Relocation Package and Repayment Agreement. In connection with Employee’s relocation to
Austin, Texas, Parsley has (x) paid Employee a one-time lump sum relocation stipend equal to
$50,000 after taxes and (y) reimbursed and/or advanced certain moving and relocation expenses
consistent with Parsley’s relocation policies ((x) and (y) together, the “Relocation Payments”). In
the event Employee’s employment is terminated by Parsley for Cause or by Employee without
Good Reason (i) within the first 12 months following Employee’s relocation to Austin then
Employee must repay 100% of the Relocation Payments and (ii) within the 13 to 24 months
following Employee’s relocation to Austin then Employee must repay 50% of the Relocation
Payments. In each case, the repayment must occur within sixty (60) days following Employee’s
date of termination. Finally, Employee executed an Employee Relocation Expense Repayment
Agreement on February 11, 2014 (the “Repayment Agreement”). The Repayment Agreement is
hereby canceled and superseded in all respects by this Agreement.
1.04 Benefits. At all times during Employee’s employment with Parsley, Employee will be
entitled to all other benefits and conditions of employment generally available to employees of
Parsley of the same level and responsibility. Furthermore, Parsley shall pay all costs (including
all reasonable costs associated with travel and lodging) for Employee to obtain a bi-annual
physical examination at the Cooper Clinic in Dallas, Texas.
1.05 Duties. During Employee’s employment, Employee agrees to serve as Vice President and
General Counsel and in such other position(s) as Employee’s supervisor and Employee shall
mutually agree. Employee will have the duties that are normally required of an employee of
Employee’s same level and responsibility in the exploration and production business and agrees
to perform diligently and to the best of Employee’s abilities the duties and services appertaining
to such position(s), as well as such additional duties and services which may be designated by
Parsley or other members of the Parsley Group, at Parsley’s discretion, from time to time.
Employee will also, at the reasonable discretion and request of Parsley, advise and assist in
other ways to further the business of the Parsley Group, as may be requested. Initially, Employee
shall report to and be subject to the supervision and direction of Parsley’s Chief Executive
Officer.
1.06 Place of Work. Employee shall perform Employee’s services at an office, space for which
will be furnished by Parsley at Parsley’s principal office in Austin, Texas, or such other location to
which Parsley relocates its principal office. If Employee is required to travel, Parsley agrees to
reimburse Employee in accordance with Parsley’s expense reimbursement policy in effect from
time to time.
1.07 No Privacy on Electronic Systems. Employee agrees and understands that the computer
and email services provided by the Parsley Group are for the purpose of conducting work for the
Parsley Group alone. Employee agrees and stipulates that Employee shall have no expectation
of privacy with regard to emails or computer files on, or sent to or from, the computers or servers
of the Parsley Group or otherwise made available to Employee through Employee’s employment
with Parsley.
1.08 Employee Resources. Parsley agrees to pay for memberships, seminars, professional
meetings and/or professional publications needed for the continuing development of prospects
and education of Employee, but only as the same are pre-approved by Parsley in Parsley’s sole
and absolute discretion.
1.09 Full-Time Employee. While employed by Parsley, Employee agrees to devote Employee’s
entire and full-time productive ability and attention to the business of Parsley, provided that
Employee may engage in passive personal investment and charitable activities that do not
Compete (as defined below) with the business and affairs of Parsley or interfere with Employee’s
performance of Employee’s duties hereunder. Employee warrants and agrees to not, directly or
indirectly, render any services of a business, commercial, or professional nature to any other
person or organization, including self-employment, without the prior written consent of Parsley.
Employee warrants and agrees that Employee will not render any services as either an
employee or independent consultant to any person or entity that is in competition with Parsley or,
while employed, prepare or establish a business that would result in a breach of Employee’s
non-compete restrictions set forth in Section 3.03.
2
1.10 Fiduciary Duties of Employee. At all times while an employee of Parsley, Employee
warrants and agrees that Employee will perform and discharge the duties of Employee’s position
fully and faithfully and to the best of Employee’s abilities. Employee agrees Employee shall owe
Parsley, and hereby voluntarily assumes, a duty of loyalty and utmost good faith; a duty of
candor; a duty to refrain from any self-dealing; a duty to act with integrity of the strictest kind; a
duty of fair and honest dealing; a duty of full disclosure, that is, a duty not to conceal matters that
might influence Employee’s actions to Parsley’s prejudice; and any other and further duties
imposed by law on employees to their employers, and specifically including under this
Agreement a covenant not to solicit fellow Parsley employees for future employment, as set forth
in Section 3.04.
1.11 Reporting Requirement. During the course of Employee’s employment with Parsley,
Employee agrees that, if Employee learns or even suspects that any fellow employee is, or may
be, breaching Employee’s fiduciary duties to Parsley, Employee agrees to alert Parsley promptly.
Employee understands that this is a broad and general obligation in light of the difficulty to
anticipate all possible circumstances. If Employee is in doubt, Employee agrees to resolve
Employee’s doubts by reporting to Parsley the information that has come to Employee’s
attention.
1.12 Corporate Opportunities. During Employee’s employment with Parsley, in the event that
Employee, in Employee’s individual capacity, shall be presented with, or made aware of, any
commercial proposal, prospect, solicitation, deal, transaction or opportunity relating to the oil and
gas business (“New Business Opportunity”), Employee shall immediately notify and present the
terms and conditions of such New Business Opportunity to Employee’s superiors at Parsley;
whether or not any member of the Parsley Group elects to take advantage of such New Business
Opportunity, Employee shall not present such New Business Opportunity to any person or entity
other than the Parsley Group.
1.13 Termination by Non-Renewal, by Parsley for Cause or by Employee without Good
Reason. Employee’s employment hereunder may be terminated by (x) the provision of notice by
either of the Parties that they do not wish to renew the Term on the next Renewal Date in
accordance with Section 1.01 and shall terminate the employment relationship between the
Parties on such date, (y) by Parsley for Cause, or (z) by Employee without Good Reason. If
Employee’s employment is terminated for any of the reasons enumerated in this Section 1.13
then Employee shall be entitled to receive: (i) any accrued but unpaid Base Salary, which shall
be paid, unless otherwise required by law, on the pay date immediately following the date of
Employee’s termination of employment in accordance with Parsley’s customary payroll
procedures; (ii) reimbursement for unreimbursed business expenses properly incurred by
Employee, which shall be subject to and paid in accordance with Parsley’s expense
reimbursement policy in effect from time to time; and (iii) such employee benefits (including
equity compensation), if any, as to which Employee may be entitled under Parsley’s employee
benefit plans as of the date of Employee’s termination of employment; provided that, in no event
shall Employee be entitled to any payments in the nature of severance payments except as
specifically provided herein (items (i) through (iii), the “Accrued Obligations”). If Employee’s
employment is terminated for any of the reasons enumerated in this Section 1.13 then Parsley
will not be obligated to make any payments other than the Accrued Obligations under this
Agreement and, except as otherwise provided in the award agreement under which the award
was granted, Employee will forfeit all unvested outstanding equity awards held by Employee as
of the date of Employee’s termination of employment.
“Cause” shall mean: (i) violation of Parsley’s substance abuse policy; (ii) refusal or inability (other
than by reason of death or Disability) to perform the duties assigned to Employee; (iii) acts or
omissions evidencing a violation of Employee’s duties of loyalty and good faith; candor; fair and
honest dealing; integrity; or full disclosure to Parsley, as well as any acts or omissions which
constitute self-dealing; (iv) willful disobedience of lawful orders, policies, regulations, or
directives issued to Employee by Parsley, including policies related to sexual harassment,
discrimination, computer use or the like; (v) conviction or commission of a felony, a crime of moral
turpitude, or a crime that could reasonably be expected to impair the ability of Employee to
perform Employee’s job duties; (vi) breach of any part of this Agreement by Employee;
(vii) revocation or suspension of any necessary license or certification; (viii) generation of
materially incorrect financial, geological, seismic or engineering projections, compilations or
reports; or (ix) a false statement by Employee to obtain this position, in each case as determined
by the Board in good faith and in its sole and absolute discretion. For purposes of clarity, “Cause”
shall not mean termination of Employee’s employment for death or Disability, which shall be
governed by Section 1.15.
3
1.14 Termination by Employee for Good Reason or Termination by Parsley without Cause.
Employee’s employment hereunder may be terminated by Employee for Good Reason or by
Parsley without Cause. If Employee’s employment is terminated by Employee for Good Reason
or by Parsley without Cause then Employee shall be entitled to receive (i) the Accrued
Obligations, (ii) provided that Employee has fulfilled the Severance Conditions (as defined
below), a cash payment equal to 1.25 times the sum of (A) Employee’s Base Salary and (B) the
average of the three most recent Annual Bonuses actually paid in the three-year period
preceding the date of Employee’s termination (or the period of Employee’s employment, if
shorter), which amount shall be paid in a lump-sum on the first business day following the
Release Consideration Period (as defined below), (iii) during the portion, if any, of the 18-month
period commencing on the date of such termination of employment that Employee is eligible to
elect and elects to continue coverage for himself and his eligible dependents under any of the
Parsley Group’s group health plans, as applicable, under the Consolidated Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act of 1985, as amended (“COBRA”), Parsley shall promptly reimburse Employee
on a monthly basis for the difference between the amount Employee pays to effect and continue
such coverage and the employee contribution amount that vice presidents of the Parsley Group
pay for the same or similar coverage under such group health plans at that time, and
(iv) outplacement services provided by a company of Parsley’s choosing for up to 6 months
following the date of Employee’s termination or such time as Employee obtains reasonably
comparable employment, whichever occurs earlier. Except as otherwise provided in the award
agreement under which the award was granted, all unvested outstanding equity awards held by
Employee upon a termination of employment without Cause or by Employee for Good Reason
covered by this Section 1.14 shall be forfeited for no consideration.
“Good Reason” shall mean (i) a material diminution in Employee’s base compensation, (ii) a
material diminution in Employee’s authority, duties, or responsibilities, or (iii) any other action or
inaction that constitutes a material breach by Parsley of the Agreement, in each case, without
Employee’s consent. Employee cannot terminate Employee’s employment for Good Reason
unless Employee has provided written notice to Parsley of the existence of the circumstances
providing grounds for termination for Good Reason within sixty (60) days of the initial existence of
such grounds and Parsley has had at least thirty (30) days from the date on which such notice is
provided to cure such circumstances. If Employee does not terminate Employee’s employment
for Good Reason within 120 days after the first occurrence of the applicable grounds, then
Employee will be deemed to have waived Employee’s right to terminate for Good Reason with
respect to such grounds.
1.15 Death or Disability. Employee’s employment shall terminate automatically on the date of
Employee’s death or immediately upon Parsley’s sending Employee a notice of termination for
“Disability,” which shall mean Employee’s inability to perform the essential functions of
Employee’s position, with reasonable accommodation, due to an illness or physical or mental
impairment or other incapacity that continues, or can reasonably be expected to continue, for a
period in excess of ninety (90) days (whether or not consecutive) during any period of three
hundred sixty-five (365) consecutive days. Upon termination of Employee’s employment for
death or Disability pursuant to this Section 1.15, Parsley’s sole obligations to Employee shall be
to pay (i) the Accrued Obligations and (ii) provided that Employee or Employee’s estate, as
applicable, has fulfilled the Severance Conditions, beginning on the first business day following
the Release Consideration Period (the “Initial Payment Date”), Employee’s Base Salary for the
remainder of the calendar year in which death or Disability occurred, which, following the Initial
Payment Date, shall be paid as and when such amounts would have been due had Employee’s
employment continued (the “Death or Disability Payment”). Any installments of the Death or
Disability Payment that, in accordance with customary payroll practices, would have typically
been made during the Release Consideration Period shall accumulate and shall then be paid on
the Initial Payment Date.
1.16 Termination by Parsley without Cause or by Employee for Good Reason following a
Change of Control. If within the 12 months following a Change of Control Employee’s
employment is terminated by Employee for Good Reason or by Parsley without Cause then
Employee shall be entitled to receive (i) the Accrued Obligations, (ii) provided that Employee has
fulfilled the Severance Conditions, a cash payment equal to two (2) times the sum of
(A) Employee’s Base Salary and (B) the average of the three most recent Annual Bonuses
actually paid in the three-year period preceding the date of Employee’s termination (or the period
of Employee’s employment, if shorter), which amount shall be paid in a lump-sum on the first
business day following the Release Consideration Period, (iii) during the portion, if any, of the
18-month period commencing on the date of such termination of employment that Employee is
eligible to elect and elects to continue coverage for himself and his eligible dependents under
any of the Parsley Group’s group health plans, as applicable, under COBRA, Parsley shall
promptly reimburse Employee on a monthly basis for the difference between the amount
Employee pays to effect
4
and continue such coverage and the employee contribution amount that vice presidents of the
Parsley Group pay for the same or similar coverage under such group health plans at that time,
and (iv) outplacement services provided by a company of Parsley’s choosing for up to 6 months
following the date of Employee’s termination or such time as Employee obtains reasonably
comparable employment, whichever occurs earlier. Except as otherwise provided in the award
agreement under which the award was granted, all unvested outstanding equity awards held by
Employee upon a termination of employment without Cause or by Employee for Good Reason
following a Change of Control and covered under this Section 1.16 shall be accelerated in full
upon Employee’s termination of employment.
“Change of Control” means the occurrence of any of the following events:
(i) A “change in the ownership of the Company” which shall occur on the date that any one
person, or more than one person acting as a group, acquires ownership of stock in the Company
that, together with stock held by such person or group, constitutes more than 50% of the total fair
market value or total voting power of the stock of the Company; however, if any one person or
more than one person acting as a group, is considered to own more than 50% of the total fair
market value or total voting power of the stock of the Company, the acquisition of additional stock
by the same person or persons will not be considered a “change in the ownership of the
Company” (or to cause a “change in the effective control of the Company” within the meaning of
paragraph (ii) below) and an increase of the effective percentage of stock owned by any one
person, or persons acting as a group, as a result of a transaction in which the Company acquires
its stock in exchange for property will be treated as an acquisition of stock for purposes of this
paragraph; provided, further, however, that for purposes of this Section 1.16, any acquisition by
any employee benefit plan (or related trust) sponsored or maintained by the Company or any
entity controlled by the Company will not constitute a Change of Control. This paragraph
(i) applies only when there is a transfer of the stock of the Company (or issuance of stock) and
stock in the Company remains outstanding after the transaction.
(ii) A “change in the effective control of the Company” which shall occur on the date that either
(A) any one person, or more than one person acting as a group, acquires (or has acquired during
the twelve month period ending on the date of the most recent acquisition by such person or
persons) ownership of stock of the Company possessing 35% or more of the total voting power of
the stock of the Company, except for any acquisition by any employee benefit plan (or related
trust) sponsored or maintained by the Company or any entity controlled by the Company; or (B) a
majority of the members of the Board are replaced during any twelve-month period by directors
whose appointment or election is not endorsed by a majority of the members of the Board prior to
the date of the appointment or election. For purposes of a “change in the effective control of the
Company,” if any one person, or more than one person acting as a group, is considered to
effectively control the Company within the meaning of this Section 1.16, the acquisition of
additional control of the Company by the same person or persons is not considered a “change in
the effective control of the Company,” or to cause a “change in the ownership of the Company”
within the meaning of paragraph (i) above.
(iii) A “change in the ownership of a substantial portion of the Company’s assets” which shall
occur on the date that any one person, or more than one person acting as a group, acquires (or
has acquired during the twelve month period ending on the date of the most recent acquisition by
such person or persons) assets of the Company that have a total gross fair market value equal to
or more than 40% of the total gross fair market value of all the assets of the Company
immediately prior to such acquisition or acquisitions. For this purpose, gross fair market value
means the value of the assets of the Company, or the value of the assets being disposed of,
determined without regard to any liabilities associated with such assets. Any transfer of assets to
an entity that is controlled by the shareholders of the Company immediately after the transfer, as
provided in guidance issued pursuant to Section 409A (as defined below), shall not constitute a
Change of Control.
For purposes of the definition of Change of Control, the provisions of section 318(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code (the “Code”) regarding the constructive ownership of stock will apply to
determine stock ownership; provided, that, stock underlying unvested options (including options
exercisable for stock that is not substantially vested) will not be treated as owned by the
individual who holds the option. In addition, for purposes of this Section 1.16, “Company”
includes (x) Parsley, (y) the entity for whom Employee performs services, and (z) an entity that is
a stockholder owning more than 50% of the total fair market value and total voting power (a
“Majority Shareholder”) of Parsley or the entity identified in (y) above, or any entity in a chain of
entities in which each entity is a Majority Shareholder of another entity in the chain, ending in
Parsley or the entity identified in (y) above.
5
1.17 Release and Compliance with this Agreement. The obligation of the Parsley Group to
pay any portion of the amounts due pursuant to Sections 1.14, 1.15, and 1.16, with the exception
of the Accrued Obligations, shall be expressly conditioned on (i) Employee’s execution (and, if
applicable, non-revocation) of a full general release, releasing all claims, known or unknown, that
Employee may have against the Parsley Group, including those arising out of or in any way
related to Employee’s employment or termination of employment with the Parsley Group no later
than the 60th day following the date of Employee’s termination of employment (such period, the
“Release Consideration Period”) and (ii) continued compliance with the requirements of Sections
II and III (the “Severance Conditions”). If Employee (x) does not execute the release described
above during the Release Consideration Period, or (y) breaches Section II or III of this
Agreement, (i) Parsley shall immediately cease any payments owed pursuant to Sections 1.14,
1.15, or 1.16 (other than the Accrued Obligations) but not yet paid and shall have no obligation to
make any further payments to Employee pursuant to Sections 1.14, 1.15, or 1.16 and
(ii) Employee shall promptly pay to Parsley (or its successor) an amount equal to any payments
Employee has received pursuant to Sections 1.14, 1.15, or 1.16 (other than the Accrued
Obligations) as of the time of Employee’s breach or refusal to execute the general release (such
repayment outlined in (ii) of this sentence, the “Recoupment Payment”).
1.18 Excise Taxes. If the Compensation Committee determines, in its sole discretion, that
Section 280G of the Code applies to any compensation payable to Employee, then the
provisions of this Section 1.18 shall apply. If any payments or benefits to which Employee is
entitled from the Parsley Group, any successor to Parsley or another member of the Parsley
Group, or any trusts established by any of the foregoing by reason of, or in connection with, any
transaction that occurs after the Effective Date (collectively, the “Payments,” which shall include,
without limitation, the vesting of any equity awards or other non-cash benefit or property) are,
alone or in the aggregate, more likely than not, if paid or delivered to Employee, to be subject to
the tax imposed by Section 4999 of the Code or any successor provisions to that section, then
the Payments (consistent with the requirements of Section 409A (as defined below) and
beginning with any Payment to be paid in cash hereunder), shall be either (a) reduced (but not
below zero) so that the present value of such total Payments received by Employee will be one
dollar ($1.00) less than three times Employee’s “base amount” (as defined in Section 280G(b)(3)
of the Code) and so that no portion of such Payments received by Employee shall be subject to
the excise tax imposed by Section 4999 of the Code, or (b) paid in full, whichever of (a) or
(b) produces the better net after tax position to Employee (taking into account any applicable
excise tax under Section 4999 of the Code and any other applicable taxes). The determination as
to whether any Payments are more likely than not to be subject to taxes under Section 4999 of
the Code and as to whether reduction or payment in full of the amount of the Payments provided
hereunder results in the better net after tax position to Employee shall be made by the Board and
Employee in good faith.
1.19 Resignation. Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by Parsley and Employee prior to the
termination of Employee’s employment, any termination of Employee’s employment shall
constitute, to the extent applicable: (i) an automatic resignation of Employee as an officer of each
member of the Parsley Group and (ii) an automatic resignation of Employee from the Board and
the board of directors or board of managers of each member of the Parsley Group and from the
board of directors or managers or similar governing body of any corporation, limited liability entity
or other entity in which Parsley or another member of the Parsley Group holds an equity interest
and with respect to which board or similar governing body Employee serves as a designee or
other representative for a member of the Parsley Group.
II. CONFIDENTIALITY AND NON-DISCLOSURE AGREEMENT
2.01 Return of Property. Employee hereby acknowledges and agrees that all Personal Property
and equipment furnished to Employee in the course of, or incident to, Employee’s employment by
the Parsley Group belongs to the Parsley Group and shall be promptly returned to Parsley upon
termination of employment or upon demand by the Parsley Group. “Personal Property” includes,
without limitation, all automobiles, computers, phones, equipment, well reports, engineering data,
credit cards, books, manuals, records, reports, notes, contracts, lists, blueprints, and other
documents, or materials, or copies thereof (including computer files and other electronically
stored information), and all other proprietary information relating to the business of any member
of the Parsley Group. Following termination, Employee will not retain any written, computer files,
or other tangible or intangible material containing any proprietary information, Confidential
Information (as defined below) or trade secrets of the Parsley Group or any of its agents,
employees, and representatives.
6
2.02 Developed Intellectual Property. Employee also acknowledges and agrees that in
connection with the performance of Employee’s duties, Employee may author, create, or develop
Confidential Information, trade secrets, and other intellectual property, both alone or in
conjunction with others. With respect to any and all trade secrets, inventions (whether or not
patentable), discoveries, conceptions, ideas, copyrights (including copyrights in software), know-
how, other intellectual property or proprietary rights and/or improvements to any of the same
authored, created, conceived, developed, or reduced to practice by Employee or Parsley
(whether alone or in combination with others) (a) during Employee’s working hours, or (b) at
Parsley’s, expense, or (c) using any of Parsley’s, materials or facilities, or (d) that relates to the
business of Parsley or to the research or development of Parsley (collectively, “Developed
Intellectual Property”), Employee agrees that the same are, and shall be, the exclusive property
of the Parsley Group. Employee further acknowledges that all original works of authorship made
by Employee (solely or jointly with others) that constitute Developed Intellectual Property are
“works made for hire,” as that term is defined in the United States Copyright Act. Without limiting
the immediately preceding sentence, Employee agrees to and does hereby assign to Parsley, or
its nominee, Employee’s entire right, title, and interest in and to all Developed Intellectual
Property. For clarity, such assignment includes all registrations or applications for registration of
such Developed Intellectual Property, including any U.S. or international applications for patents
or copyright registrations filed during or after the Term of this Agreement. Employee shall
promptly disclose all such works made for hire and other Developed Intellectual Property to
Parsley and, both during and after the Term of this Agreement, agrees to execute, at no cost to
Parsley, any and all documents that Parsley reasonably deems necessary to obtain, maintain,
protect and/or enforce its worldwide right to, title interest in, and ownership of such works made
for hire and Developed Intellectual Property.
2.03 Confidential Information. During Employee’s employment, Parsley also agrees to provide,
and Employee will develop as part of Employee’s duties, various trade secrets and other
confidential information that are, or will be, owned by Parsley, and that Parsley expressly agrees
to assist Employee in developing. Such trade secrets or confidential information includes (but is
not limited to) internal confidential information previously developed or compiled by Parsley,
commercially obtained information at substantial cost, research resources and other valuable
and proprietary materials, and more specifically (but without limitation): financial information and
company planning, strategic goals and plans of Parsley or another member of the Parsley Group,
geophysical data, engineering data and compilations, well logs, well production records, well
files, seismic and other geophysical data and interpretation, engineering data and analysis,
maps, samples, cores, cuttings, well logs, well production records, well files, and the like
(“Confidential Information”). Employee stipulates and acknowledges: (i) that the Confidential
Information is not generally known outside of Parsley’s business or by employees and others
involved in the same business as Parsley; (ii) that Parsley takes significant measures to guard
the secrecy of this information; (iii) that the information is extremely valuable to Parsley and
would be valuable to Parsley’s competitors; (iv) that Parsley has expended material amounts of
money and effort in developing this Confidential Information; and (v) that this Confidential
Information could not be easily or properly acquired by others.
2.04 Confidentiality Obligation. Employee agrees to not disclose, directly or indirectly, any of
the Confidential Information of Parsley, nor use it in any way, directly or indirectly, except in
furtherance of Employee’s duties as an employee under this Agreement. Employee specifically
agrees that Employee will not use any Confidential Information for Employee’s own benefit, the
benefit of any other person, including competitors of Parsley, or for the disadvantage of Parsley.
Employee will take care to guard the security of the Confidential Information at all times. In this
regard, Employee agrees that Employee will not disclose any of this Confidential Information to
any person that does not need to know and have the right to know the information, including
other Parsley employees, and that Employee will take care in guarding electronic data.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, to the extent that Employee shall be required, by law or process of
law, to disclose Confidential Information, Employee shall be entitled to do so only to the extent so
required, subject to giving prompt, advance notice of such requirement in writing to the General
Counsel of Parsley so that Parsley may pursue a protective order or other remedy, and Employee
acknowledges and agrees to cooperate reasonably with Parsley’s efforts to obtain a
confidentiality order or similar protection.
2.05 Duties Upon Termination. Employee agrees that at such time as Employee’s services are
terminated or upon demand by the Parsley Group, for whatever reason, Employee shall promptly
return: (i) all Confidential Information (however stored) and (ii) equipment in Employee’s
possession belonging to Parsley.
2.06 These confidentiality duties survive the termination of Employee’s employment into
perpetuity.
7
III. NON-COMPETITION AGREEMENT AND NON-SOLICITATION
3.01 Ancillary. The non-competition obligations of Employee and the non-solicitation provisions
in this Section III are ancillary to, and are supported by (and in support of), Parsley’s and
Employee’s respective obligations set forth in this Agreement.
3.02 Definitions. Terms given special meaning in this Section III are:
“Compete” means: (i) to lease, purchase, or otherwise obtain a mineral estate (in whole or in
part), including purchasing or obtaining a royalty interest, overriding royalty interest, working
interest, or the like or (ii) to provide legal services, or serve in a supervisory role of persons
performing such services, to any corporate entity operating as an exploration and production
business other than members of the Parsley Group.
“Restricted Period” means during such time as Employee is employed with Parsley and the one-
year period commencing on the date Employee ceases employment with Parsley for any reason
and ending on the first anniversary thereof; provided, however, that if Parsley terminates
Employee’s employment other than for Cause, the Restricted Period shall end six months after
the date of termination of Employee’s employment with Parsley.
“Territory” means all land within a three mile radius from the farthest outside edge of each oil or
gas lease that is or was under lease, letter agreement, or operated by a member of the Parsley
Group as of the effective date of this Agreement.
3.03 Non-Compete Obligation. In return for the consideration given in this Agreement and in
support of the promises therein, Employee agrees that Employee will not Compete during the
Restricted Period in the Territory.
3.04 Non-Solicitation. In return for the consideration given in this Agreement and in support of
the promises therein, Employee agrees that Employee will not directly or indirectly solicit or hire
any employee of the Parsley Group to be an employee or co-venturer in another matter that
Competes or intends to Compete with Parsley during the Restricted Period in the Territory.
3.05 Non-Disparagement. Employee shall not, during the Term or any time thereafter, make any
untrue, misleading, or defamatory statements concerning the Parsley Parties. After termination of
Employee’s employment with the Parsley Group for any reason, Parsley shall make
commercially reasonable efforts to ensure that its managers, directors and officers do not make
any untrue, misleading, or defamatory statements concerning Employee. Employee will not, and
Parsley shall make commercially reasonable efforts to ensure that its managers, directors and
officers do not, directly or indirectly make, repeat or publish any false, disparaging, negative,
unflattering, accusatory, or derogatory remarks or references, whether oral or in writing,
concerning the Parsley Parties or Employee, respectively, or otherwise take any action which
might reasonably be expected to cause damage or harm to the Parsley Parties or Employee,
respectively. However, nothing in this Agreement is intended to restrict actions or
communications protected or required by law, such as enforcing rights under this Agreement or
any other agreement, testifying truthfully as a witness, or complying with other legal obligations,
including communicating with or fully cooperating in the investigations of any governmental
agency on matters within their jurisdictions.
3.06 Cooperation. Upon the receipt of reasonable notice from Parsley (including outside
counsel), Employee agrees that while employed by any Parsley and thereafter, Employee shall
provide reasonable assistance to the Parsley Group and their respective representatives in
defense of any claims that may be made against any member of the Parsley Group and shall
assist in the prosecution of any claims that may be made by any member of the Parsley Group, to
the extent that such claims relate to or arise out of Employee’s service to or employment by
Parsley. Employee agrees to inform Parsley promptly if Employee becomes aware of any
lawsuits involving such claims that may be filed or threatened against any member of the Parsley
Group. Employee also agrees to inform Parsley promptly (to the extent legally permitted to do so)
if Employee is asked to assist in any investigation of any member of the Parsley Group (or its
actions), regardless of whether a lawsuit or other proceeding has then been filed against any
member of the Parsley Group with respect to such investigation. Upon presentation of
appropriate
8
documentation, Parsley shall pay or reimburse Employee for all reasonable out-of-pocket
expenses incurred by Employee in complying with this Section 3.06. If at the time of compliance
Employee is no longer an employee, officer or director (or functional equivalent) of any member
of the Parsley Group, Parsley shall provide a reasonable per diem to Employee.
3.07 Stipulation of Reasonable Scope and Term. Employee warrants, represents, and
stipulates that the consideration given in this Agreement was good and valid consideration and
that no bad faith existed in the negotiation of this Agreement. Employee further warrants,
represents, and stipulates the duties imposed and rights granted in this Section III are necessary
to protect legitimate interests of Parsley and the Parsley Group as set forth in this document and,
in particular, that the non-compete obligations set forth in Section 3.03 are fair, appropriate, and
reasonable in their limitations with respect to time, geographic area, and scope of activities and
impose no more restraint than is necessary to protect Parsley’s legitimate business interest, nor
are they oppressive, nor will they unreasonably deprive Employee of the ability to earn a living.
IV. GENERAL
4.01 Enforcement by Injunction. Employee acknowledges that Employee’s violation or
threatened or attempted violation of the covenants contained in Section III of this Agreement will
cause irreparable harm to Parsley and that money damages would not be sufficient remedy for
any breach of those covenants. Employee agrees that Parsley shall be entitled as a matter of
right to specific performance of the covenants in Section III of this Agreement, including entry of
an ex parte temporary restraining order in a state or federal court, preliminary and permanent
injunctive relief against activities in violation of this Agreement, or both, or other appropriate
judicial remedy, writ, or order, in any court of competent jurisdiction, restraining any violation or
further violation of such agreements by Employee or others acting on Employee’s behalf, without
any showing of irreparable harm and without any showing that Parsley does not have an
adequate remedy at law. In furtherance of the intent to allow for immediate injunctive relief in the
event of a breach, or threatened breach, of this Agreement, Employee agrees that Parsley would
be entitled to its attorneys’ fees if successful in seeking injunctive relief and that any temporary
restraining order or temporary/preliminary injunction bond should not be more than $1,000.
Injunction is expressly not the exclusive remedy hereunder.
4.02 Assignment. This Agreement is personal to Employee, and neither this Agreement nor any
rights or obligations hereunder shall be assignable or otherwise transferred by Employee.
Parsley may assign this Agreement without Employee’s consent to any successor (whether by
merger, purchase, or otherwise) to all or substantially all of the equity, assets, or businesses of
Parsley. The rights and obligations of Parsley under this Agreement will inure to the benefit of the
successors and assigns of Parsley.
4.03 Savings Clause. Should any court of competent jurisdiction hold any term, provision,
covenant, or condition of this Agreement (or portion thereof) to be illegal, void, unenforceable, or
otherwise invalid, such term, provision, covenant, or condition (or portion thereof), will be
automatically conformed to the applicable law to give the provision(s) the greatest effectuation
possible of the original intent allowed by law and equity, and this Agreement will otherwise
continue in full force and effect.
4.04 Entire Agreement. This Agreement represents the entire agreement of the Parties
regarding the employment of Employee and cancels and supersedes all prior written or oral
agreements, including, without limitation, the Prior Agreements, the Repayment Agreement, and
any other prior non-disclosure, confidentiality, or employment agreements. The terms are
contractual and not mere recitals. In entering into this Agreement, each Party stipulates, warrants,
and represents that it or Employee has relied on the advice of its or Employee’s own attorneys
and financial advisors concerning the legal and tax consequences of the Agreement; that its or
Employee’s own attorneys have completely read and explained to it or Employee the terms of the
Agreement; that each is a sophisticated business person with experience negotiating these types
of transactions; that no special relationship of influence or trust existed among the Parties prior to
the entry into this Agreement that caused it or Employee to enter this Agreement; that each fully
understands and voluntarily accepts the terms of the Agreement without any duress or undue
persuasion put upon it or Employee by the other or any other person, specifically including, but
not limited to, counsel or accountants for either Party; and that no representations, promises,
or statements outside the four corners of this Agreement by the opposite Party, nor any
agent, employee, attorney, accountant, or other representative of the opposite Party has
influenced it or Employee into entering this Agreement. Each Party
9
has had access to counsel and an opportunity to read, review, and revise this Agreement. This
Agreement is the result of the joint efforts of the Parties and each of the party’s respective
counsel. Therefore, the Parties agree that this Agreement, and any given provision of it, should
not be construed against either Party. Each of the Parties hereto recognize and stipulate that this
provision is binding as a matter of law and fact and shall preclude said Party from asserting that
Employee was wrongfully induced to enter into this Agreement by any representation, promise,
or agreement, or statement of a past or existing fact, which is not found within the four corners of
this Agreement.
4.05 Key Person Insurance. Parsley and Employee acknowledge that Employee is a “key
person” and as such Parsley may take out life insurance on such Employee for the benefit of
Parsley or its affiliates. Employee agrees to cooperate with Parsley and submit to the necessary
medical examinations and tests reasonably required to obtain such insurance, but insurability is
not a condition of employment or continuation of employment.
4.06 No Waiver. A waiver of any breach of any of the terms of this Agreement shall be effective
only if in writing and signed by the Party against whom such waiver or breach is claimed. No
waiver of any breach shall be deemed a waiver of any other subsequent breach.
4.07 Further Assurances. Each Party shall each execute such assignments, endorsements and
other instruments and documents and shall give such further assurance as shall be reasonably
necessary to perform its obligations under this Agreement.
4.08 Third Party Beneficiaries. Each member of the Parsley Group, together with any additional
or future affiliates thereof, are expressly third party beneficiaries of Employee’s representations
herein and can enforce this Agreement as if a party hereto.
4.09 Clawback. Notwithstanding any other provisions in this Agreement to the contrary, any
incentive-based compensation, or any other compensation, paid to Employee pursuant to this
Agreement or any other agreement or arrangement with Parsley or another member of the
Parsley Group which is subject to recovery under any law, government regulation or stock
exchange listing requirement, will be subject to such deductions and clawback as may be
required to be made pursuant to such law, government regulation or stock exchange listing
requirement (or any policy adopted by Parsley or the Parsley Group pursuant to any such law,
government regulation or stock exchange listing requirement).
4.10 Section 409A.
(i) This Agreement is intended to comply with Section 409A of the Code and the applicable
Treasury Regulations issued thereunder (“Section 409A”) or an exemption thereunder and shall
be construed and administered in accordance with Section 409A. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this Agreement, payments provided under this Agreement may only be made upon
an event and in a manner that complies with Section 409A or an applicable exemption. Any
payments under this Agreement that may be excluded from Section 409A either as separation
pay due to an involuntary separation from service or as a short-term deferral shall be excluded
from Section 409A to the maximum extent possible. For purposes of Section 409A, each
installment payment provided under this Agreement shall be treated as a separate payment. Any
payments to be made under this Agreement upon a termination of employment shall only be
made upon a “separation from service” under Section 409A. The amount of expenses eligible for
reimbursement, or in-kind benefits provided, if any, under this Agreement during Employee’s
taxable year shall not affect the expenses eligible for reimbursement or in in-kind benefits to be
provided, in any other taxable year. Further, the reimbursement of an eligible expense will be
made on or before the last day of Employee’s taxable year following the taxable year in which the
expense was incurred and the right to reimbursement or in-kind benefits, if any, is not subject to
liquidation or exchange for another benefit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Parsley Group
makes no representations that the payments and benefits provided under this Agreement comply
with Section 409A and in no event shall the Parsley Group be liable for all or any portion of any
taxes, penalties, interest or other expenses that may be incurred by Employee on account of non-
compliance with Section 409A.
(ii) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, if any payment or benefit provided to
Employee in connection with Employee’s termination of employment is determined to constitute
“nonqualified deferred compensation” within the meaning of Section 409A and Employee is
determined to be a “specified
10
employee” as defined in Section 409A(a)(2)(b)(i), then such payment or benefit shall not be paid
until the first payroll date to occur following the six-month anniversary of the date of Employee’s
termination of employment (the “Specified Employee Payment Date”). The aggregate of any
payments that would otherwise have been paid before the Specified Employee Payment Date
shall be paid to Employee in a lump sum on the Specified Employee Payment Date and
thereafter, any remaining payments shall be paid without delay in accordance with their original
schedule.
4.11 Governing Law; Venue; Waiver of Trial by Jury.
(i) This Agreement and the rights of the Parties hereunder shall be governed by, interpreted, and
enforced in accordance with the internal laws of the State of Texas without giving effect to any
choice of law or conflicts of law rules or provisions thereof.
(ii) Each Party irrevocably agrees that any action or proceeding involving any dispute or matter
arising under or relating to this Agreement may only be brought in the state or federal courts of
the State of Texas in Midland County. In accordance with the foregoing, each Party agrees that
the courts of Midland County will be the exclusive venue for any dispute or matter arising under
or relating to this Agreement, which such jurisdiction, forum, and venue each Party expressly
acknowledges and agrees has a direct, reasonable relation to this Agreement and any
controversy relating to or arising from this Agreement, and the Parties agree not to raise, and
hereby waive, any objection to or defense based upon the jurisdiction or venue of any such court
or forum non conveniens.
(iii) TO THE EXTENT NOT PROHIBITED BY APPLICABLE LAW, EACH PARTY TO THIS
AGREEMENT HEREBY WAIVES, AND COVENANTS THAT IT SHALL NOT ASSERT
(WHETHER AS PLAINTIFF, DEFENDANT OR OTHERWISE), ITS RESPECTIVE RIGHT TO A
JURY TRIAL OF ANY PERMITTED CLAIM OR CAUSE OF ACTION ARISING OUT OF THIS
AGREEMENT, ANY OF THE TRANSACTIONS CONTEMPLATED HEREBY, OR ANY
DEALINGS BETWEEN ANY OF THE PARTIES HERETO RELATING TO THE SUBJECT
MATTER OF THIS AGREEMENT OR ANY OF THE TRANSACTIONS CONTEMPLATED
HEREBY. THE SCOPE OF THIS WAIVER AND COVENANT IS INTENDED TO BE ALL
ENCOMPASSING OF ANY AND ALL DISPUTES THAT MAY BE FILED IN ANY COURT AND
THAT RELATE TO THE SUBJECT MATTER OF THIS AGREEMENT OR ANY OF THE
TRANSACTIONS CONTEMPLATED HEREBY, INCLUDING, CONTRACT CLAIMS, TORT
CLAIMS AND ALL OTHER COMMON LAW AND STATUTORY CLAIMS. THIS WAIVER AND
COVENANT IS IRREVOCABLE AND SHALL APPLY TO ANY SUBSEQUENT
AMENDMENTS, SUPPLEMENTS OR OTHER MODIFICATIONS TO THIS AGREEMENT.
(iv) In the event of any action or proceeding involving any dispute or matter arising under or
relating to this Agreement, the prevailing party in such action or proceeding shall be entitled to
recover from the other party all reasonable and necessary attorneys’ fees incurred in connection
with such action or proceeding.
4.12 Multiple Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in any number of counterparts, or
with counterpart signature pages, each of which shall be deemed an original, but all of which
shall constitute one and the same instrument.
[Signatures Follow]
Executed as of this 8th day of December 2014.
11
12
EMPLOYEE:
/s/ Colin Roberts
Colin Roberts, an individual
Parsley Energy Operations, LLC
By: /s/ Bryan Sheffield
Bryan Sheffield, President