
EX-99.1 5 y13986a1exv99w1.htm EX-99.1: FORM OF BIDDER'S STATEMENT OF THE
REGISTRANT EX-99.1
MAGELLAN PETROLEUM CORPORATION
BIDDER’S STATEMENT
OFFER TO ACQUIRE ALL OUTSTANDING SHARES IN MAGELLAN PETROLEUM
Exhibit 99.1
AUSTRALIA LIMITED
(ACN 009 728 581)
CORPORATE DIRECTORY
 
Magellan Petroleum Corporation
10 Columbus Boulevard 
Hartford, Connecticut 06106 
United States of America 
T: +1 860 293 2006 
F: +1 860 293 2349 
W: www.magpet.com
 
Joint Financial Advisers
 
TM Capital Corp
35th Floor, One Battery Park Plaza
New York, NY 10004
United States of America
T: +1 212 809 1360
F: +1 212 809 1450
W: www.tmcapital.com
 
Legal Advisers 
Murtha Cullina LLP
30th Floor, CityPlace I
185 Asylum Street
Hartford, CT 06103-3469
United States of America
T: +1 860 240 6000
F: +1 860 240 6150
W: www.murthalaw.com
 
Share Registry 
Computershare Investor Services Pty
Directors
Walter J. McCann (Chairman)
Donald V. Basso
Timothy L. Largay
Ronald P. Pettirossi
Baron Partners Limited
Level 32, Colonial Centre
52 Martin Place
Sydney NSW 2000
T: +61 2 9232 5500
F: +61 2 9232 5300
W: www.baronpartners.com.au
 
Watson Mangioni
Level 13, 50 Carrington Street
Sydney NSW 2000
T: +61 2 9262 6666
F: + 61 2 9262 2626
W: www.wmlaw.com.au
Information Agent
Georgeson Shareholder
Level 1, 60 Carrington Street
Sydney NSW 2000
T: 1300 551 398 (within Australia)
    +61 3 9415 4303 (outside Australia)
W: www.georgesonshareholder.com
Limited
Level 5, 115 Grenfell Street
ADELAIDE SA 5000 
T: 1300 55 61 61 (within Australia) 
    +61 8 8236 2300 (outside Australia)
F: +61 8 8236 2305 
W: www.computershare.com.au
If you are in any doubt as to how to deal with it, you should consult your financial or other
professional adviser. Alternatively, you can call the shareholder information line on 1300 551 398 if
calling from within Australia or +61 3 9415 4303 if calling from outside Australia.
To accept this Offer please complete the enclosed Acceptance Form and return it to
Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited, GPO Box 1326, Adelaide SA 5001 (reply paid
envelope enclosed) or by hand to Level 5, 115 Grenfell Street, Adelaide SA 5000.
The Offer is dated [ ] and will expire at 7.00pm (Sydney Time) on [   ] unless either withdrawn or
extended. ASIC takes no responsibility for this Bidder’s Statement.
-2-
CONTENTS
 
Corporate Directory
 
Contents
 
Important Information
 
Chairman’s Letter
 
Summary of the Offer
 
1. Questions regarding the Offer
 
2. Reasons to Accept the Offer
 
4. Effect of the Offer on Magellan
 
6. Magellan’s Intentions
 
7. Offer Consideration and implications for accepting MPAL Shareholders
 
8. Risk Factors
 
9. Taxation Implications
 
10. Information on MPAL Securities
 
12. Definitions and Interpretation
2 
 
3 
 
4 
 
7 
 
9 
 
13 
 
18 
 
27 
 
40 
 
43 
 
51 
 
62 
 
67 
 
73
13. Approval of Bidder’s Statement
 
Appendix B: ASX Announcement regarding OFFER
 
Appendix C: Magellan Announcements to SEC since 30 June 2005
 
Appendix D: MPAL Announcements to ASX since 30 June 2005
 
Appendix E: Comparison of MPAL and Magellan Shareholder Rights
-3-
IMPORTANT INFORMATION
IMPORTANT DATES
Event
Announcement Date
 
Date of Bidder’s Statement
 
Date of Offer & date Bidder’s Statement dispatched to shareholders
 
Close of Offer*
 
*
80 
 
89 
 
95 
 
96 
 
97
Date
18 October 2005
 
29 November 2005
[   ]
[   ]
This date is indicative only and may be changed as permitted by the Corporations Act.
BIDDER’S STATEMENT AND OFFER
This is the Bidder’s Statement dated 29 November 2005 given by Magellan to MPAL and each
holder of MPAL Shares under Part 6.5 of Chapter 6 of the Corporations Act.
This Bidder’s Statement was approved by a unanimous resolution of the Board of Magellan. It
includes an Offer for the MPAL Shares dated [date].
The Offer relates to all MPAL Shares (excluding those held by Magellan) that exist or will exist on
the date of the Offer, and extends to all MPAL Shares issued during the Offer Period including
MPAL Shares issued on exercise of MPAL Options (if any).
ASIC
A copy of this Bidder’s Statement was lodged with ASIC on 29 November 2005. Neither ASIC nor
any of its officers takes any responsibility for the contents of this Bidder’s Statement.
INVESTMENT DECISION
This is an important document. This Bidder’s Statement does not take into account the individual
investment objectives, financial situation or any particular needs of each MPAL Shareholder or any
other person. MPAL Shareholders may wish to seek independent financial and taxation advice
before making a decision as to whether to accept the Offer.
Except for historical information contained in this booklet, there may be matters discussed in this
Bidder’s Statement that are forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statement, which are
based on assumptions and estimates and describe Magellan’s future plans, strategies and
DISCLAIMER
expectations, are generally identifiable by the use of the words ‘anticipate’, ‘will’, ‘believe’,
‘estimate’, ‘expect’, ‘intend’, ‘seek’ or similar expressions. MPAL Shareholders are cautioned not to
place undue reliance on forward-looking statements. By its nature, forward-looking information of
Magellan involves numerous assumptions, inherent risks and uncertainties both general and
specific that contribute to the possibility that the predictions, forecasts, projections and other
forward-looking statements will not occur. Those risks and uncertainties include factors and risks
specific to the industry in which Magellan and MPAL operate as well as general economic
conditions and prevailing exchange rates and interest rates. Actual events or results made differ
materially.
-4-
Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the forward-looking
statements we make in this Bidder’s Statement are described in Section 8. We caution that the list
of risks is not exhaustive. If one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialise, or if any
underlying assumptions prove incorrect, our actual results, performance or achievements may vary
materially from future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-
looking statements. All forward-Iooking statements attributable to us, or persons acting on our
behalf, are expressly qualified in their entirety by the cautionary statements in this section. Except
as expressly required by the Corporations Act, we undertake no obligation to publicly update or
revise any forward-looking statements provided in this Bidder’s Statement, whether as a result of
new information, future events or otherwise, or the list of risks affecting this information.
For a discussion of important risk factors which could cause actual results to differ materially from
such forward-looking statements, refer to Section 8 of this Bidder’s Statement.
None of Magellan’s Officers, any person named in this Bidder’s Statement with their consent, or
any person involved in the preparation of this Bidder’s Statement makes any representation or
warranty (express or implied) as to the accuracy or likelihood of fulfilment of any forward looking
statement, except to the extent required by law.
DEFINED TERMS
Defined terms used in this Bidder’s Statement are capitalised. Definitions of these terms are set out
in Section 12. Unless the contrary intention appears, the context requires otherwise or words are
defined in Section 12, words and phrases in the Bidder’s Statement have the same meaning and
interpretation as in the Corporations Act.
SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Information included in this Bidder’s Statement relating to MPAL and its business has been
derived solely from publicly available sources published by MPAL, including MPAL’s 2005 Annual
Report and its website.
Subject to the foregoing and to the maximum extent permitted by law, Magellan and its Directors
disclaim all liability for any information concerning MPAL included in this Bidder’s Statement.
MPAL Shareholders should form their own views concerning MPAL from publicly available
information.
US DISCLAIMER
This Bidder’s Statement is not being and may not be distributed in or into the United States of
America and this Bidder’s Statement does not constitute an offer to sell securities and is not
soliciting an offer to sell securities in the United States of America.
Magellan has filed a preliminary Form S-4 Registration Statement (File No. 333-12329) containing
a joint prospectus/proxy statement for the offer (U.S. Registration Statement) with the Securities
and Exchange Commission of the United States (SEC) with respect to the offer of Magellan Shares
to MPAL Shareholders who have registered addresses as shown in the MPAL Register in the
United States.
Offers to MPAL Shareholders who, as at the Offer Date, have registered addresses as shown in the
MPAL Register in the United States will only be made after the U.S. Registration Statement has
been declared effective by the SEC.
Until these events have occurred, no acceptance of MPAL Shares from persons who, as at the
Offer Date, have registered addresses as shown in the MPAL Register in the United States will be
accepted or solicited by, or on behalf of, Magellan.
-5-
The U.S. Registration Statement contains information which is in addition to the information
contained in this Bidder’s Statement. For further details about this additional information, please
see Section 7.9. The additional information is not set out in full in this Bidder’s Statement. You may
obtain a copy of the U.S. Registration Statement from Magellan’s website at www.magpet.com, the
SEC’s website at www.sec.gov or from Magellan’s information agent in Australia, Georgeson
Shareholder (see directory).
Magellan will not assume any responsibility or liability for the violation by a person of any foreign
laws where that person, at the time the Offer is made, has a registered address outside Australia or
an external territory of Australia.
-6-
CHAIRMAN’S LETTER
MAGELLAN PETROLEUM CORPORATION
Dear MPAL Shareholder,
On behalf of the directors of Magellan Petroleum Corporation (Magellan), it is my pleasure to
provide details of Magellan’s proposal to acquire all of your ordinary shares in Magellan Petroleum
Australia Limited (MPAL).
As you may be aware, Magellan holds approximately 55% of MPAL and this investment in MPAL
is Magellan’s principal asset. In thinking strategically about our investment in MPAL, we have
concluded that the current shareholding structure of MPAL is not necessarily in the best interest of
either Magellan or MPAL Shareholders. We also believe that the existing ownership structure has
not provided sufficient pricing transparency nor fostered a desirable level of market understanding
of MPAL’s assets. Nor has it enhanced liquidity or facilitated access to capital in either market.
These views have led us to consider alternatives to the existing Magellan/MPAL ownership
structure. As a result, we have decided to make an offer for all of the shares in MPAL that Magellan
does not already own.
THE OFFER
Under the Offer, MPAL Shareholders (other than Magellan itself) are being offered 7 Magellan
Shares for every 10 MPAL Shares held. MPAL Shareholders with a registered Australian address
may choose to receive Magellan Shares that may be traded on the NASDAQ Capital Market.
Alternatively, you may choose to receive Magellan Shares in the form of CHESS Depository
Interests (CDIs), which will be quoted and tradeable on the ASX. If you choose to receive CDIs,
you may later exchange the CDIs for the underlying Magellan Shares which are tradeable on the
NASDAQ market.
This Offer represents an implied Offer value of A$1.582 per MPAL Share — we have called this the
Benchmark Offer Consideration (defined in Section 2.1). The figure quoted above is based on an
average Magellan Share price of US$1.65 and exchange rate of 0.73 as at mid/late
November 2005.
Magellan’s share price will vary during the Offer Period as it continues to be publicly traded on US
markets, and therefore the implied Offer Consideration will vary. A range of Magellan Share prices
and the effect of changes has been tabulated and set out in Section 2.1 to illustrate possible
outcomes.
The Offer is an offer for all your shares in MPAL.
If the Offer is successful you will retain an indirect interest in the MPAL business through your
interest in Magellan.
The Offer is subject to a number of conditions including Magellan attaining a relevant interest in at
least 90% of MPAL, and Magellan receiving approval from its own shareholders in the U.S. to
allow the issue of new Magellan Shares to MPAL Shareholders. The conditions of the Offer are
summarised in Section 1.10 of this Bidder’s Statement and set out in full in Appendix A.
-7-
REASONS WHY YOU SHOULD ACCEPT THE OFFER
The Magellan Board believes that the Offer provides attractive benefits to MPAL Shareholders, as
detailed in Section 2. Some of the key reasons why we believe that you should accept the Offer are
summarised below:
• The Benchmark Offer Consideration of A$1.582 represents a premium of approximately 12.2%
over the volume weighted average price of A$1.41 at which MPAL Shares traded on ASX over
the 3-month period to the Announcement Date.
• The Benchmark Offer Consideration represents a premium of approximately 17.2% over MPAL’s
closing share price of A$1.35 on 18 October 2005, being the day prior to the Announcement
Date.
• The Benchmark Offer Consideration represents a premium of approximately 24.6% over MPAL’s
book value of net assets of A$1.27 (as at 30 June 2005).
• You will receive securities in Magellan. Magellan Shares have a more liquid share trading profile
on NASDAQ in the U.S., than MPAL Shares have on the ASX.
• If you choose to receive Magellan Shares in the form of CDIs, you will continue to be able to
access ASX.
• As MPAL will become a wholly owned subsidiary of Magellan on completion of the Offer (if
successful), there is expected to be a greater level of correlation between Magellan Share trading
prices in the United States and Magellan CDI trading prices in Australia, compared to the
historical correlation with MPAL Shares.
• You will retain an ongoing indirect interest in MPAL’s assets and its future.
• A structure reflecting a US parent with full ownership of its principal asset (MPAL) may allow
access to capital for future strategic initiatives and exploration activities on potentially more
favourable terms than is currently experienced by MPAL.
• The potential to achieve organisational efficiencies leading to improved returns for stakeholders.
In the event Magellan acquires over 80% of MPAL, capital gains tax relief may be available to
Australian-resident MPAL Shareholders, by virtue of the roll-over provisions.
It is important that you read the information in this booklet in deciding on our Offer and, if
necessary, contact a qualified investment adviser for assistance.
We believe that the Offer is an attractive one for MPAL Shareholders, and we therefore encourage
you to accept the Offer by completing and returning your Acceptance Form. The Offer is presently
scheduled to close on [ ]. To accept the Offer, follow the instructions set out in Section 1.7 and on
the back of the Acceptance Form. The Offer Consideration will be remitted to you after the Offer
becomes unconditional.
We look forward to welcoming you as a new shareholder of Magellan so that you may participate
in the future growth and exciting opportunities of the combined Magellan/MPAL group.
Yours sincerely,
Walter J. McCann
Chairman
-8-
SUMMARY OF THE OFFER
The information set out below is only a summary of the Offer. You should read the entire Bidder’s
Statement before deciding whether to accept the Offer.
 
The Offer
Offer Price
Form of Offer Consideration
Magellan is offering to acquire all of your MPAL Shares on the
terms set out in Appendix A.
 
The Offer is 7 Magellan Shares for every 10 shares that you hold in
MPAL.
 
If you are an MPAL Shareholder, and registered as having an
address in Australia, you may choose to receive:
•   Magellan Shares; or
 
  •   Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs.
If you do not make a choice in your Acceptance Form, you are
deemed to have chosen to receive Magellan CDIs.
 
An accepting MPAL Shareholder’s choice to receive Magellan
Shares or Magellan CDIs will depend on their own personal
circumstances. See Section 7.10 for an outline of some relevant
factors to take into account.
 
Important information regarding the rights attaching to Magellan
Shares and Magellan CDIs is set out in Section 7 and Appendix E.
There are a number of key differences between the rights of
holders of Magellan Shares and MPAL Shares. See Section 7 for
details.
Magellan Shares trade on NASDAQ and the Boston Stock
Exchange. Magellan Shares will not trade on ASX.
 
Magellan CDIs will trade on ASX but they will not trade on
NASDAQ or the Boston Stock Exchange.
 
Holders of Magellan CDIs may surrender their CDIs in exchange
for the underlying Magellan Shares. On conversion, the holder of
Magellan Shares will be entitled to trade those Magellan Shares
on NASDAQ or the Boston Stock Exchange.
 
Similarly, Magellan Shares can be exchanged for Magellan CDIs
which may then be traded on ASX. See Sections 7.4 and 7.5 for
details.
 
The Offer is scheduled to close at 7:00 pm (Sydney time) on [ ] (but
it may be extended).
-9-
Trading on ASX or NASDAQ
Offer Period
Offer Conditions
The Offer is subject to the conditions set out in Section 7.1 of
Appendix A.
The conditions of the Offer are:
The U.S. Registration Statement being declared effective by
the SEC and Magellan receiving confirmation that all Magellan
Shares issued pursuant to the Offer will be registered
immediately on issue;
 
Magellan receiving shareholder approval from Magellan
Shareholders in accordance with U.S. securities law and the
Restated Certificate of Incorporation and By-Laws of Magellan;
 
Magellan receiving all necessary regulatory approvals to
undertake the Offer;
 
Magellan achieving a relevant interest of 90% of MPAL Shares
and satisfying any other requirements to effect compulsory
acquisition of all outstanding MPAL Shares;
 
quotation on ASX of Magellan CDIs issued to accepting MPAL
Shareholders;
 
prior to the end of the Offer Period, there has not been any
•
•
•
•
•
•
Settlement Terms
acquisition or disposal of material assets by MPAL or any of its
controlled entities;
 
the level of the S&P ASX 200 Index not falling below 4,000 on
any trading day prior to the end of the Offer Period;
 
there being no change in control in MPAL or any of its
controlled entities;
 
there being no material adverse change in circumstances or
litigation or arbitration proceedings commenced or threatened
against MPAL or any of its controlled entities in any material
respect;
 
there being no material litigation or arbitration proceedings
instituted against MPAL or a controlled entity;
 
there being no regulatory intervention to prevent trading in
MPAL Shares, impose onerous conditions on the Offer or
require Magellan to dispose of any Securities or assets of a
MPAL Group Entity;
 
no “prescribed occurrence” taking place before the end of the
Offer Period; and
 
there is no selective disclosure of information to a third party
that is not also provided to Magellan.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
-10-
See Section 1.10 and Clause 7 of Appendix A for a complete list of
Conditions. See Section 11.2 for an outline of the status of these
Conditions at the date of this Bidder’s Statement.
Magellan may choose to waive any of the conditions in accordance
with the Offer.
If you accept the Offer, the Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs
which you would be entitled to receive for your MPAL Shares will
be issued to you on or before the later of:
(a)  1 month after the date you validly accept the Offer; or
1 month after the date the Offer becomes or is declared
unconditional,
(b)
Magellan’s existing
shareholding in MPAL
Capital Structure
How to accept the Offer
Foreign Shareholders
and in any event (assuming the Offer becomes or is declared
unconditional), no later than 21 days after the end of the Offer
Period.
As at the date of this Bidder’s Statement, Magellan has a Relevant
Interest in 25,739,028 MPAL Shares. This represents Voting Power
of 55.13%.
If the Offer is successful and Magellan moves to compulsory
acquisition of all MPAL Shares it does not already own, Magellan
will have issued approximately 14.7 million Magellan Shares
representing approximately 36.3% of its expanded capital.
Acceptance procedures vary depending on whether you are a
CHESS holder or Issuer Sponsored holder. See Section 1.7 for
details. Completed Acceptance Forms should be returned to:
Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited
GPO Box 1326
Adelaide SA 5001
(a reply paid envelope is enclosed)
   
  Or by hand:
   
  Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited
  Level 5, 115 Grenfell Street
  Adelaide SA 5000
If you are an MPAL Shareholder with a registered address other
than in Australia or the United States, your Magellan CDIs will be
received by an ASIC approved nominee who will then sell those
Magellan CDIs on your behalf. The net sales proceeds will then be
distributed to you. See Clause 1.7 of Appendix A for further
information.
-11-
The above information is a summary only of key elements of this Bidder’s Statement. MPAL
Shareholders should read all of this Bidder’s Statement before making any decision in relation to
this Offer.
-12-
1. QUESTIONS REGARDING THE OFFER
This Section endeavours to answer key questions you may have in regard to the Offer. It is
qualified by the detailed information contained in the remainder of the Bidder’s Statement.
1.1 WHEN WAS THE OFFER ANNOUNCED
On 18 October 2005, Magellan announced its intention to make an offer to acquire all of the MPAL
Shares that it does not already own. Appendix A of this Bidder’s Statement contains the terms of
the Offer. The remainder of this Bidder’s Statement contains other information known to Magellan
which is relevant to your decision as to whether to accept or reject the Offer.
1.2 HOW IS THE OFFER STRUCTURED?
Magellan’s bid to acquire all MPAL Shares is structured as follows:
(a) Australian Offer Document: An Offer will be sent to all MPAL Shareholders who, as at the
Offer Date, have their registered address, as shown in the MPAL Register, in Australia. The
terms of the Offer are contained in Appendix A which is given by Magellan to MPAL under the
Corporations Act;
(b) United States Offer Document: An offer will be sent to all MPAL Shareholders who, as at the
Offer Date, have their registered address, as shown in the MPAL Register, in the U.S. pursuant
to the U.S. Registration Statement after that document is declared effective by the SEC (U.S.
Offer). Magellan anticipates that the U.S. Offer will remain open for a minimum period of one
month and will close at the same time on the same date as the Offer. Further details regarding
the U.S. Offer Document are contained in Section 7.9 of this Bidder’s Statement; and
(c) Other Foreign Shareholders: Offers will not be sent to MPAL Shareholders who, as at the
Offer Date, have a registered address as shown in the MPAL Register, other than in Australia or
the United States. Instead, a nominee approved by ASIC will be appointed by Magellan to
receive the Magellan CDIs to which Foreign Shareholders are entitled under the Offer. The
nominee will then sell those Magellan CDIs on behalf of the Foreign Shareholders and will
receive the proceeds of the sale (less any expenses incurred in giving effect to the sale). These
sales proceeds will then be distributed to the Foreign Shareholders.
1.3 WHAT IS MAGELLAN OFFERING FOR MY MPAL SHARES?
The consideration to be offered under both the Australian Offer Document and the United States
Offer Document for the acquisition of MPAL Shares, will be the same, namely:
7 Magellan Shares for every 10 MPAL Shares.
In the case of the Offer made under the Australian Offer Document, MPAL Shareholders may
choose to receive Magellan Shares or Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs. See
Section 1.4 for details.
If the number of Magellan Shares which you are entitled to receive is not a whole number, the
number of Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs to be issued to you will be rounded up to the nearest
whole number.
The Offer extends to MPAL Shares (excluding those held by Magellan) on issue on
commencement of the Offer Period and extends to all MPAL Shares issued during the Offer Period
including MPAL Shares issued on exercise of MPAL Options (if any).
-13-
1.4 WHAT IS A MAGELLAN CDI?
All MPAL Shareholders who receive and accept the Offer and do not choose to receive their Offer
Consideration in the form of Magellan Shares will, subject to the terms of the Offer, have their
entitlement to receive Magellan Shares issued in the form of Magellan CHESS Depositary
Interests (Magellan CDIs). One Magellan CDI will be issued for each Magellan Share to which a
person becomes entitled by accepting the Offer.
The alternative to receive Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs is being provided in order
to permit trading on the ASX of Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs. It is not possible for
Magellan, which is subject to the laws of Delaware, United States, to facilitate Magellan Shares
being settled electronically or held in CHESS because Magellan is required under its Amended
and Restated By Laws to issue certificates for Magellan Shares. The issue of Magellan CDIs in
accordance with the terms of the Offer will facilitate trading in Australia on ASX and settlement of
trades of Magellan Shares, in the form of Magellan CDIs.
Where a MPAL Shareholder chooses to receive Magellan CDIs, Magellan Shares issued as a
result of an acceptance of the Offer will be issued by Magellan to CHESS Depositary Nominees
Pty Limited (CDN), which is a subsidiary of ASX, to hold on behalf of MPAL Shareholders who
accept the Offer. These Magellan Shares will be registered in the name of CDN and held in trust by
CDN for the benefit of the Magellan CDI holder.
Each such MPAL Shareholder who accepts the Offer will, subject to the terms of the Offer, be
issued such number of Magellan CDIs as is equal to the number of Magellan Shares to which they
become entitled. Holders of Magellan CDIs will have all the direct economic and other benefits of
holding the underlying securities, as discussed below.
See Sections 7.4 and 7.5 for further information on Magellan CDIs and the rights attaching to
Magellan CDIs respectively.
1.5 WILL I PAY ANY BROKERAGE IF I ACCEPT ANY OF THE OFFER?
You will not pay brokerage as a result of accepting the Offer.
1.6 WHEN DOES THE OFFER CLOSE?
The Offer closes at 7.00pm (Sydney time) on [ ], unless extended or withdrawn in accordance with
the Corporations Act.
1.7 HOW DO I ACCEPT THE OFFER?
There are several ways to accept the Offer depending on the type of holding you have.
CHESS Holdings
Please instruct your stockbroker or Controlling Participant to accept the Offer on your behalf in
accordance with the ASTC Settlement Rules, or complete and execute the enclosed Acceptance
Form in accordance with the instructions on it.
Issuer Sponsored Holdings
Please complete the enclosed Acceptance Form in accordance with the instructions on it.
Completed forms are to be returned to:
Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited
GPO Box 1326
ADELAIDE SA 5001
(a reply paid envelope is enclosed)
Or by hand:
Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited
Level 5, 115 Grenfell Street
ADELAIDE SA 5000
-14-
You should indicate in your acceptance whether you wish to receive Magellan Shares or Magellan
CDIs. If you do not make a choice, you are deemed to have chosen to receive Magellan CDIs.
You may only accept the Offer for all of your MPAL Shares.
1.8 CAN I SELL MY MAGELLAN CDIS?
Magellan will apply to the ASX for quotation of the Magellan CDIs to be issued under the Offer.
The Offer is conditional on Magellan applying for quotation of the Magellan CDIs to be issued
under the Offer on ASX within seven days of issue of the Offer and the ASX confirming quotation
within seven days after the expiry of the Offer Period.
1.9 CAN I ACCESS NASDAQ TO TRADE MY UNDERLYING ENTITLEMENT TO MAGELLAN
SHARES?
Magellan Shares are currently traded on NASDAQ and the Boston Stock Exchange. Concurrently
with seeking Magellan shareholder approval for implementation of the Offer and the acquisition of
MPAL Shares, Magellan will apply for quotation of all Magellan Shares issued to MPAL
Shareholders under the Offer on NASDAQ and the Boston Stock Exchange. These Magellan
Shares will be registered with the SEC upon their issue.
MPAL Shareholders who receive Magellan CDIs may surrender their Magellan CDIs in exchange
for the underlying Magellan Shares. On conversion, the MPAL shareholder may then trade the
Magellan Shares on NASDAQ or the Boston Stock Exchange. See Section 7.4 for details.
1.10 WHAT ARE THE CONDITIONS OF THE OFFER?
The Offer is subject to the conditions set out in Clause 7 of Appendix A. In summary, the main
conditions of the Offer are:
(a) Registration: the U.S. Form S-4 registration statement is declared effective by the SEC and
Magellan receives confirmation from the SEC that all Magellan Shares issued pursuant to the
Offer will be registered immediately on issue pursuant to the Offer;
(b) Magellan shareholder approval: all resolutions necessary to approve, effect and implement
or authorise the implementation of the Offer and the acquisition of the MPAL Shares are passed
by the requisite majority of Magellan shareholders at a general meeting of Magellan
shareholders expected to be held during January or February 2006;
(c) Other regulatory approvals: all other necessary approvals for the proposed transaction are
granted, given, made or obtained on an unconditional basis and, at the end of the Offer Period,
remain in full force and effect;
(d) 90% relevant interest: the number of MPAL Shares in which Magellan and its Associates
have a Relevant Interest at the expiry of the Offer Period is not less than 90% of the MPAL
Shares then on issue, and Magellan satisfies any other requirements to effect compulsory
acquisition of all outstanding MPAL Shares;
(e) Quotation: an application for admission of the Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs
to quotation on ASX is made within seven days after commencement of the Offer Period and
permission for admission is granted no later than seven days after the expiry of the Offer
Period;
(f)  No acquisition or disposal of material asset: except for any proposed transaction publicly
announced by MPAL before the Announcement Date, during the period from the
Announcement Date to the end of the Offer Period none of MPAL or any controlled entity of
MPAL:
(i)  acquires any companies, businesses or assets for an amount in aggregate greater than
A$500,000 or makes an announcement in that regard;
(ii) enters into, offers to enter into any agreement, joint venture, partnership or commitment
which would require expenditure, of an amount which is, in aggregate, more than
A$500,000, other than in the ordinary course of business or makes an announcement in that
regard;
(g) S&P ASX 200 Index: before the end of the Offer Period, the S&P ASX 200 Index does not fall
below 4,000 on any trading day;
-15-
(h) No change in control: no person has, or is entitled to have any right to terminate or alter any
contractual relations between any person and any MPAL Group Entity or require the sale of any
Securities in an MPAL Group Entity as a result of the acquisition of MPAL Shares by Magellan;
(i)  No material adverse change: during the period commencing on the Announcement Date and
ending on the expiry of the Offer Period, no change occurs or is announced that would
reasonably be expected to affect the capital structure, business, financial or trading position,
future profitability, condition of assets or liabilities of MPAL or a controlled entity in a manner
which would be material in the context of MPAL’s operations as a whole;
(j)  No litigation: during the period commencing on the Announcement Date and ending on the
expiry of the Offer Period, no litigation or arbitration proceedings have been or are instituted or
threatened against MPAL or a controlled entity which are material in the context of MPAL’s
operations as a whole;
(k) No regulatory intervention: during the period commencing on the Announcement Date and
ending on the expiry of the Offer Period, no Governmental Agency or any other person takes
any action to:
(i)  prohibit, prevent or inhibit the acquisition of, or trading in, MPAL Shares;
(ii)  impose conditions on the Offer which impose unduly onerous obligations upon Magellan or
would materially affect the business or capital structure of MPAL; or
(iii) require the divestiture by Magellan of Securities or assets of any MPAL Group entity, other
than an application to or a decision or order of ASIC or the Takeovers Panel for the purpose
of or in the exercise of the powers and discretions conferred on it by the Corporations Act;
(l)  No prescribed occurrences: no prescribed occurrences happen during the period
commencing on the Announcement Date and ending on the expiry of the Offer Period;
(m) No selective disclosure of information: at all times during the period from the
Announcement Date to the end of the Offer Period, MPAL promptly provides to Magellan a
copy of all information that is not generally available which relates to MPAL or any of its
controlled entities or any of their respective businesses or operations that has been provided
by MPAL or any of their respective officers, employees, advisers or agents to any person for
the purposes of soliciting, encouraging or facilitating a proposal or offer by that person, or by
any other person, in relation to a transaction which may result in a change in control of MPAL.
1.11 WHEN WILL I RECEIVE MY OFFER CONSIDERATION?
Magellan will provide or procure the provision of the Offer Consideration due for your MPAL
Shares on or before the later of:
(a) 1 month after the date you validly accept the Offer; or
 
(b) 1 month after the date the Offer becomes or is declared unconditional, and in any event
(assuming the Offer becomes or is declared unconditional), no later than 21 days after the end
of the Offer Period.
1.12 WHAT HAPPENS IF I DO NOT ACCEPT?
If Magellan becomes entitled to acquire your MPAL Shares compulsorily under the Corporations
Act, it intends to do so. If your MPAL Shares are compulsorily acquired, your Offer Consideration
will be provided at the conclusion of this process and as a consequence you will receive it later
than the MPAL Shareholders who choose to accept the Offer.
If Magellan does not become entitled to compulsorily acquire your MPAL Shares, unless you
otherwise dispose of them, you will remain an MPAL Shareholder.
-16-
1.13 ARE THERE ANY RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH HOLDING MAGELLAN SHARES OR
MAGELLAN CDIS?
There are a number of risks associated with holding Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs. These
are outlined in detail in Section 8.
1.14 WHAT ARE THE TAX CONSEQUENCES OF THE OFFER?
Our understanding of the major tax implications for MPAL Shareholders resident for tax purposes
in Australia are summarised in Section 9.
Your personal financial and other circumstances will influence your taxation position. You should
read Section 9 carefully and seek professional taxation advice if necessary.
1.15 WHAT ARE THE RIGHTS ATTACHING TO MAGELLAN SHARES?
The terms of issue of Magellan Shares are summarised in Section 7.6.
There are a number of important differences between the rights attaching to ordinary shares in a
listed Australian company and the rights attaching to shares of common stock issued by a
company incorporated in Delaware, United States. A comparison of the key rights under Australian
law for ordinary shares and under Delaware law for Magellan Shares is set out in Section 7.7 and
Appendix E.
1.16 WHAT ARE THE RIGHTS ATTACHING TO MAGELLAN CDIS?
The rights attaching to Magellan CDIs are summarised in Section 7.5.
1.17 SHOULD I CHOOSE TO RECEIVE MAGELLAN SHARES OR MAGELLAN CDIS?
Your own personal circumstances will affect your decision whether to choose to receive Magellan
Shares or Magellan CDIs under the Offer. See Section 7.10 for a discussion of some relevant
factors to take into account.
1.18 QUESTIONS
If you have any enquiries about the Offer or its terms, please telephone Magellan’s information
agent in Australia, Georgeson Shareholder, on 1300 551 398 if you are calling from within
Australia or +61 3 9415 4303 if you are calling from outside Australia. Alternatively you may submit
your query in writing to Georgeson Shareholder, Level 1, 60 Carrington Street, Sydney, NSW
2000, or consult your financial or other professional adviser.
As required under the Corporations Act, if any telephone communication is undertaken with MPAL
Shareholders on the above number, those calls will be recorded, indexed and stored.
-17-
2. REASONS TO ACCEPT THE OFFER
The Magellan board of directors believes that the completion of the Offer will result in, among other
things, the simplification of Magellan’s corporate structure, the potential for greater liquidity for
current MPAL shareholders, access to capital for future strategic initiatives or exploration activities
Value of the
Offer
Offer Exchange Consideration Closing Price**
The value of Magellan’s Offer Consideration will depend, ultimately, on Magellan’s Share price.
The table below illustrates a range of possible values and is designed to assist MPAL
Shareholders in making a determination of Offer value. Magellan Shares trade on NASDAQ and
the Boston Stock Exchange at prices which vary from day to day and hour to hour. Accordingly the
Offer Consideration varies. Prices may be higher or lower than those illustrated.
Magellan’s Offer
    
 
 
    
MagellanShare    
    
 Exchange Rate* 
  
0.73    
0.73    
  
0.73    
  
0.73    
  
  
0.73    
0.73    
  
0.73    
  
  
0.73    
0.73    
  
  
0.73
1.342    
1.390    
1.438    
1.486    
1.534    
1.582    
1.630    
1.678    
1.726    
1.774
1.35     
1.35     
1.35     
1.35     
1.35     
1.35     
1.35     
1.35     
1.35     
1.35
(0.6%)
3.0%
6.5%
10.1%
13.6%
17.2%
20.7%
24.3%
27.9%
31.4%
0.7 
0.7 
0.7 
0.7 
0.7 
0.7 
0.7 
0.7 
0.7 
0.7
MPAL’s
Ratio
A$
A$
Offer Premium
Price
US$
1.40
1.45
1.50
1.55
1.60
1.65
1.70
1.75
1.80
1.85
 
*
on potentially more favourable terms and opportunities for cost reductions leading to organisational
efficiencies.
The degree to which the shareholder and operational benefits outlined below may in fact be
achieved will depend on a number of factors, including Magellan’s ultimate shareholding in MPAL.
Detailed information regarding the intentions of Magellan regarding the continuation and major
changes to be made to the business of MPAL and other matters following conclusion of the Offer
are set out in Section 6.
Operational and shareholder benefits that may be achieved if the Offer is successful are outlined
below.
1. OFFER CONSIDERATION
A$ to US$ exchange rate immediately prior to date of Bidder’s Statement. Note a 1 cent
change in rate = approx 1.4% change in consideration.
**  closing price on the Announcement Date of 18 October 2005.
-18-
For the purposes of this Bidder’s Statement, Magellan has chosen A$1.582 as a suitable
Benchmark Offer Consideration value. This value is derived from the approximate volume
weighted average price of Magellan Shares in the period from the Announcement Date to 28
November 2005, the last trading day prior to the lodgement of this Bidder’s Statement, in
conjunction with the exchange rate and offer consideration ratio.
2. SHAREHOLDER BENEFITS
Benefits that may be derived by MPAL Shareholders from the success of the Offer include the
following:
(a) receiving a value premium as the Benchmark Offer Consideration of A$1.582 being offered for
each of your MPAL Shares represents a premium of approximately:
(i)  12.2% over MPAL’s volume weighted average price of A$1.41 in the 3 month period prior to
the Announcement Date; and
(ii) 17.2% over MPAL’s closing Share price of A$1.35 on 18 October 2005;
 
     (ii) 24.6% over MPAL’s book value of net assets per Share of A$1.27 (as at 30 June 2005);
(b) the Offer enables you to receive Magellan Shares which has a more liquid trading profile on
NASDAQ than MPAL Shares on ASX. Magellan’s average daily trading volume in the period
from the Announcement Date to the lodgement of this Bidder’s Statement was 212,000. This
compares to MPAL’s average daily trading volume of approximately 11,000 over the same
period;
(c) In addition, it is anticipated that if the Offer is successful and MPAL becomes a wholly owned
subsidiary of Magellan, there will be a more direct correlation between the prices at which
Magellan Shares and Magellan CDIs trade than is presently the case for Magellan Shares and
MPAL Shares. Magellan believes that investors may seek to trade in Magellan Shares or
Magellan CDIs in an effort to derive an arbitrage advantage. This fact and the transparency with
respect to disclosure of material price sensitive information is, in the view of the directors of
Magellan, likely to lead to a closer alignment of pricing than is presently experienced by
Magellan Shares and MPAL Shares.
(d) you will receive the full Offer Consideration of 7 Magellan CDIs for every 10 MPAL Shares you
hold and you will not incur brokerage or stamp duty on acceptance of the Offer;
(e) Magellan’s Offer is the only offer currently tabled. In view of Magellan’s existing 55% interest in
MPAL, Magellan does not expect a counterbid to emerge;
(f)  by accepting the Offer, you will retain an ongoing indirect interest in MPAL’s assets and its
future;
(g) capital gains tax relief may be available to Australian-resident MPAL Shareholders if Magellan
becomes the owner of at least 80% of MPAL Shares;
(h) the Magellan CDIs which are being issued in exchange for MPAL Shares, will be quoted on
and tradable on the ASX; and
(i)  the Magellan Shares which are being issued in exchange for MPAL Shares, will be quoted and
tradable on NASDAQ and the Boston Stock Exchange.
3. OPERATIONAL BENEFITS
Operational benefits that may be derived from the success of the Offer include the following:
(a) a simpler capital structure which may facilitate the investment transfer of consolidated financial
resources;
(b) facilitating the alignment of corporate strategies between Magellan and MPAL if and where
these are different;
(c) enhancing the ability, on potentially more favourable terms, of Magellan to raise capital for
future strategic initiatives for exploration activities; and
-19-
(d) improving organisational efficiency and reducing cost if and when these can be achieved.
-20-
3. ABOUT MAGELLAN
3.1. CORPORATE
Magellan is incorporated in the State of Delaware, United States of America. Magellan Shares are
quoted on both the NASDAQ Capital Market (code: MPET) and the Boston Stock Exchange (code:
MPET) in the United States.
3.2 OVERVIEW OF MAGELLAN AND ITS PRINCIPAL ACTIVITIES
Magellan, primarily through its holding of MPAL Shares, is engaged in the sale of oil and gas
reserves resulting from the exploration for and development of oil and gas reserves. Magellan’s
principal asset is its 55% equity interest in MPAL. Magellan’s other asset (other than cash) is a
direct 2.67% carried interest in the Kotaneelee Gas Field in the Yukon Territory of Canada.
Please refer to Section 5 for an overview of MPAL and its principal business activities.
3.3 FINANCIAL INFORMATION REGARDING MAGELLAN
2003
14,736
2004  
US$000  
  19,424
2005  
  
  
  21,871
The following table is a summary of selected historical consolidated financial data of Magellan for
each of the years in the 3-year period ended 30 June 2005. This information is derived from, and
should be read in conjunction with, Magellan’s audited consolidated financial statements.
Years Ended 30 June
 
 
 
Total revenues
Net income before cumulative effect of accounting
change
Net income
Working capital
Cash provided by operating activities
Property and equipment (net)
Total assets
Long-term liabilities
Minority Interests
Shareholders’ equity:
Capital
Accumulated deficit
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
Total shareholders’ equity
Exchange rate A$ = US$ at end of period
Common stock outstanding shares end of period (in
thousands)
87  
 
 
87  
  26,208  
  8,776  
  24,265  
  56,424  
  5,729  
  18,583  
  
  
  44,660  
 (15,161) 
  (2,323) 
  27,176  
 
0.76
350  
 
 
350  
  21,696  
  10,717  
  24,421  
  52,894  
  5,256  
  16,533  
  
  
  44,660  
 (15,248) 
  (4,491) 
  24,920  
 
0.70
890 
 
 
152 
  21,798 
  7,109 
  21,592 
  50,741 
  5,629 
  16,931 
  
 
  43,152 
 (15,598)
  (5,407)
  22,147 
 
0.67
25,783
25,783
24,427
-21-
2005
2004
2003
Book value per share
Quoted market value per share
Operating Data
Standardised measure of discounted
future cash flow relating to proved oil and
gas reserves — gross of minority interests
— net of minority interests
Annual production (net of royalties)
Gas (bcf)
Oil (bbls) (in thousands)
1.05  
2.40
US$000
.97  
1.31
.91 
1.20
31,63317,640  
  
  
5.7  
 
151
29,88116,519  
  
  
5.7  
 
150
26,48613,633 
  
 
6.0 
 
126
3.4 MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
In summary, Magellan’s management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results
of operations for the year ended 30 June 2005 shows the following:
(a) As at 30 June 2005, Magellan, on an unconsolidated basis, had working capital of
approximately US$3.9 million;
(b) Oil sales increased 54% to US$7.574 million from US$4.923 million in 2004 because of the 5%
Australian foreign exchange rate increase (discussed below) and a 49% increase in average
sales price per barrel;
(c) Gas sales decreased 3% to US$12.478 million from US$12.87 million in 2004. The decrease
was primarily the result of the one off proceeds of US$1.135 million from the Kotaneelee gas
field settlement recorded in 2004. This was partially offset by the 5% Australian foreign
exchange rate increase, an increase in the price of gas sold and an increased sales volume in
2005;
(d) Other production related revenues increased 11% to US$1.818 million from US$1.632 million
in 2004. This was primarily MPAL’s share of gas pipeline tariff revenues which increased as a
result of the higher volumes of gas sold at Mereenie and because of the 5% Australian foreign
exchange rate increase;
(e) Production costs increased 13% to US$6.144 million from US$5.416 million in 2004, primarily
the result of increased expenditures by MPAL in the Mereenie and Palm Valley fields and the
5% Australian foreign exchange rate increase, partially offset by lower expenditures from the
Nockatunga project and the Cooper Basin;
(f)  Exploration and dry hole costs increased 29% to US$4.157 million from US$3.225 million in
2004. These costs related to the exploration work being performed on MPAL’s properties. The
primary reasons for the increase were work performed on the Nockatunga project, cost related
to exploration activities in New Zealand and the 5% Australian foreign exchange rate increase.
These are partially offset by lower costs incurred in 2005 on properties in South Australia;
(i)  Salaries and employee benefits decreased 28%;
(ii)  Depletion, depreciation and amortisation increased 10%;
(iii) Auditing, accounting and legal expenses increased 7%;
(g)  Other costs:
(iv) Accretion on asset retirement obligation expenses increased 14%;
(v)  Shareholder communication costs increased 26%; and
(vi) Other administrative expenses increased 21%.
-22-
The value of the Australian dollar relative to the US dollar increased to US$0.7620 at 30
June 2005 compared to US$0.6993 at 30 June 2004. The 9% increase in the value of the
Australian dollar increased the reported asset and liability amounts in the statement of financial
performance at 30 June 2005 from the previous financial year. The annual average exchange rate
used to translate MPAL’s operations in Australia for fiscal 2005 was US$0.7533, which is a 5%
increase compared to the US$0.7179 for fiscal 2004.
3.5 CAPITAL STRUCTURE
As at the date of this Bidder’s Statement, Magellan has 25,783,243 Magellan Shares on issue.
3.6 SHAREHOLDERS OF MAGELLAN
Magellan Shares are widely held, with over 7,000 shareholders registered. There are no significant
holders on the register, the largest record holding being approximately 0.7%
3.7 DIRECTORS OF MAGELLAN
Brief profiles of the directors of the Magellan are as follows:
Donald V. Basso
Mr Donald V. Basso, age 67, was elected a director of Magellan in 2000. Mr Basso served as a
consultant and Exploration Manager for Canada Southern Petroleum Limited from October 1997 to
May 2000. He also served as a consultant to Ranger Oil & Gas Limited during 1997. From 1987 to
1997, Mr Basso served as Exploration Manager for Guard Resources Limited. Mr Basso has over
40 years experience in the oil and gas business in the United States, Canada and the Middle East.
Timothy L. Largay
Mr Timothy L. Largay, age 62, has been a partner in the law firm of Murtha Cullina LLP, Hartford,
Connecticut since 1974. Mr Largay has been a director of MPAL since August 2001. He also
served as a director of Canada Southern Petroleum Limited, Calgary, Alberta, Canada from 1997
to 15 June 2004. Mr Largay also served as a director of Coastal Caribbean Oils and Minerals
Limited from January 2001 until 7 October 2002.
Walter J. McCann
Mr Walter J. McCann, age 68, was the President of Richmond, The American International
University, located in London, England from January 1993 until his retirement in August 2002.
Currently Chairman of the Magellan Board of Directors, he has been a director of MPAL since
1997. From 1985 to 1992, he was President of Athens College in Athens, Greece. Mr McCann was
Dean of the University of Hartford School of Business and a faculty member at Harvard
University’s Graduate School of Education. He is a retired member of the Bar of Massachusetts.
Ronald P. Pettirossi
Mr Ronald P. Pettirossi, age 62, has been President of ER Ltd., a consulting company since 1995.
Mr Pettirossi is also a director and audit committee chairman of Farmstead Telephone Group, a
supplier and installer of business communication products and systems. Mr Pettirossi is a director
of MPAL and is a former audit partner of Ernst & Young LLP, and has worked with public and
privately held companies for 31 years.
3.8 MATTERS RELEVANT TO THE DIRECTORS
(a) Interest of Directors in Magellan
There are no shareholder requirements for Directors under the Restated Certificate of Incorporation
and By Laws of Magellan.
As at the Announcement Date the Relevant Interests of each Director in Magellan Shares were as
follows:
-23-
Relevant
Interests
  11,000 
 
6,000 
  59,368 
6,500
Director
Donald V. Basso
Timothy L. Largay
Walter J. McCann
Ronald P. Pettirossi
Each director also holds 100,000 options.
(b) Remuneration of Directors
Under Magellan’s Restated Certificate of Incorporation and By-Laws, each Director may be paid
remuneration for ordinary services performed as a director.
Each Director is entitled to receive fees of up to US$40,000 per annum. Additional remuneration
may be paid in accordance with the Restated Certificate of Incorporation and By-Laws of Magellan.
The following are the Director’s remuneration received for the year ended 30 June 2005:
 
 
Director
Donald V. Basso
Timothy L. Largay
Walter J. McCann
Ronald P. Pettirossi
The Directors have the authority to fix the directors fees for their service as directors and as
members of special or standing committees including reasonable allowance of expenses actually
incurred in connection with their duties.
In addition, Magellan has a medical reimbursement plan for all independent directors where the
Company reimburses certain directors the cost of their medical expenses up to US$500 per month.
(c) Remuneration of Chief Executive Officer
On 1 March 2004 Magellan entered into a 36 month employment agreement with Dan Samela. The
36 month term automatically renews each 30 day period unless he elects to retire or the agreement
is terminated according to its terms. The employment agreement provides for him to be employed
as the President and Chief Executive Officer of Magellan, effective as of 1 July 2004, at a salary of
US$175,000 per annum and an annual contribution of 15% of the salary to a SEP/IRA pension
plan for Mr Samela’s benefit.
40,000 
40,000 
65,000 
47,500
Remuneration
(US$)
-24-
The employment agreement may be terminated for cause, on written notice by Magellan without
cause, by Mr Samela’s resignation or upon change of control of Magellan. On a termination without
cause, Mr Samela will be entitled to payment of the balance of salary payments and average
bonus payments due for the term of the agreement.
If during the two year period following a change of control of Magellan, Mr Samela terminates his
employment for good reason (as defined in the employment agreement), or Magellan terminates
his employment other than for disability, then Mr Samela will be paid an amount equal to three
times his annual base salary and three year average bonus payment plus any previously deferred
compensation, accrued vacation pay and three years of reimbursements for medical coverage
insurance benefits. In addition, any unvested options will be accelerated so as to become fully
exercisable. If at any time during the two year period following a change of control of Magellan, Mr
Samela terminates his employment for good reason or Magellan terminates his employment other
than for disability, he will paid an amount equal to his then current annual salary and a three year
average bonus payment. In addition, any unvested options will be accelerated so as to become
fully exercisable.
3.9 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
The following are details of various related party transactions between Magellan and Directors,
substantial shareholders or entities associated with the Directors or substantial shareholders of
Magellan.
During the financial year ended 30 June 2005, Magellan paid US$65,700 to G&O’D Inc., a
company associated with James Joyce, Magellan’s President and Chief Financial Officer until 30
June 2004 for providing accounting and administrative services. In addition, Magellan purchased
US$12,000 of office equipment from G&O’D Inc.
Magellan also paid US$144,596 to Murtha Cullina LLP, a law firm of which Timothy Largay is a
partner, for legal services during the year ended 30 June 2005.
3.10 Dividend policy
Magellan has not declared or paid dividends on Magellan Shares and has no current intention to
change this policy. Magellan currently plans to retain any future earnings to reduce Magellan’s
accumulated deficit and finance growth.
3.11 Share trading in Magellan
The table below shows the average daily trading in, high and low prices and VWAP of Magellan
Shares during the three month period prior to the Announcement Date up to the date of this
Bidder’s Statement:
 
 
Period
3 months prior to the date of the
Announcement Date
Announcement Date to date of
this Bidder’s Statement
Average daily volume
High
Low
(000s)
212
761
US$ 1.76   US$ 3.52   US$ 2.79
US$ 1.50   US$ 1.94   US$ 1.65
VWAP
-25-
3.12 PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMENTS BY MAGELLAN
On 18 October 2005 Magellan made a public announcement to ASX, NASDAQ and the Boston
Stock Exchange in relation to the offer for MPAL.
A copy of this announcement is contained in Appendix B.
Magellan is a reporting issuer for the purposes of the U.S. Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended, and as such, is subject to regular reporting and disclosure obligations. Broadly, these
obligations require Magellan to file periodic reports with the SEC detailing financial, operational
and other material information for investors. These reports include an annual report on Form 10-K,
quarterly reports on Form 10-Q and current reports on Form 8-K. Magellan is also subject to the
proxy solicitation requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and must provide
shareholders with an annual meeting proxy statement and accompanying annual report. Magellan
is also subject to the other provisions of the Securities Exchange Act, including the requirement for
Magellan insiders to file beneficial ownership reports on Forms 3, 4 and 5. Magellan is also subject
to the listing requirements of NASDAQ and the Boston Stock Exchange, on which its shares are
traded.
Copies of documents lodged at the SEC in relation to Magellan may be obtained from either
Magellan’s website at www.magpet.com, the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov or inspected at:
Magellan Petroleum Corporation
10 Columbus Boulevard
Hartford, Connecticut 06106
United States of America
Appendix C contains a list of each announcement made by Magellan to the SEC between 30
June 2005 and the date of this Bidder’s Statement.
-26-
4. EFFECT OF THE OFFER ON MAGELLAN
4.1 CAPITAL STRUCTURE POST-OFFER
The following table sets out the anticipated capital structure of Magellan on completion of the Offer
if the Offer is declared free from all Conditions and Magellan acquires all MPAL Shares currently
on issue in which it does not presently have a Relevant Interest.
 
 
  
  Magellan Shares 
 
Directors and officers related entities
 
82,868  
25,700,375  
 
Other Shareholders
14,667,042  
 
Magellan shares to be issued under the Offer
Total Capital
40,450,285  
 
Notes:
1. The Offer is 7 Magellan Shares for every 10 MPAL Shares. The actual number of Magellan
Options
 430,000 
— 
 
 
— 
 430,000
Shares to be issued will vary slightly due to rounding.
2. The above table assumes that:
(a) no options to acquire Magellan Shares are exercised;
(b) all MPAL Shareholders accept the Offer;
(c) no additional Magellan Shares are issued prior to completion of the Offer; and
(d) no additional MPAL Shares are issued during the Offer Period.
4.2 PRO FORMA SUMMARY FINANCIAL INFORMATION
The pro forma consolidated summary statements of financial position and financial performance of
Magellan (Pro Forma Summary Financial Statements) set out below, as well as certain pro
forma adjustments, have been prepared to illustrate the financial position and financial
performance of Magellan following completion of the Offer assuming that:
• Magellan completes the acquisition of all MPAL Shares currently on issue in which it presently
does not have a Relevant Interest; and
• the transaction had taken place on 30 June 2005 (with income statement matters deemed to
have affected the year to that date).
The Pro Forma Summary Financial Statements:
• are derived from the audited historical consolidated financial statements (including related notes
to the consolidated financial statements, assumptions and adjustments) of Magellan and MPAL;
• are shown in a form which reflects US generally accepted accounting principles (US GAAP);
• should be read together with the audited historical consolidated financial statements, related
notes and other financial information pertaining to Magellan and MPAL;
• should not be relied on as being indicative of the historical results that would have been
achieved or the future results that will be achieved. The actual financial position and results of
the operations of Magellan and MPAL may differ, perhaps materially, from the pro forma amounts
reflected below because of a variety of factors, including access to additional information,
changes in value not currently identified and changes in operating results between the dates of
the pro forma summary statements of financial position and the date on which the Offer is
consummated; and
-27-
• are intended to be illustrative only and will not reflect the actual position and balances as at the
date of this Bidder’s Statement or at the conclusion of the Offer.
If the Offer is successful and MPAL ultimately becomes a wholly-owned subsidiary of Magellan,
MPAL will no longer be listed on the ASX but will still have an obligation to lodge financial
statements with ASIC. This obligation survives until such time as Magellan meets certain
prescribed conditions imposed by ASIC. As Magellan is a US domestic corporation, its financial
statements will be prepared in accordance with US GAAP.
The ‘historical’ columns shown in the summary financial statements below are replicated from
Magellan’s publicly filed Annual Report (Form 10-K) in the United States. That Annual Report
relating to 30 June 2005 was filed with the SEC on 28 September 2005. The Form 10-K Annual
Report contains audited consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with US GAAP.
In the past, the primary accounting difference between financial statements prepared in the US by
Magellan and those prepared in Australia by MPAL was in the way oil and gas operations were
booked. In the United States, Magellan follows the ‘successful efforts’ method of accounting for oil
and gas exploration costs. This method is aligned with the requirements of the International
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). Australian companies, with effect from 1 January 2005, are
required to adopt IFRS and, accordingly, the Directors believe there is no requirement to disclose
the summary financial statements on any basis other than the basis set out below.
Unless otherwise indicated, all dollar amounts in Sections 4.2 and 4.3 are expressed in Australian
Dollars. The following table shows the rates of exchange for U.S. dollars per Australian Dollar in
effect at the end of certain periods. The high and low rates of exchange for the periods and the
average rate of exchange for the periods are also shown.
 
   
  
Financial Years Ended 30 June
 
2001
2002  
 
$0.598 
High for period
$0.575  
  0.479 
  0.485  
Low for period
  0.538 
  0.524  
Average for period
  0.510 
End of period
  0.564  
In Sections 4.2 and 4.3, amounts stated in Australian Dollars are derived from U.S. Dollars, unless
otherwise indicated, have been translated at a fixed rate of A$1 = US$0.7533 for the statement of
2005  
$0.798  
  0.689  
  0.753  
  0.762
2004  
$0.799  
  0.637  
  0.718  
  0.699
2003  
$0.677  
  0.527  
  0.585  
  0.674
financial performance (being the average for the financial year), and A$1 = US$0.762 for the
statement of financial position (being the year end closing price), solely for convenience. These
translations should not be construed as a representation by Magellan that Australian Dollar
amounts actually represent these U.S. Dollar amounts, or vice versa, or that a conversion could be
made at the rate indicated, or any other rate, or at all. Certain amounts and percentages included in
Sections 4.2 and 4.3 have been rounded and accordingly may not add up to the totals.
-28-
Pro Forma   Pro Forma 
A$000
US$000
31,234 
6,660 
777 
690
39,361
116,402 
5,478
121,880
(79,625)
42,255 
1,332 
830 
83,778 
 
 
4,727
1,751
6,478 
2,593 
7,518
29,993
31,143
(1,150)
23,800  
5,075  
592  
526
80,766  
4,174
24,950  
5,075  
592  
526
US$000
(1,150)(a)
Historical   Adjustments 
US$000
 
 
 
(see Note 2)
Pro forma summary consolidated statement of financial position as at 30 June 2005
 
  
 
 
Current assets
 
Cash, cash equivalents and
marketable securities
Accounts receivable
Inventories
Other assets
 
 
 
 
Property and equipment
Oil and gas properties
Land, buildings and equipment
 
 
 
Less accumulated depletion,
depreciation and amortisation
 
Net property and equipment
Deferred income taxes
Goodwill
TOTAL ASSETS
 
Current liabilities
Accounts payable
Accrued liabilities and income
taxes payable
 
 
Deferred income taxes
Long-term liabilities
24,266  
1,015  
  
56,424  
  
  
3,602
32,198  
1,015  
633  
63,839  
  
  
3,602
7,932
633(b)
7,415
7,932(b)
88,698  
4,174
1,976(c)
4,936  
  
5,729
4,936  
1,976  
5,729
84,940
92,872
7,932
(60,674)
(60,674)
1,334
1,334
Minority interests
 
 
 
Shareholders’ Equity
 
 
 
Issued share capital, at par value  
 
 
Issued share capital, in excess of
par value
Accumulated deficit and other
comprehensive loss
 
 
TOTAL LIABILITIES, MINORITY
INTERESTS AND
SHAREHOLDER EQUITY
Notes:
18,583  
  
  
  
258
(18,583)(d) 
 
 
 
147(e)
44,402
23,875(e)
(17,484)
27,176
56,424
24,022
7,415
-29-
0  
  
  
  
405
68,277
(17,484)
51,198
63,839
0 
 
 
 
531
89,603
(22,945)
67,189
83,778
The table above has been presented in the style used in Magellan’s Form S-4 as filed with the
SEC
in the United States. The adjustments reflect a pro forma issue price of Magellan Shares at
US$1.65 each. The share price used in the Form S-4 filed with the SEC on 31 October 2005 was
US$1.93, being the prevailing Magellan share price at the time of the Offer announcement.
The pro forma summary consolidated statement of financial position outlined above has been
prepared on the following bases:
1. The figures shown in the column entitled “Historical US$000” reflect the position of Magellan set
out in the audited financial statements of Magellan as at 30 June 2005, as disclosed in
Magellan’s public filing with the SEC on Form 10-K, as lodged on 28 September 2005.
2. The figures shown in the column entitled “Adjustments US$000” reflect a number of adjustments
required to reflect the following pro forma transactions that are contemplated under the Offer,
being:
(a) Magellan’s expenses relating to the Offer totalling approximately US$1.15 million (of which
US$0.971 million are capitalised). These costs consist primarily of financial advisory fees,
legal and accounting fees, proxy and Offer solicitation fees, printing fees and other costs
directly related to the Offer;
(b) the allocation of the excess of consideration payable over net assets acquired to oil and gas
properties (US$7.932 million) and goodwill (US$0.633 million);
(c) the deferred tax on the step up in basis of the oil and gas properties;
 
  (d) the elimination of minority interests upon acquisition of 100% of MPAL;
 
  (e) the issue of new shares at US$1.65 each; and
 
  (f)  the estimated aggregate value of the Offer of US$25.2 million (including related capitalised
transaction costs).
3. The figures in the column entitled “Pro Forma US$000” is the sum of the prior two columns.
 
4. The figures in the column entitled “Pro Forma A$000” are calculated using the US$/A$
exchange rate at 30 June 2005 of 0.762.
5. Form S-4 is available for viewing on Magellan’s website for further detail.
4.3 PRO FORMA SUMMARY CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
The pro forma consolidated summary statement of financial performance of Magellan set out below
has been prepared to illustrate the financial performance of Magellan following completion of the
Offer assuming that:
• Magellan completes the acquisition of all MPAL Shares currently on issue which Magellan does
not own; and
• the transaction had taken place as of 30 June 2005 (with income statement matters deemed to
have affected the year to that date).
Pro Forma   Pro Forma 
A$000  
 
 
 
29,034 
 
(1,927)(a) 
(31,627)
US$000   
  
21,871  
(23,825)
Historical   Adjustments 
  US$000   
US$000
 
(see Note 2)
  
 
21,871  
 
— 
 
(21,898)
The pro forma consolidated summary statement of financial performance is intended to be
illustrative only and will not reflect the actual performance as at the date of this Bidder’s Statement
or at the conclusion of the Offer.
Pro forma summary consolidated statement of financial performance
 
  
 
Year ended 30 June 2005
 
Total revenues
Costs and expenses
 
Operating loss
Interest income
 
Profit (loss) before income taxes and
 
minority interests
 
Income tax benefit
 
 
Profit (loss) before minority interests  
Minority interests
 
 
 
 
Net profit (loss)
(1,349)
 
1,110(b)
(1,954) 
1,142
1,197  
(1,110)
(1,927)
578(a)
(27) 
1,142
1,115  
82
(1,927)
—
(2,593)
1,516
(1,077)
876
(812) 
660
(152) 
0
(201)
0
(239)
(152)
(201)
87
-30-
Notes:
1. The figures shown in the column entitled “Historical US$000” reflect the financial performance of
Magellan as set out in the audited financial statements of Magellan as at 30 June 2005, as
disclosed in Magellan’s public filing with the SEC on Form 10-K, as lodged on 28
September 2005.
2. The figures shown in the column entitled “Adjustments US$000” reflect a number of adjustments
required to reflect the following pro forma transactions that are contemplated under the Offer,
being:
(a) an adjustment to costs and expenses and income tax benefit representing the depletion on
the excess of the value of the Offer over the identifiable assets and liabilities acquired which
has been allocated to oil and gas properties, and related income tax effect;
(b) an adjustment to minority interests representing the reversal of the income allocated to the
minority interests as the shares of MPAL subject to the Offer, which are assumed to be
acquired by Magellan at the beginning of the period.
3. The figures in the column entitled “Pro Forma US$000” is the sum of the prior two columns.
 
4. The figures in the column entitled “Pro Forma A$000” are calculated using the US$/A$
exchange rate average over the year to 30 June 2005 of 0.7533.
-31-
5. ABOUT MPAL
5.1 DISCLAIMER
The following description of MPAL and the financial information concerning MPAL contained in
this section have been prepared by Magellan using publicly available information and certain
information provided to Magellan by Magellan’s nominees on the board of MPAL. Information in
this document concerning MPAL’s business has not been independently verified and Magellan
has not conducted any due diligence on MPAL’s business. To the extent permitted by law,
Magellan does not make any representation or warranty, express or implied, as to the currency,
accuracy or completeness of such information.
The primary sources of information about MPAL’s business used by Magellan are as follows:
(a) MPAL’s 2005 Annual Report; and
 
(b) MPAL’s website.
Further information about MPAL (including copies of financial statements) can be found on MPAL’s
website: www.magpet.com.au.
5.2 OVERVIEW OF MPAL AND ITS PRINCIPAL BUSINESS ACTIVITIES
MPAL is engaged in the sale of oil and gas in the exploration for and development of oil and gas
reserves.
MPAL’s major assets are two petroleum production leases covering the Mereenie Oil and Gas
Field (Mereenie) (35% working interest) and one petroleum production lease covering the Palm
Valley Gas Field (Palm Valley) (52% working interest). Both fields are located in the Amadeus
Basin in the Northern Territory.
Mereenie Oil and Gas Field
MPAL has a 35% interest and Santos Limited, the operator, has a 65% interest in Mereenie.
MPAL’s share of the remaining Mereenie proved developed oil reserves (net of royalties), based
upon contract amounts, was approximately 262,000 barrels and 14.6 billion cubic feet of gas as at
30 June 2005. During the 2005 financial year, MPAL’s share of oil sales was 136,000 barrels, and
its share of gas sales was 4.3 billion cubic feet. Two gas development wells were drilled in late
2004 to increase deliverability in order to meet the gas contractual requirements until June 2009.
Palm Valley Gas Field
MPAL has a 52.023% interest in and is the operator of Palm Valley. Santos Limited owns the
remaining interest in Palm Valley which provides gas to meet the Alice Springs and Darwin supply
contracts with the Northern Territory Power and Water Corporation (PAWC) and Gasgo Pty Limited
(Gasgo), a wholly owned subsidiary of PAWC.
MPAL’s share of the remaining Palm Valley proved developed reserves, net of royalties, was 10.7
billion cubic feet as at 30 June 2005. During fiscal 2005, MPAL’s share of gas sales was 2.4 billion
cubic feet.
MPAL drilled an additional development well, Palm Valley–11, in 2004. The well was a dry hole.
Gasgo paid the cost of the well under the gas supply agreement. The producers and Gasgo have
agreed to install additional compression equipment in the field that will assist field deliverability
during the remaining Darwin gas contract period. Gasgo will pay for the cost of the additional
compression under the gas supply agreement, which is scheduled to be commissioned in the field
at the end of 2005. The production lease covering the Palm Valley Field expires in
November 2024.
-32-
Nockatunga Oil Fields
MPAL acquired a 40.936% working interest in the Nockatunga Oil Fields in July 2004. Santos
Limited is the operator of the fields and holds the remaining interest. The assets comprise eight
producing oil fields in Petroleum Leases 33, 50 and 51 together with exploration acreage in ATP
267P. The fields are currently producing approximately 258 barrels of oil per day. During fiscal
2005, MPAL’s share of oil sales was 35,000 barrels. MPAL’s share of the Nockatunga Fields’
proved developed oil reserves was approximately 253,000 barrels as at 30 June 2005. Petroleum
Lease 33 expires in April 2007 and Petroleum Leases 50 and 51 expire in June 2011.
A 92 square mile 3D seismic survey was undertaken in late 2004 over Petroleum Lease 51 and
parts of PL 33 and ATP 267P. The drilling of three wells, development as well as exploration, is
planned for late 2005 at locations identified by the seismic data.
Dingo Gas Field
MPAL has a 34.3% interest in the Dingo Gas Field which is held under a retention licence. No
market has emerged for the gas volumes that have been discovered in the Dingo Gas Field. The
licence expires in October 2008.
Maryborough Basin
MPAL holds a 100% interest in exploration permit ATP 613P and has applications pending for
permits ATP 674P and ATP 733P in the Maryborough Basin in Queensland.
Cooper/Eromanga Basin
PEL 94 and PEL 95
During fiscal 1999, MPAL (50%) and Beach Petroleum Limited were successful in binding for two
exploration blocks (PEL94 and PEL95) in South Australia’s Cooper Basin. Aldinga-1 was
completed in September 2002 and began producing in May 2003 at 80 barrels of oil per day. By
June 2005, production had declined to about 25 barrels of oil per day. Petroleum Production
Licence 210 was granted over the Aldinga field in December 2004. During July 2004, the
Waitpinga-1 well was drilled in PEL95 and the Almonta-1 well was drilled in PEL95 during
April 2005. Both wells were dry holes. Black Rock Petroleum NL contributed to the cost of drilling
the Myponga-1 well in June 2004 to earn a 15% interest in the PEL94 permit. MPAL’s interest in
PEL94 was reduced to 35%. Black Rock Petroleum NL subsequently assigned its interest in
PEL94 to Victoria Petroleum NL.
PEL 110 and PELA 116
During fiscal year 2001, MPAL and Beach Petroleum Limited were successful in bidding for two
additional exploration blocks, PEL 110 (37.5%) and PELA 116 (50%) in the Cooper Basin. PEL
110 was granted in February 2003. The application for PELA 116 has been withdrawn. During
July 2005, the
Yanerbie-1 well was drilled in PEL 110. Cooper Energy NL contributed to the cost of the well to
earn a 25% interest in PEL 110 and Enterprise Energy NL contributed to the cost of the well to earn
12.5% in any discovery. The well was a dry hole. MPAL has granted Enterprise Energy NL the
option to earn 6.25% interest in PEL 110 by funding further exploration in the area. At 30
June 2005, MPAL’s share of the work obligations of the PEL 110 permit totalled $0.601 million, of
which $0.143 was committed.
Kiana-1 Discovery
MPAL farmed into the Kiana-1 and Tyringa-1 wells in Great Artesian Oil and Gas’ permit PEL 107.
Kiana-1 flowed 1,100 barrels of oil per day and 2.8 million cubic feet per day on test. Kiana-1 is
currently on production test. MPAL has earned a 30% interest in this discovery.
-33-
New Zealand
PEP 38222, PEP 38225 and PEP 38765
During fiscal 2002, MPAL was granted exploration permit PEP 38222, offshore south of the South
Island of New Zealand. Following a program of seismic processing and interpretation, the permit
was surrendered during May 2005. In November 2003, MPAL was granted permit PEP 38225,
adjacent to PEP 38222. On 30 June 2005, MPAL’s contingent work obligations on PEP 38225
totalled $12.725 million. MPAL has the discretion whether or not to proceed with expenditure of
these monies MPAL was granted exploration permit PEP 38765 (12.5%) during February 2004.
The Miromiro-1 well was drilled in the permit during December 2004. The well was a dry hole. At
30 June 2005, MPAL’s share of work obligations on this permit totalled $0.21 million, of which
none was committed.
United Kingdom
PEDL 098 and PEDL 099
During fiscal year 2001, MPAL acquired an interest in two licences in southern England in the
Weald-Wessex Basin. The licences, PEDL 098 (22.5% interest) in the Isle of Wight and PEDL 099
(40% interest) in the Portsdown area of Hampshire, were each granted for a period of six years.
The Sandhills-2 well spudded in PEDL 098 during August 2005. The UK companies, Northern
Petroleum and Montrose Industries funded part of MPAL’s share in the cost of the Sandhills-2 well.
PEDL 112 and PEDL 113
During fiscal year 2002, MPAL acquired two additional licences in southern England. The
licences, PEDL 113 (22.5% interest) in the Isle of Wight and PEDL 112 (33.3% interest) in the Kent
area on the margin of the Weald-Wessex Basin were each granted for a period of six years.
PEDL 125 and PEDL 126
Effective 1 July 2003, MPAL acquired two licences each granted for a period of six years in
southern England – PEDL 125 (40% interest) in Hampshire and PEDL 126 (40% interest) in West
Sussex. The drilling plans for the Hedge End-2 well in PEDL 125 and Horndean Extension-1 well
in PEDL 126 are in progress and spudding of these wells is expected in 2006. The UK company,
Oil Quest Resources Plc will fund part of MPAL’s share of the cost of the two wells to acquire a
10% interest in each of them.
PEDL 135, PEDL 136 and PEDL 137
Effective 1 October 2004, MPAL was granted a 100% interest in these licences in southern
England for six years, each with a drill or drop obligation at the end of the third year of the term.
MPAL has undertaken a program of seismic data purchase and interpretation.
PEDL 151, PEDL 152, PEDL 153, PEDL 154 and PEDL 155
Effective 1 October 2004, MPAL acquired an additional five licences each granted for a period of
six years in southern England being an interest of 11.25%, 22.5%, 33.3%, 50% and 40% in the
above licences respectively. Each licence has a drill or drop obligation at the end of the third year
of the term. Oil Quest Plc will fund part of MPAL’s share of the PEDL 155 exploration costs to
acquire 10% interest in the licence.
5.3 FINANCIAL INFORMATION REGARDING MPAL
A summary of the historical financial performance of MPAL for each of the three years to 30 June
2005 and financial position of MPAL as at 30 June 2005 is set out below:
-34-
MPAL Summary Statement of Financial Performance
Year ended 30 June
Revenues (see note 2)
 
EBITDAX (see note 3)
 
EBIT
Interest Income
 
Net Profit Before Tax
Tax Benefit
 
Net Profit After Tax
-35-
2005   
A$000   
 
 32,965  
 
 16,518  
 
10  
 
  1,407  
 
  1,417  
 
117  
 
  1,534
2004   
A$000
2003  
A$000
28,668
27,786
13,351
13,494
(782) 
 
  1,305
(385)
 
  1,318
523  
 
  2,659
933 
 
  2,386
3,182
3,319
MPAL Summary Statement of Financial Position as at 30 June 2005
 
 
Current assets
Cash assets
Receivables
Inventories
Current tax assets
A$000  
  
 
 29,145 
  5,561 
 
777 
91
Non-Current Assets
Petroleum properties
Property, plant and equipment
Deferred tax assets
 
TOTAL ASSETS
 
Current liabilities
Payables
Provisions
 
 
 
Non-current liabilities — Provisions
 
TOTAL LIABILITIES
NET ASSETS
Equity
Contributed equity
Reserves
Retained profits
TOTAL EQUITY
Notes:
1.  The information in the two previous tables has been drawn from the audited financial
35,574 
  
 
  
  
 
 21,276 
 12,803 
474 
 
  
 70,127 
  
  
 
  4,964 
714 
 
  
  5,678 
  
 
  5,334 
  
 11,012 
 59,115 
  
 
 40,027 
 
476 
 18,612 
 59,115
statements for MPAL included in its Annual Reports for the years ended 30 June 2003, 2004
and 2005. The above amounts have been rounded to the nearest whole number.
2.  Revenues comprises sales and other revenues and interest income.
-36-
3.  EBITDAX represents earnings before depreciation amortisation write-off of exploration costs,
interest (income), and tax (benefit).
-37-
5.4 FINANCIAL SUMMARY
In summary, MPAL’s financial report for the financial year ended 30 June 2005 shows the
following:
(a) MPAL’s consolidated profit from ordinary activities before write off of capitalised exploration
expenditure and income tax was A$8.998 million representing an increase of 113% from the
previous period. The principal contributing factor was a 16% increases in sales revenue of
A$4.106 million primarily due to higher oil prices;
(b) After writing off capitalised exploration expenditure totalling A$7.581 million and taking into
account an income tax benefit of A$0.117 million, profit from ordinary activities after income tax
was A$1.534 million down 52% from the comparable figure in 2004 of A$3.182 million;
(c) Total sales revenue was up 16% (A$4.106 million) comprised of an increase of 47% in oil
sales revenue principally from the Mereenie and Nocktunga fields and an increase of 3% in
gas sales revenue;
(d) Compared on a year-on-year basis, the Statement of Financial Position shows a 1% decrease
in shareholders’ funds of A$0.801 million to A$59.115 million and the current asset ratio has
increased from 4.2 to 6.3 due to a combination of higher receivables and lower payables. Net
cash flows from operating activities has fallen slightly from A$16.047 million to A$15.984
million; and
(e) MPAL has cash reserves of approximately A$29 million.
5.5 MAJOR SHAREHOLDERS OF MPAL
The major holders of Relevant Interests in MPAL Shares are as follows:
 
 
 
Holder
Magellan
Origin Energy Limited
452 Capital Pty Limited
Paradice Cooper Investors Pty Limited
 
*
 
**  Estimate based on public filings following the issue of MPAL’s Annual Report.
Number of Relevant   
Interests in MPAL
25,739,028   
5,091,721*  
3,341,244** 
2,054,330**
As per most recent substantial shareholding notice.
Shares
% holding 
55.13%
10.90%
7.16%
4.40%
5.6 DIRECTORS
As at the date of this Bidder’s Statement, there are seven directors of MPAL:
Rodney Cormie
Mr Rodney Cormie is the chairman of MPAL. He was formerly a director of Suncorp Metway
Limited and a leading Brisbane stockbroker.
John Kelly
Mr John Kelly is a partner in the law firm of Corrs Chambers Westgarth with particular expertise in
the resources area and contract negotiations.
-38-
Norbury Rogers
Mr Norbury Rogers is a company director and chartered accountant and was a senior partner and
managing partner (Queensland) of an international chartered accounting firm. He is also a senator
of the University of Queensland.
Robert Mollah
Mr Robert Mollah is a geophysicist with a broad petroleum exploration background both within
Australia and internationally.
Timothy L. Largay
Please refer to Section 3.7 for information on Timothy L. Largay.
Walter J. McCann
Please refer to Section 3.7 for information on Walter J. McCann.
Ronald P. Pettirossi
Please refer to Section 3.7 for information on Ronald P. Pettirossi.
5.7 ASX ANNOUNCEMENTS
MPAL is a disclosing entity for the purposes of Section 111AC(1) of the Corporations Act and as
such, is subject to regular reporting and disclosure obligations. Broadly, these obligations require
MPAL to:
(a) prepare and lodge with ASIC both yearly and half-yearly financial statements accompanied by
a directors’ statement and report and an audit or review report; and
(b) immediately notify the ASX of any information concerning MPAL of which it is, or becomes,
aware and which a reasonable person would expect to have a material effect on the price or
value of securities in MPAL, subject to certain limited exceptions related mainly to confidential
information.
Appendix D contains a list of each announcement (other than drilling result announcements) made
by MPAL to the ASX between 30 June 2005 and the date of this Bidder’s Statement.
Copies of documents lodged at ASIC in relation to MPAL may be obtained from or inspected at an
office of ASIC. Copies of documents lodged with the ASX in relation to MPAL may be obtained
from, or inspected at, an office of the ASX.
6. MAGELLAN’S INTENTIONS
-39-
6.1 GENERAL
This Section 6 sets out Magellan’s intentions with respect to MPAL’s business and operations,
which are based on its review and current assessment of MPAL’s business, operations and
prospects.
Except for changes and intentions specifically set out in this Section 6, Magellan intends, based on
the information presently known to it:
(a) to continue the business of MPAL;
 
(b) not to make any major changes to the business of MPAL or the deployment of fixed assets of
MPAL; and
(c) to continue the monitoring and review process which is currently in place in regard to MPAL’s
employees and the usage of consultancy services.
Magellan’s intentions are based on the information known and the circumstances that exist at the
date of this Bidder’s Statement.
Final decisions in relation to Magellan’s intentions will only be reached in light of all material facts
and circumstances. Accordingly, the statements set out in this Section are statements of current
intention only which may change as new information becomes available or circumstances change.
6.2 RATIONALE FOR THE OFFER
Magellan has made the Offer as it believes that the current shareholding structure of MPAL has not
provided optimal benefits and transparency as to pricing or market understanding of MPAL’s
assets nor fostered liquidity or access to capital in either market.
Among the reasons to accept Magellan’s Offer are simplification of Magellan’s corporate structure,
greater liquidity for investors, access to capital for future strategic initiatives or exploration activities
on potentially more favourable terms, opportunities for organisational efficiencies and greater
ability to align the strategies of the companies.
6.3 MAGELLAN’S INTENTIONS UPON ACQUISITION OF 90% OR MORE OF MPAL SHARES
This Section sets out Magellan’s intentions if it acquires 90% or more of MPAL Shares, if the Offer
is declared free of all Conditions and Magellan becomes entitled to proceed to compulsory
acquisition under the Corporations Act for the MPAL Shares:
(a) Compulsory acquisition: Magellan intends to proceed to compulsory acquisition of the
remaining MPAL Shares in accordance with the provisions of the Corporations Act.
(b) Removal from Official List: Magellan intends to request ASX to remove MPAL from the
Official List of the ASX following completion of the Offer.
(c) Business: Magellan expects MPAL to continue as an oil and gas exploration and production
company in substantially the same manner as it is presently operated.
(d) Board of Directors and executive management: Magellan will maintain the current board of
directors subject to the existing directors’ consent. Magellan will also seek to retain key
members of the MPAL’s executive management team, whose performance will continue to be
reviewed in line with current procedures. Additional members of the executive management
team will be added, as appropriate.
(e) Employees and consultants: Magellan intends to continue the monitoring and review
process which is currently in place in regard to MPAL’s employees and the usage of
consultancy services.
-40-
(f)  Headquarters: MPAL, as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Magellan, will continue to be
headquartered in Brisbane. Magellan’s headquarters will continue to be based in Hartford,
Connecticut, USA.
(g) Compulsory acquisition: Magellan intends to proceed to compulsory acquisition of the
remaining MPAL Shares in accordance with the provisions of the Corporations Act.
(h) Removal from Official List: Magellan intends to request ASX to remove MPAL from the
Official List of the ASX following completion of the Offer.
(i)  MPAL’s business practices and policies: Consistent with Magellan’s enhanced ownership
position, Magellan intends to review all of MPAL’s important business policies and practices,
including corporate governance, exploration and development efforts, capital expenditures,
existing and planned joint ventures, acquisition prospects, and investment policies, with the
aim to maximise all shareholder returns.
(j)  Strategic initiatives: Magellan intends to continue to review strategic options in light of the
new ownership structure, in
co-operation with the MPAL Board, its executive management and taking into account the
strategic review undertaken by MPAL’s business development committee.
(k) Cash resources: Magellan believes that MPAL’s existing cash resources are currently
sufficient to continue its business without a major effort to raise additional capital.
(l)  Other actions: Magellan intends to undertake all other actions consistent with Magellan’s role
and interests of the combined companies and the shareholders.
If, in the future, MPAL does not perform to an acceptable level, Magellan will take whatever action
it deems necessary to maximise its shareholders’ returns.
6.4 MAGELLAN’S INTENTIONS UPON ACQUISITION OF LESS THAN 90% OF MPAL SHARES
If Magellan becomes entitled to less than 90% of MPAL Shares, Magellan presently intends to
allow the Offer to lapse.
This Section sets out Magellan’s intentions if, notwithstanding its present intention, it subsequently
determines to declare the Offer free from the 90% minimum acceptance Condition without
becoming entitled to compulsorily acquire the outstanding MPAL Shares.
Magellan reserves its right to declare the Offer free from the 90% minimum acceptance Condition
(or any other Condition), although it has no present intention to do so. In the event that the Offer is
declared free of all Conditions and Magellan achieves a Relevant Interest in MPAL of less than
90% Magellan’s current intentions are as set out below.
(a) Magellan will seek to maintain MPAL’s listing on ASX, subject to the requirements for listing
(including a sufficient spread of investors) continuing to be satisfied (although in this event the
liquidity of MPAL Shares and Magellan CDIs on ASX is likely to be materially diminished).
(b) Magellan intends to undertake the activities referred to in Section 6.3(c) to (j) to the extent
permitted by its control of MPAL.
(c) Magellan may at, at some later time, acquire further MPAL Shares in a manner consistent with
the Corporations Act.
(d) If Magellan becomes entitled at some later time to exercise general compulsory acquisition
rights under Part 6A.2 of the Corporations Act, it may exercise those rights.
-41-
6.5 LIMITATIONS ON INTENTIONS
The intentions and statements of future conduct set out in this Section 6 must be read as being
subject to:
(a) the law (including the Corporations Act) and the Listing Rules, including in particular the
requirements of the Corporations Act and the Listing Rules in relation to conflicts of interest and
“related party” transactions; and
(b) the legal obligation of the MPAL directors at the time, including any nominees of Magellan, to
act in good faith and the best interests of MPAL and for proper purposes and to have regard to
the interest of all MPAL Shareholders (in which regard the role of independent directors of
MPAL will also be important).
-42-
7. OFFER CONSIDERATION AND IMPLICATIONS FOR ACCEPTING MPAL SHAREHOLDERS
7.1 CONSIDERATION UNDER THE OFFER
The consideration for the acquisition of the MPAL Shares to which the Offer relates will be satisfied
by the issue of Magellan Shares. In the case of the Offer made under this Bidder’s Statement,
MPAL Shareholders may choose to receive Magellan Shares or Magellan Shares in the form of
Magellan CDIs.
MPAL Shareholders who do not express a choice are deemed to have chosen to receive Magellan
Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs.
7.2 SHARES CONSIDERATION
Based on the number of MPAL Shares on issue as at the date of this Bidder’s Statement, the
maximum number of Magellan Shares (to be issued in the form of Magellan CDIs) that would be
required to settle acceptances under the Offer is 14,667,042 (disregarding rounding for fractional
entitlements).
7.3 MAGELLAN SHAREHOLDER APPROVAL REQUIRED
NASDAQ Marketplace Rule 4350(i) provides that Magellan must obtain shareholder approval if it
wishes to issue Magellan Shares or other securities convertible into Magellan Shares if the voting
powers attached to those securities would represent more than 20% of the voting power
represented by Magellan’s then existing outstanding securities.
Magellan plans to convene a meeting of its shareholders to be held at Hartford, Connecticut to
obtain this shareholder approval. This meeting is expected to be held in January or February 2006.
7.4 MAGELLAN CDIS
Under the Offer, MPAL Shareholders are being offered 7 Magellan Shares for every 10 MPAL
Shares.
Accepting MPAL Shareholders may choose to receive Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan
CDIs.
The ASX uses an electronic system, called the Clearing House Electronic Subregister System
(CHESS), for the clearance and settlement of transactions in securities traded on the stock market
of the ASX. Securities of companies incorporated outside of Australia whose governing legislation
does not allow the direct use of CHESS, such as Magellan, are traded on ASX as ‘CDIs’. CDIs
represent beneficial interests in the foreign securities and enable Magellan Shares to be
transferred and settled electronically using CHESS. The Offer is an offer of Magellan Shares but
Magellan will not issue Magellan Share certificates to accepting MPAL Shareholders who choose
to receive Magellan CDIs. Rather, Magellan will issue holding statements for CDIs. By accepting
the Offer, such an accepting MPAL Shareholder will be applying for Magellan Shares to be issued
to, and held by, CDN. The underlying Magellan Shares are quoted and traded on the stock market
of the ASX; however, the CDIs are used to effect the broker to broker settlement of trading in the
Magellan Shares. Thus, the beneficial interest in the Magellan Shares is freely transferable
electronically in CHESS, subject to applicable law.
The principal difference between holding Magellan CDIs and holding the underlying Magellan
Shares is that the holder of Magellan CDIs will hold a beneficial interest in the equivalent number
of Magellan Shares, but not legal title. The legal title to the underlying Magellan Shares is instead
held by CDN, which is a wholly owned subsidiary of ASTC, which is in turn a wholly owned
subsidiary of the ASX. Thus, using Magellan CDIs, a seller transfers beneficial interest in the
Magellan Shares to the buyer instead of legal title. See Section 7.5 for a summary of the rights
attaching to the Magellan CDIs.
Number of CDIs issued in relation to Magellan Shares
-43-
Magellan CDIs are structured so that 1 CDI represents 1 Magellan Share. Holders of Magellan
CDIs will be entitled to all the economic benefits of the Magellan Shares, such as dividends (if any)
as though they were holders of the legal title.
Magellan registers
Magellan will operate three registers:
(a) a certificated register of Magellan Shares;
 
(b) an uncertificated issuer-sponsored subregister of Magellan CDIs; and
 
(c) an uncertificated CHESS subregister of Magellan CDIs.
The certificated register will be the register of legal title. CDN will be entered on the certificated
register, along with any existing Magellan Shareholders who were Magellan’s shareholders of
record prior to the Offer who choose to have their holdings remain in certificated form. The two
uncertificated Magellan CDI subregisters combined comprise the register of beneficial interests.
Accepting MPAL Shareholders who choose to receive Magellan CDIs may receive Magellan CDIs
on either the issuer-sponsored subregister or CHESS subregister. Holding and trading Magellan
CDIs on the CHESS subregister has a reduced settlement risk because CHESS settlement results
in the irrevocable transfer of Magellan CDIs and cash. For accepting MPAL Shareholders who
elect to hold their Magellan CDIs on the CHESS subregister, Magellan will issue an allotment
advice that sets out the number of Magellan CDIs allotted and at the end of the month of allotment,
ASTC (acting on behalf of Magellan) will provide a Magellan CDI holding statement (similar to a
bank account statement), which confirms the number of Magellan CDIs held on the CHESS
subregister. If an accepting MPAL Shareholder elects to hold Magellan CDIs on the issuer-
sponsored subregister rather than the CHESS subregister, Magellan will issue a Magellan CDI
holding statement which sets out the number of Magellan CDIs held on the issuer-sponsored
subregister. Following distribution of these initial holding statements to all Magellan CDI holders, a
holding statement will only be provided to a holder at the end of any subsequent month in which
the holder buys, sells or otherwise transfers Magellan CDIs. Holders may also request statements
at any other time (although Magellan or ASTC may charge a fee for such statements).
Converting Magellan CDIs to Magellan Shares
After the successful closing of the Offer, holders who do not wish to have their trades settled in
Magellan CDIs may request share certificates representing the Magellan Shares by:
(a) in the case of issuer-sponsored Magellan CDIs, notifying Magellan’s Registrar:
on 1300 55 61 61 (if calling from within Australia) or +61 8 8236 2300 (if calling from outside
Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited
Australia); or
(b) in the case of CHESS-sponsored Magellan CDIs, notifying the CHESS sponsoring participant
(in most cases, your stockbroker).
Magellan has been informed that the process of surrendering Magellan CDIs for the underlying
Magellan Shares may be completed within 24-48 hours at no cost to the holder.
ASX does not provide any settlement system for certificated Magellan Shares. Settlement of trades
in Magellan Shares that are held in certificated form must be organised between the buying and
selling broker for the transaction, which may lead to delay and expense. Thus, Magellan believes
that the majority of accepting MPAL Shareholders will prefer to register and trade Magellan CDIs
on the CHESS subregister.
Converting Magellan Shares to Magellan CDIs
-44-
Holders of Magellan Shares may also transfer their Magellan Shares to CDN and receive
Magellan CDIs (in the same manner as above) which may then be traded on ASX. The likelihood
of holders of Magellan Shares converting them to Magellan CDIs and vice versa will depend on a
number of factors including the price at which Magellan Shares and Magellan CDIs trade on
NASDAQ and ASX, brokerage rates and prevailing exchange rates.
7.5 RIGHTS ATTACHING TO MAGELLAN CDIS UNDER THE ASTC SETTLEMENT RULES
The relationship between Magellan, CDN and holders of Magellan CDIs is governed in part by the
ASTC Settlement Rules which have the force of law under the Corporations Act. The following is a
summary of the rights and obligations of these parties as set out in the ASTC Settlement Rules:
Title
Magellan must cause the legal title to the underlying Magellan Shares in respect of the Magellan
CDIs to be vested in CDN. The beneficial title to the underlying Magellan Shares is vested in the
holders of Magellan CDIs. The holders of Magellan CDIs are to receive all direct economic
benefits and any other entitlements with respect to the Magellan Shares. CDN is not to dispose of
any of the Magellan Shares unless authorised by the ASTC Settlement Rules, and is not able to
create any interest that is inconsistent with the title of the holders of Magellan CDIs.
Registers
Magellan must ensure that at all times the total number of Magellan CDIs on the issuer sponsored
subregister of Magellan CDIs and the uncertificated CHESS subregister of Magellan CDIs
reconciles with the number of Magellan Shares registered in the name of CDN on the Magellan
Share register. Magellan must make available for inspection the Magellan Share register and the
Magellan CDI register as if that register were a register of securities of an Australian listed public
company.
Transfer
Unless permitted by the Listing Rules, Magellan or CDN must not refuse nor fail to register, nor
give effect to, nor otherwise interfere with the processing and registration of a transfer of Magellan
CDIs. Any obligation to transfer a quantity of Magellan Shares shall be made by initiating a transfer
of the corresponding quantity of Magellan CDIs in respect of the Magellan Shares.
Dividends
Any dividend declared in respect of the Magellan Shares vested in CDN is to be distributed to the
holders of the Magellan CDIs. CDN is taken to have directed Magellan to distribute any dividend
that would otherwise be payable to it under Magellan’s restated certificate of incorporation to the
holders of Magellan CDIs.
Magellan has never declared or paid dividends on Magellan Shares and has no current intention
to change this policy. See Section 3.10 for details.
Bonus issues, rights issues and reconstructions
Magellan must administer all bonus issues, rights issues, reconstructions and mergers that result
in the issue of additional or replacement Magellan Shares so that the benefits are distributed to
holders of Magellan CDIs on the same terms as would otherwise have applied if the holders of
Magellan CDIs were the holders of the Magellan Shares.
Voting
CDN as a shareholder of record of Magellan will receive notice of all Magellan shareholder
meetings and be entitled to attend and vote at Magellan shareholder meetings.
-45-
Holders of Magellan CDIs are not entitled as of right to attend meetings of holders of Magellan
Shares; however, Magellan will invite holders of Magellan CDIs to attend Magellan shareholder
meetings; but they will not be permitted to vote other than by direction to CDN.
Magellan must send a notice of the shareholder meeting to each holder of Magellan CDIs at the
address recorded in the Magellan CDI register if any meeting is convened for the holders of
Magellan Shares. The notice must:
(a) inform the holder of Magellan CDIs of their rights to direct CDN on how it should vote with
respect to the resolutions described in the notice;
(b) make provision for a direction to be given by the holders of Magellan CDIs in relation to how
CDN should so vote;
(c) make appropriate arrangements to collect and process any direction by holders of Magellan
CDIs and provide CDN with a report in writing that clearly shows how CDN must exercise its
right to vote by proxy at the Magellan shareholder meeting, in sufficient time to enable CDN to
lodge a proxy for the meeting.
Following the time and day by which holders of Magellan CDIs must provide their direction to
CDN, CDN will calculate the number of votes in favour of the resolution, the number of votes
against the resolution and the number of votes abstaining. CDN will then appoint 2 proxies. One of
the 2 proxies will indicate the number of Magellan CDIs in favour of the resolution described in the
proxy, and the second proxy will indicate the number of Magellan CDIs against the resolution
described in the proxy.
If it is necessary or appropriate that a meeting of the holders of Magellan CDIs be convened, the
notice and conduct of the meeting will be held in accordance with the provisions of Magellan’s
Restated Certificate of Incorporation, as amended (Magellan Restated Certificate of
Incorporation) and amended and restated By-Laws as of 22 July 2004 (Magellan By-Laws).
7.6 RIGHTS ATTACHING TO MAGELLAN SHARES
The following information is a summary of the Magellan Restated Certificate of Incorporation and
Magellan By-Laws. MPAL Shareholders have the right to obtain a copy of the Magellan Restated
Certificate of Incorporation and By-Laws, free of charge, from Magellan during the Offer Period.
Each Magellan Share confers on its holder:
•
The right to vote at a general meeting of shareholders (whether present in person or by any
representative, proxy or attorney) on a ballot (one vote per Magellan Share) subject to the rights
and restrictions on voting which may attach to or be imposed on Magellan Shares (at present
there are none);
•
 
•
The right to receive dividends;
In a winding up, the right to receive payment in proportion to the amount paid (if any) to the
holders of Magellan Shares in a liquidating distribution.
Magellan Shares are fully transferable.
The rights attaching to Magellan Shares may be varied with the approval of Magellan shareholders
in general meeting by special resolution.
-46-
7.7 COMPARISON OF MPAL AND MAGELLAN SHAREHOLDER RIGHTS
MPAL is incorporated under the laws of Australia and Magellan is incorporated under the laws of
the State of Delaware, United States. If MPAL Shareholders participate in the Offer and receive
Magellan Shares in exchange for their MPAL Shares, they will become Magellan common
shareholders. MPAL’s Shareholders’ rights are governed by Australian law and regulations,
including the Corporations Act and MPAL’s Constitution. Once the MPAL Shareholders accepting
the Offer become Magellan Shareholders, their rights as such will be governed by the Delaware
General Corporation Law and by the Magellan Restated Certificate of Incorporation and the
Magellan By-Laws. The material differences between the rights of MPAL Shareholders and
Magellan Shareholders, resulting from differences in the respective governing documents and the
applicable law, are set out in Appendix E.
MPAL Shareholders should have particular regard to the following differences as set out in
Appendix E:
•
    – resolutions to be passed at a Magellan Shareholders meeting must be passed by both a
Shareholder voting rights
majority of shareholders voting, and by a majority of votes cast on the resolution. This dual
approval process is not a feature of Australian law and so impacts on the ability of Magellan
to receive an affirmative vote on a resolution;
Amending constituent documents
•
    – in limited circumstances, the Magellan By-Laws may be amended without Magellan
Shareholders’ approval;
Business combinations with interested shareholders
•
    – Magellan Shareholder approval is required for certain business combinations where
approval would not be required for MPAL;
Annual shareholder meetings and special shareholder meetings
•
    – the notice period for Magellan Shareholder meetings may be between 10 and 60 days which
differs from the minimum notice period of 28 days currently required for MPAL Shareholder
meetings. Shareholder rights to requisition resolutions and meetings are more limited for
Magellan than for MPAL;
•
 
•
Board of Directors, removal of Directors and board vacancies; and
Indemnification of Directors and officers.
7.8 DUAL LISTING ISSUES
As Magellan will be listed on the ASX as well as maintaining its listings on NASDAQ and the
Boston Stock Exchange, it will be subject to the ASX Listing Rules, NASDAQ Marketplace Rules
and Boston Stock Exchange Rules (which are substantially similar to the NASDAQ Marketplace
Rules).
The following is a brief summary of major rules contained in the ASX Listing Rules and NASDAQ
Marketplace Rules applicable to Magellan.
(a) ASX Listing Rules
The ASX Listing Rules sets out the requirements that must be satisfied for an entity to gain
admission to ASX’s Official List and its on-going obligations.
Except for the waivers of the Listing Rules granted by ASX identified below, Magellan will be
subject to the Listing Rules as they currently apply to MPAL including the following:
•
Continuous and periodic disclosure obligations in relation to price sensitive and financial
reporting on a quarterly and annual basis respectively including specific disclosure in relation
to mining entities;
•
•
•
•
Subject to certain exceptions, any issue of securities within a 12 month period beyond 15% of
the issued capital of a listed company requires shareholder approval;
-47-
The constitutions of listed companies must contain provisions prohibiting the disposal of
certain of its securities during a specified period of between 12 and 24 months in certain
circumstances. This includes shares which have been issued to a seller of an interest in a
mining exploration area or similar interest or tenement;
Subject to certain exceptions, an issue of securities to a related party of the listed entity is
prohibited unless shareholder approval is obtained; and
Shareholder approval is required for a disposal of a listed entity’s major asset or there is a
proposed change to the nature or scale of its activities.
Listing Rule Waivers
Magellan will lodge with the ASX an application for admission to ASX’s Official List and quotation
of the Magellan CDIs which are to be issued under the Offer 7 days after the date of this Bidder’s
Statement.
Magellan has received an in principle ruling from ASX that it will waive certain of the Listing Rules
when it seeks admission to ASX’s Official List. ASX has confirmed that it will waive its Listing
Rules to permit Magellan to:
•
use this Bidder’s Statement rather than a prospectus or a product disclosure statement for the
offering of Magellan Shares in consideration for MPAL Shares on condition that the Bidder’s
Statement includes all material that is required for a prospectus for an offer of those Securities
under Sections 710 to 713 of the Corporations Act and otherwise complies with the information
requirements of Appendix 1A of the Listing Rules;
•
•
apply for quotation only of the Magellan CDIs to be issued as consideration for MPAL Shares
rather than all Magellan Shares; and
accept nominations for election of directors no less than 60 days and no more than 90 days
prior to the date of the meeting on condition that Magellan releases the terms of the waiver to
the market and the terms of the waiver are set out in a separate document provided with the
annual report to all Magellan CDI holders.
ASX has also confirmed that the following articles in the Magellan Restated Certificate of
Incorporation would be acceptable to the ASX:
(i) The 12th Article
Listing Rules 6.8 and 6.9 set out minimum voting requirements on a show of hands or on a poll.
The 12th Article of the Magellan Restated Certificate of Incorporation provides that any matter to be
voted on at a shareholders meeting must be approved by both a majority of:
(A) shares voted at the meeting; and
 
(B) shareholders present in person or by proxy and who are entitled to vote on the resolution.
The validity under the Delaware General Corporation Law of Magellan’s 12th Article has also been
confirmed by the Delaware Supreme Court in 1993.
The above confirmation by ASX is subject to the requirement that Magellan disclose the provisions
of these Articles to the market at the time Magellan is listed and in every annual report.
-48-
(ii) The 13th Article
The 13th Article of the Magellan Restated Certificate of Incorporation provides that a “Business
Combination” with a “Related Person” (including a merger, issue of shares worth more than US$5
million or the sale of any assets worth US$5 million or more) requires the approval of shareholders
holding at least 662/3% of the voting power and 662/3% of shareholders present in person or by
proxy and who are entitled to vote on the resolution. Magellan is not required to obtain the higher
voting requirement in the 13th Article for the purposes of the Offer because it does not constitute a
“Business Combination” under Article 13th and because of an exception to the higher voting
requirement where the transaction has been approved by the Magellan Board.
In Australia, Section 602 of the Corporations Act, protects shareholders of a target company in a
takeover bid. These principles are not entrenched in U.S. corporate law and, as such, the practice
in the U.S. is for certain mechanisms to be built into a company’s constituent documents, including
poison pills, pre-emptive rights and “supermajority” voting requirements. The 13th Article of the
Magellan Restated Certificate of Incorporation is one mechanism used to provide Magellan
shareholders with protection against potentially hostile corporate acquirers.
The presence of such mechanisms in the constituent documents of a Delaware corporation is
customary in the U.S. and such a provision has been tested and approved in the Delaware courts.
(b) NASDAQ Marketplace Rules
Companies listed on NASDAQ are required to meet high standards of corporate governance
outlined in NASDAQ Marketplace Rules. Among the areas NASDAQ corporate governance
requirements address are: Distribution of Annual and Interim Reports, Solicitation of Proxies,
Independent Directors, Conflicts of Interest, Audit Committees, Shareholder Approval for certain
specified transactions, Shareholder Meetings, Stockholder Voting Rights, Quorum requirements
and the Code of Conduct requirements.
NASDAQ-listed companies are required to notify NASDAQ when taking certain actions including,
listing a new class of security or additional shares of the sale class, stock splits/stock dividends,
cash dividend and distribution notices, change in transfer agent or registrar, change in number of
shares outstanding (5% or more), change in company name, trading symbol, title of security or par
value.
Companies listed on NASDAQ are required to adhere to regulations regarding the disclosure of
material information. “Material information” is information that would reasonably be expected to
affect the value of a company’s securities or influence investors’ decisions. NASDAQ requires,
except in unusual circumstances, that NASDAQ-listed companies:
(a) disclose, promptly to the public through any Regulation FD-compliant method (or combination
of methods), material information which would reasonably be expected to affect the value of
their securities or influence investors’ decisions, and
(b) provide NASDAQ MarketWatch advance notice of certain news events to permit MarketWatch
to assess the news announcement for materiality and, in certain circumstances, implement
temporary trading halts to allow for even dissemination of the material news.
NASDAQ-listed companies are required to file with NASDAQ three copies of all reports and other
documents filed or required to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. This
requirement is considered fulfiled if the company files the report or document with the SEC through
the EDGAR system at www.sec.gov.
7.9 UNITED STATES REGISTRATION STATEMENT
On 31 October, 2005 Magellan filed its U.S. Registration Statement on Form S-4 containing a joint
prospectus/proxy statement for the Offer with the SEC. The purpose of the U.S. Registration
Statement is to:
-49-
(i)  permit Magellan to undertake an offer of Magellan Shares to MPAL Shareholders entered on
the MPAL Register with a registered address in the United States in connection with the Offer.
Under U.S. securities laws, Magellan will be permitted to make the offer to MPAL Shareholders
with a registered address as shown in the MPAL Register in the United States pursuant to the
joint prospectus/proxy statement contained in the U.S. Registration Statement after it is
declared effective by the SEC;
(ii) register all Magellan Shares to be offered pursuant to the Offer to allow for resale in the United
States. Absent registration, MPAL Shareholders who as at the Offer Date do not have a
registered address shown in the MPAL Register in the United States may only be permitted to
subscribe for Magellan Shares (including to be undertaken through the issue of Magellan
CDIs) if appropriate undertakings are entered into to ensure that the Magellan Shares are not
resold within the United States unless those Magellan Shares have been registered with SEC.
The U.S. Registration Statement is intended to address this registration requirement.
The U.S. Registration Statement contains substantially the same information as that contained in
this Bidder’s Statement. U.S. securities laws require the inclusion of additional information which is
not required by the Corporations Act or other Australian securities laws to be included in the
Bidder’s Statement. Magellan does not consider that any of this information is material to the
making of the decision by a MPAL Shareholder to whom the Offer is made under this Bidder’s
Statement whether to accept the Offer.
You may obtain a copy of the U.S. Registration Statement from Magellan’s website at
www.magpet.com, the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov or from Magellan’s information agent in
Australia, Georgeson Shareholder, Level 1, 60 Carrington Street, Sydney NSW 2000.
7.10 MAGELLAN SHARES OR MAGELLAN CDIS?
Accepting MPAL Shareholders should carefully consider whether they wish to receive Magellan
Shares or Magellan CDIs under the Offer. Whether you choose to receive Magellan Shares or
Magellan CDIs will depend, among other things, on your own personal circumstances.
Relevant factors to take into account include the following:
•
Magellan CDIs will be tradable on ASX. Accepting MPAL Shareholders may generally trade
using their existing Australian brokers in the same way as MPAL Shares are presently traded
on ASX.
Magellan Shares may be traded on NASDAQ or through the Boston Stock Exchange. While
many Australian brokers provide a service for trading such securities from Australia, some
accepting MPAL Shareholders may need to identify a United States resident broker to trade
Magellan Shares on their behalf.
As trades in Magellan Shares will be undertaken in United States dollars, accepting MPAL
Shareholders may benefit or suffer from fluctuations in the A$/US$exchange rate.
Rates of brokerage payable for brokers trading in Magellan CDIs in Australia and Magellan
Shares in the United States may differ.
Registered holders of Magellan Shares may attend and vote at Magellan Shareholder
meetings. As resolutions of Magellan Shareholders must be approved by both a majority in
number of shareholders voting and the number of votes cast on the resolution, accepting MPAL
Shareholders registered as holding Magellan Shares may have more influence over whether
resolutions of Magellan Shareholders are passed than holders of Magellan CDIs.
Some institutional MPAL Shareholders may be restrained by their investment mandates or
other contracts personal to them from trading in non-Australian securities and so must elect to
receive Magellan CDIs.
Trading liquidity in Magellan CDIs on ASX will not necessarily reflect trading liquidity of
Magellan Shares on NASDAQ or the Boston Stock Exchange.
-50-
•
•
•
•
•
•
8. RISK FACTORS
8.1 RISK FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH OWNING MAGELLAN SHARES
MPAL Shareholders who accept the Offer will receive Magellan Shares directly or in the form of
Magellan CDIs as their Offer Consideration.
The business activities of Magellan and MPAL are subject to risks. These risks include those that
apply specifically to Magellan’s business and those that apply to Magellan following the Offer. To a
large extent MPAL Shareholders are exposed to these risks now as MPAL is a subsidiary of
Magellan. Some of the specific risks can be mitigated through the use of safeguards and
contingency plans. However many risks are outside the control of Magellan and its Directors and
cannot be mitigated. The occurrence of any of the risk factors set out in this Section 8 may have an
adverse impact on the financial performance of Magellan following the Offer and the value of
Magellan Shares.
The Directors are responsible for ensuring that appropriate policies and procedures are in place to
identify and monitor the risks faced by Magellan and to ensure that those risks are managed in an
appropriate and prudent manner.
Investors should appreciate that owning Magellan Shares and/or Magellan CDIs involves various
risks which can be broadly categorised into general investment risks and specific business risks.
To fully understand the risks associated with an investment in Magellan, this Bidder’s Statement
should be read in its entirety.
Careful consideration should be given to the risk factors identified below, as well as the other
information contained in this Bidder’s Statement, before an investment decision is made. This
Bidder’s Statement contains statements that involve certain assumptions that are subject to
potential risks and uncertainties. Actual events and results, including the results of Magellan’s
operations, could differ materially from those anticipated. Some of the risks may be mitigated by
Magellan using safeguards and appropriate systems and taking certain actions. Some of the risks
may be outside the control of Magellan and not capable of mitigation. There are also general risks
associated with any investment in securities.
8.2 SPECIFIC BUSINESS RISKS
An analysis of some of the specific business risks facing Magellan are as set out below:
Magellan’s principal oil and gas property and the properties owned by MPAL could stop
producing oil and gas
MPAL’s Palm Valley and Mereenie fields could stop producing oil and gas or there could be a
material decrease in productions levels at the fields. Since these are the two principal revenue
producing properties of MPAL, any decline in production levels at these properties could cause
MPAL’s revenues to decline, thus reducing the amount of dividends paid by MPAL to Magellan.
Any such adverse impact on the revenues being received by Magellan from MPAL could restrict
Magellan’s ability to explore and develop oil and gas properties in the future.
In addition, the Kotaneelee gas field, which is now Magellan’s only source of revenue other than
MPAL’s operations, could stop producing natural gas, produce gas in decreased amounts, or be
shut-in completely (so that production would cease). In this event, Magellan would experience a
decline in revenues and would be forced to rely completely on Magellan’s receipt of dividends from
MPAL.
However, MPAL Shareholders will be exposed to these risks irrespective of whether Magellan
succeeds in its Offer to acquire all of the MPAL Shares it does not presently own.
If MPAL’s existing long-term gas supply contracts are terminated or not renewed,
Magellan’s share price and business could be adversely affected
-51-
MPAL’s financial performance and cash flows and therefore those of Magellan are substantially
dependent upon its Palm Valley and Mereenie existing supply contracts to sell gas produced at
these fields to MPAL’s major customers, The Northern Territory Power and Water Corporation and
its subsidiary, Gasgo Pty Limited. The Palm Valley-Darwin contract expires in the year 2012 and
the Mereenie contracts expire in the year 2009. If these gas supply contracts were to be terminated
or not renewed when they are due to expire, Magellan’s share price and business could be
adversely affected.
The Palm Valley Producers are actively pursuing gas sales contracts for the remaining
uncontracted reserves at both the Mereenie and Palm Valley gas fields in the Amadeus Basin. As
indicated above, gas production from both fields is fully contracted through to 2009 and 2012,
respectively. While opportunities exist to contract additional gas sales in the Northern Territory
market after these dates, there is a strong competition within the market and there are no
assurances that the Palm Valley producers will be able to contract for the sale of the remaining
uncontracted proved reserves.
However, MPAL Shareholders will be exposed to this risk irrespective of whether Magellan
succeeds in its Offer to acquire all of the MPAL Shares it does not presently own.
Fluctuations in Magellan’s operating results and other factors may depress Magellan’s
Share price
During the past few years, equity trading markets have experienced declines in the value of
securities generally and also price volatility that has often been unrelated to the operating
performance of particular companies. These fluctuations may adversely affect the trading price of
Magellan Shares. From time to time, there may be significant volatility in the market price of
Magellan Shares. Investors could sell Magellan Shares at or after the time that it becomes
apparent that the expectations of the market may not be realised, resulting in a decrease in the
market price of Magellan Shares.
As MPAL is also a public listed company, MPAL Shareholders will remain exposed to this risk with
respect to MPAL Shares irrespective of whether Magellan succeeds in its Offer to acquire all of the
MPAL Shares it does not presently own.
Magellan only has two full time employees and its operations could be disrupted if they were
unable or unwilling to perform their duties
Magellan only has two full time employees, Daniel Samela, the President and Chief Financial
Officer and one other employee. Mr. Samela has an employment agreement with an automatically
renewing 36 month term. Mr. Samela may terminate his employment relationship with Magellan at
any time with no penalty other than the loss of future compensation. If Mr. Samela resigned or was
unable or unwilling to perform the duties of President and Chief Financial Officer, Magellan’s
operations could face significant delay and disruption until a suitable replacement could be found
to succeed Mr. Samela. Any such delay or disruption could also prevent the achievement of
Magellan’s business objectives. In order to minimise any delay or disruption, Magellan has
retained a consultant to assist Mr Samela in the performance of his duties.
Magellan’s Restated Certificate of Incorporation includes provisions that could delay or
prevent a change in control of Magellan that Magellan Shareholders consider favourable
Magellan’s Restated Certificate of Incorporation, as amended, provides that any matter to be voted
upon at any meeting of shareholders must be approved not only by a simple majority of the shares
voted at such meeting, but also by a majority of the shareholders present in person or by proxy and
entitled to vote at the meeting. This provision may have the effect of making it more difficult to take
corporate action than customary “one share one vote” provisions, because it may not be possible
to obtain the necessary majority of both votes.
As a consequence, this provision may make it more difficult for a takeover of Magellan to be
consummated, which could prevent Magellan’s shareholders from receiving a premium for their
shares. In addition, an owner of a substantial number of Magellan Shares may be unable to
influence Magellan’s policies and operations through the shareholder voting process (e.g., to elect
directors).
-52-
In addition, Magellan’s Restated Certificate of Incorporation requires the approval of 662/3% of the
voting shareholders and of the voting shares for the consummation of any business combination
(such as a merger, consolidation, other acquisition proposal or sale, transfer or other disposition of
$5 million or more of Magellan’s assets) involving Magellan and certain related persons (generally,
any 10% or greater shareholders and their affiliates and associates). This higher vote requirement
may deter business combination proposals which Magellan Shareholders may consider
favourable.
Magellan’s dividend policy could depress Magellan Share price and harm Magellan’s
Shareholders
Magellan has not declared or paid dividends on Magellan Shares and has no current intention to
change this policy. Magellan currently plans to retain any future earnings to reduce Magellan’s
accumulated deficit and finance growth. Magellan’s dividend policy could depress the market price
for Magellan Shares.
Magellan may issue a substantial number of Magellan Shares under the stock option plans
and Magellan Shareholders may be adversely affected by the issue of those shares
As of 28 November 2005, there were 430,000 stock options outstanding, of which 410,000 are fully
vested and exercisable and 20,000 were not vested. There were also 395,000 options available for
future grants under Magellan’s Stock Option Plan. If all of these options, which total 825,000, were
awarded and exercised these Magellan Shares would represent approximately 3% of Magellan
Shares and would dilute the interests of other shareholders and could adversely affect the market
price of Magellan Shares.
If Magellan’s Shares are delisted from trading on the NASDAQ Capital Market, their liquidity
and value could be reduced
In order for Magellan to maintain the listing of the Magellan Shares on the NASDAQ Capital
Market, Magellan Shares must maintain a minimum bid price of $1.00 as set out in Marketplace
Rule 4310(c)(4). If the bid price of Magellan Shares trades below $1.00 for 30 consecutive trading
days, then the bid price of Magellan Shares must trade at $1.00 or more for 10 consecutive trading
days during a 180 day grace period to regain compliance with the rule. If Magellan Shares were to
be delisted from trading on the NASDAQ Capital Market, then most likely the shares would be
traded on the Electronic Bulletin Board. The delisting of Magellan Shares could adversely impact
the liquidity and value of Magellan Shares.
ASX Listing Compliance Risk
If the ASX suspends trading of Magellan CDIs, investors will not be able to buy or sell Magellan’s
CDIs on the ASX during the period of suspension.
ASX imposes certain requirements on the continued listing of a company on the ASX. Investors
cannot be assured that Magellan will continue to meet the requirements necessary to maintain it on
the ASX. In addition, the ASX may change those listing requirements.
8.3 RISKS RELATING TO THE OFFER
The following risk factors may arise as a result of the Offer and the acquisition of MPAL by
Magellan.
Market fluctuations may reduce the market value of the consideration offered to MPAL
Shareholders because the exchange ratio contemplated by the Offer is fixed
MPAL Shareholders are being offered consideration under the Offer that consists of a specified
number of Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs, rather than a number of Magellan Shares or
Magellan CDIs with a specified market value. Thus, the market value of Magellan Shares or
Magellan CDIs received pursuant to the Offer will fluctuate depending upon the market value of
Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs. Accordingly, the market value of Magellan Shares or Magellan
CDIs at the time you receive them may vary significantly from their market value on the date of your
acceptance of the Offer.
-53-
MPAL Shareholders should obtain recent market quotations of Magellan Shares when evaluating
whether or not to accept the Offer. A range of Magellan share prices and the implied Offer
Consideration derived from these prices is tabulated at Section 2.1.
Potential loss of capital gains tax roll-over relief
Certain Australian resident shareholders may receive the benefit of scrip for scrip roll-over relief. If
such relief is available, any capital gains tax implications of the disposal of MPAL Shares by
accepting MPAL Shareholders is deferred until the relevant shareholder disposes of the Magellan
Shares or Magellan CDIs acquired pursuant to the Offer. However, this relief is only available if,
among other conditions, Magellan becomes the owner of at least 80% of MPAL Shares. See
Section 9.2(c) for details.
If Magellan waives the 90% minimum acceptance condition and achieves a Relevant Interest in
MPAL of less than 80%, accepting MPAL Shareholders will lose the ability to obtain scrip for scrip
roll-over relief.
The Magellan Shares issued to MPAL Shareholders pursuant to the Offer will have different
rights and preferences than the MPAL Shares
MPAL Shareholders who participate in the Offer will receive Magellan Shares with rights and
preferences that are different from the rights and preferences of the MPAL Shares. The rights and
preferences of the Magellan Shares issued pursuant to the Offer are governed by Magellan’s
Restated Certificate of Incorporation and the laws of the United States and the State of Delaware
and are different from the rights and preferences under the law of Australia. Please refer to
Section 7.5 and Appendix E for a discussion of the different rights associated with Magellan
Shares.
MPAL Shareholders will have limited withdrawal rights with respect to the Offer, which
means that a decision to accept the Offer will generally be irrevocable.
Once MPAL Shareholders have accepted the Offer, MPAL Shareholders will only have limited
rights to withdraw acceptances of the Offer. Under Australian law, if, after MPAL Shareholders
have accepted the Offer and while it remains subject to the Conditions, the Offer Period is
extended for more than one month, MPAL Shareholders will be able to withdraw acceptances.
Otherwise, MPAL Shareholders will be unable to withdraw acceptances of the Offer even if the
market value of Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs varies significantly from their value on the date
of acceptance of the Offer.
Obtaining required approvals and satisfying closing conditions may delay or prevent
completion of the Offer
Notifications to and authorisations and approvals of governmental agencies in Australia and the
U.S. with respect to the Offer must be made and received prior to the completion of the Offer.
Completion of the Offer is conditional upon the receipt of all approvals from public authorities on
terms acceptable to Magellan. Magellan and MPAL are seeking to obtain all required regulatory
approvals prior to the Annual Meeting of Magellan’s Shareholders however, no assurances can be
given that all required regulatory approvals will be obtained or that restrictions on the combined
company will not be sought by governmental agencies as a condition to obtaining those approvals.
-54-
Issue of Magellan Shares
Pursuant to the Offer, and if Magellan ultimately reached 100% of MPAL, Magellan will issue up to
14,700,000 new Magellan Shares. Some MPAL Shareholders may not wish to continue to hold
Magellan Shares (in the form of Magellan CDIs) which they receive and may sell them on the ASX.
Further, a nominee appointed by Magellan (and approved by ASIC) will be issued any Magellan
Shares attributable under the Offer to Foreign Shareholders and will sell them in accordance with
the terms of the Offer.
If a significant number of MPAL Shareholders sell their Magellan Shares (in the form of Magellan
CDIs), or there is a significant number of MPAL Shares held by Foreign Shareholders (resulting in
a significant number of Magellan Shares being sold by the nominee) the price at which Magellan
CDIs are traded on ASX may be adversely affected.
The closing price of Magellan Shares was US$1.93 on 17 October 2005, the last day of trading
prior to the Announcement Date. Since that date, the price of Magellan Shares has fluctuated from
a low of US$1.50 to a high of US$1.94. On 28 November 2005, the closing price of Magellan
Shares was US$1.60.
MPAL Shareholders will experience dilution to their pro-rata interest in MPAL assets as a
result of the Offer
MPAL Shareholders who accept the Offer will, upon consummation of the Offer, own a significantly
smaller pro rata percentage interest in the assets of MPAL than the pro rata percentage they
owned prior to the consummation of the Offer.
If the Offer is successful and Magellan acquires all MPAL Shares it does not presently own, it will
issue Magellan Shares representing approximately 36.3% of its expanded issued capital. MPAL
Shareholders (other than Magellan) presently hold 44.9% of the issued capital of MPAL.
Receipt of Magellan Shares in exchange for MPAL Shares in the Offer could generate tax
liabilities for MPAL Shareholders that are in excess of that MPAL Shareholder’s cash
holdings.
As a result of participation in the Offer, an MPAL Shareholder may become liable for the payment
of tax liabilities that are in excess of that MPAL Shareholder’s available cash. If that is the case, the
MPAL Shareholder might, depending upon his or her particular circumstances, have to sell non-
cash assets that he or she owns in order to satisfy his or her tax liabilities. We urge MPAL
Shareholders to consult their tax adviser to determine the tax consequences, including state, local,
foreign or other tax consequences, associated with participation in the Offer. We also urge MPAL
Shareholders to consult their tax or other adviser, such as a financial adviser, to determine their
ability to make timely payment with respect to any tax liabilities that may be incurred as a result of
participation in the Offer.
For a summary of the Australian income tax consequences that are expected to be material to
typical MPAL Shareholders that participate in the Offer, see Section 9.
Magellan’s cumulative net operating losses (NOLs) may become significantly limited
following the completion of the Offer
At June 30, 2005, Magellan had approximately US$12.2 million and US$2.237 million of net
operating loss carry forwards (NOLs) for U.S. federal and state income tax purposes, respectively,
which are available to offset taxable earnings in the future. These NOLs are scheduled to expire
periodically between the years 2007 and 2025. In the event of an “ownership change” within the
meaning of Section 382 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, Magellan’s ability to use its NOLs to
offset future taxable income may become significantly limited.
-55-
reduce the ability of Magellan to access the profits of MPAL; and
While Magellan’s management and tax advisers believe Magellan will not experience such an
“ownership change,” as a result of the Offer, it appears that Magellan would, upon completion of
the Offer and the compulsory acquisition, be close to the threshold for such a change of ownership.
Depending upon whether there are sufficient additional ownership changes during the application
measuring period because of transfers of Magellan Shares, the issue of new Magellan Shares
and/or a reorganisation of Magellan, Magellan may lose some or all of its ability to use these NOLs
in the future. Even if the Offer is not completed, NOLs may not be available to Magellan in the
future as an offset against future profits for income tax purposes to the extent that Magellan does
not have such taxable income.
Less than 100% ownership
It is possible that Magellan will acquire relevant interests in less than 100% in the MPAL Shares as
a result of the Offer. The impact on Magellan of acquiring Relevant Interests in less than 100% of
the MPAL Shares will depend on the ultimate level of ownership achieved. In this regard,
Sections 6.3 and 6.4 of this Bidder’s Statement show how Magellan’s intentions will differ
depending on the level of ownership achieved by Magellan. It is noted that a shareholding of less
than 100% of the MPAL Shares will, among other things:
•
 
•
Loss of key staff
Magellan and MPAL depend, and will continue to depend in the foreseeable future, on the services
of their officers and key employees with extensive experience and expertise in evaluating and
analysing producing oil and gas properties and drilling prospects, maximising production from oil
and gas properties, marketing oil and gas production and developing and executing financing
strategies. Magellan and MPAL’s ability to retain their officers and key employees is important to
Magellan and MPAL’s continued success and growth. The unexpected loss of the services of one
or more of these individuals could have a detrimental effect on their businesses. Neither Magellan
nor MPAL maintain key person life insurance on any of Magellan’s personnel.
MPAL information
Any inaccuracy in the MPAL information contained in this Bidder’s Statement could have an
adverse impact on the financial performance of Magellan following the Offer and the value of
Magellan Shares. In addition, it is possible that additional risks may exist in relation to MPAL’s
businesses which are unknown to Magellan.
Minority shareholders in MPAL
If an MPAL Shareholder does not accept the Offer and the Offer becomes unconditional the MPAL
Shareholder may, depending on the level of acceptance of the Offer, become part of a locked-in
minority in MPAL. In such a case, the liquidity of MPAL Shares may be materially diminished.
limit the ability of MPAL generally to function as a member of Magellan.
8.4 RISKS RELATED TO THE OIL AND GAS INDUSTRY
The following risk factors relate to an investment in the oil and gas industry generally.
MPAL Shareholders will be exposed to these risks irrespective of whether Magellan succeeds in
its Offer to acquire all of the MPAL Shares it does not presently own.
Oil and gas prices are volatile. A decline in prices could adversely affect Magellan’s financial
position, financial results, cash flows, access to capital and ability to grow
-56-
Magellan’s revenues, operating results, profitability, future rate of growth and the carrying value of
oil and gas properties in which Magellan or MPAL has an interest depend primarily upon the prices
received for the oil and gas sold. Prices also affect the amount of cash flow available for capital
expenditure and the ability of Magellan and MPAL to borrow money or raise additional capital. The
prices of oil, natural gas, methane gas and other fuels have been, and are likely to continue to be,
volatile and subject to wide fluctuations in response to numerous factors, including the following:
•
 
•
 
•
 
•
the extent of domestic production and importation of such fuels and substitute fuels in relevant
markets;
political conditions in oil, natural gas, and other fuel-producing and fuel-consuming areas;
worldwide and domestic supplies of oil and gas;
changes in the supply and demand for such fuels;
•
 
•
•
weather conditions;
the competitive position of each such fuel as a source of energy as compared to other energy
sources; and
the effect of governmental regulation on the production, transportation, and sale of oil, natural
gas, and other fuels.
These factors and the volatility of the energy markets make it extremely difficult to predict future oil
and gas price movements with any certainty. Declines in oil and gas prices would not only reduce
revenue, but could reduce the amount of oil and gas that we can produce economically and, as a
result, could have a material adverse effect on Magellan’s financial condition, results of operations
and reserves. Further, oil and gas prices do not necessarily move in tandem. Because more than
90% of proved reserves in which Magellan or MPAL has an interest at 30 June 2005 are natural
gas reserves, Magellan is more affected by movements in natural gas prices and would receive
lower reserves if natural gas prices in Australia and Canada were to decline.
Competition in the oil and natural gas industry is intense, and many competitors have
greater financial and other resources
Magellan and MPAL operate in the highly competitive areas of oil and natural gas acquisition,
development, exploitation, exploration and production and faces intense competition from both
major and other independent oil and natural gas companies. Many of their competitors have
financial and other resources substantially greater than that of Magellan and MPAL, and some of
them are fully integrated oil companies. These companies may be able to pay more for
development prospects and productive oil and natural gas properties and may be able to define,
evaluate, bid for and purchase a greater number of properties and prospects than the financial or
human resources of Magellan and MPAL permit. The ability of Magellan and MPAL to develop and
exploit oil and natural gas properties in which Magellan or MPAL has an interest and to acquire
additional properties in the future will depend upon their ability to successfully conduct operations,
evaluate and select suitable properties and consummate transactions in this highly competitive
environment. In addition, Magellan can provide no assurance that it will be able to compete with, or
enter into cooperative relationships with, any such firms.
Oil and gas exploration and production operations are subject to numerous environmental
laws, compliance with which may be extremely costly
The operations of Magellan and MPAL are subject to environmental laws and regulations in the
various countries in which they are conducted. Such laws and regulations frequently require
completion of a costly environmental impact assessment and government review process prior to
commencing exploratory and/or development activities. In addition, such environmental laws and
regulations may restrict, prohibit, or impose significant liability in connection with spills, releases,
or emissions of various substances produced in association with fuel exploration and
development.
-57-
Magellan can provide no assurance that it and MPAL will be able to comply with applicable
environmental laws and regulations or that those laws, regulations or administrative policies or
practices will not be changed by the various governmental entities. The cost of compliance with
current laws and regulations or changes in environmental laws and regulations could require
significant expenditures. Moreover, if there is any breach of any governing laws or regulations, the
operator may be compelled to pay significant fines, penalties, or other payments. Costs associated
with environmental compliance or non-compliance may have a material adverse impact on
Magellan’s financial condition or results of operations in the future.
Magellan may not have funds sufficient to make the significant capital expenditure required
to replace current reserves
MPAL’s exploration, development and acquisition activities require substantial capital expenditure.
Historically, MPAL has funded its capital expenditure through a combination of cash flows from
operations, farming in other companies to projects in which MPAL has an interest and debt and
equity issuances. Future cash flows are subject to a number of variables, such as the level of
production from existing wells, prices of oil and gas, and MPAL’s success in developing and
producing new reserves. If revenue were to decrease as a result of lower oil and gas prices or
decreased production, and MPAL’s access to capital were limited, MPAL would have a reduced
ability to replace its reserves. If MPAL’s cash flow from operations is not sufficient to fund MPAL’s
capital expenditure budget, it may not be able to access additional bank debt, debt or equity or
other methods of financing to meet these requirements.
If Magellan is not able to replace reserves, it may not be able to sustain production
Magellan’s future success depends largely upon the ability of MPAL as well as Magellan to find,
develop or acquire additional oil and gas reserves that are economically recoverable. Unless it
replaces the reserves it produces through successful development, exploration or acquisition
activities, proved reserves will decline over time. Recovery of any additional reserves will require
significant capital expenditures and successful drilling operations. Magellan and MPAL may not be
able to successfully find and produce reserves economically in the future. In addition, Magellan
may not be able to acquire proved reserves at acceptable costs.
Exploration and development drilling may not result in commercially productive reserves
MPAL does not always encounter commercially productive reservoirs through its drilling
operations. The new wells MPAL drills or participates in may not be productive and it may not
recover all or any portion of its investment in wells it drills or participates in. The seismic data and
other technologies used do not allow MPAL to know conclusively prior to drilling a well that oil or
gas is present or may be produced economically. The cost of drilling, completing and operating a
well is often uncertain, and cost factors can adversely affect the economics of a project. MPAL’s
efforts will be unprofitable if it drills dry wells or wells that are productive but do not produce
enough reserves to return a profit after drilling, operating and other costs. Further, MPAL’s drilling
operations may be curtailed, delayed or cancelled as a result of a variety of factors, including:
•
unexpected drilling conditions;
equipment failures or accidents;
adverse weather conditions;
title problems;
pressure or irregularities in formations;
•
 
•
 
•
 
•
 
•
 
•
Future price declines may result in a write-down of Magellan’s asset carrying values
compliance with environmental and other governmental requirements; and
increases in the cost of, or shortages or delays in the availability of, drilling rigs and equipment.
-58-
Magellan utilises the successful efforts method of accounting for its oil and gas operations. Under
this method, the costs of successful wells, development dry holes and productive leases are
capitalised and amortised on units of production basis over the life of the related reserves. Costs
centres for amortisation purposes are determined on a field by field basis. Magellan records its
proportionate share in its working interest agreements in the respective classifications of assets,
liabilities, revenues and expenses. Unproved properties with significant acquisition costs are
periodically assessed for impairment in value, with any required impairment charged to expense.
The successful efforts method also imposes limitations on the carrying or book value of proved oil
and gas properties. Oil and gas properties are reviewed for impairment whenever events or
changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts may not be recoverable. Magellan
estimates the future undiscounted cash flows from the affected properties to determine the
recoverability of carrying amounts. In general, analyses are based on proved developed reserves,
except in circumstances where it is probable that additional resources will be developed and
contribute to cash flows in the future. For Mereenie and Palm Valley, proved developed natural gas
reserves are limited to contracted quantities. If such contracts are extended, the proved developed
reserves will be increased to the lesser of the actual proved developed reserves or the contracted
quantities. A significant decline in oil and gas prices from current levels, or other factors, without
other mitigating circumstances, could cause a future write-down of capitalised costs and a non-
cash charge against future earnings.
Oil and gas drilling and producing operations are hazardous and expose Magellan to
environmental liabilities
Oil and gas operations are subject to many risks, including well blowouts, cratering and
explosions, pipe failure, fires, formations with abnormal pressures, uncontrollable flows of oil,
natural gas, brine or well fluids, and other environmental hazards and risks. Drilling operations
involve risks from high pressures and from mechanical difficulties such as stuck pipes, collapsed
casings and separated cables. If any of these risks occur, we could sustain substantial losses as a
result of:
•
 
•
 
•
severe damage to or destruction of property, natural resources and equipment;
pollution or other environmental damage;
injury or loss of life;
clean-up responsibilities;
suspension of operations.
regulatory investigations and penalties; and
•
 
•
 
•
The liability of Magellan and MPAL for environmental hazards includes those created either by the
previous owners of properties that it purchases or leases or by acquired companies prior to the
date Magellan acquires them. Magellan and MPAL maintain insurance against some, but not all, of
the risks described above. Insurance may not be adequate to cover casualty losses or liabilities.
Also, in the future Magellan and MPAL may not be able to obtain insurance at premium levels that
justify its purchase.
8.5 GENERAL INVESTMENT RISKS
MPAL Shareholders should be aware that acquiring Magellan Shares and Magellan CDIs involves
various risks. There are general risks associated with owning securities in publicly listed
companies. The price of securities can go down as well as up due to factors outside the control of
Magellan or MPAL. These factors include Australian and worldwide economic and political
stability, natural disaster, performance of the Australian stock market as a whole, and the
Australian interest rates, foreign exchange, taxation and labour relations environments.
These are risks of investment which are considered beyond the control of Magellan.
Possible volatility of prices
-59-
Both NASDAQ and the ASX stock market have from time to time experienced significant price and
volume fluctuations, which may be unrelated to the operating performance of particular companies.
The market price of Magellan Shares and Magellan CDIs may be volatile and may go down as
well as up. Factors that may have a significant impact on the market price and marketability of
Magellan Shares include announcements as to government regulation, variation in interest rates,
the activities of any competitors, economic and other external factors, as well as fluctuations in
Magellan’s operating results.
Regulation and publicity
Changes to the regulatory environment for the oil and gas industry and/or any publicity may have
an oil and gas on Magellan which may have a material adverse effect on investment in Magellan’s
Shares or Magellan CDIs.
Macro economic risks
The general state of the Australian and international economies as well as changes in taxation,
monetary policy, interest rates, statutory requirements and currency exchange rates may influence
the profitability of Magellan, and may affect the value of the Magellan CDIs.
Taxation risks
Tax liabilities are the responsibility of each individual investor, and Magellan is not responsible
either for taxation or penalties incurred by investors. Investors should consult their own taxation
advisers to ascertain the tax implications of their investment.
This list is not exhaustive and potential investors should read this Bidder’s Statement in full. If
prospective investors require further information on these risks, prospective investors should seek
professional advice.
Taxation considerations
The effects of taxation can be complex and may change over time. A summary of the current
Australian income tax implications associated with acceptance of the Offer is outlined in Section 9.
However, this summary is general in nature and, as the circumstances for each MPAL Shareholder
may vary, MPAL Shareholders should seek professional taxation advice in relation to their own
position.
Changes to the taxation environment, including taxation laws and their commercial application
may have a material adverse effect on an MPAL Shareholder’s investment in Magellan Shares or
otherwise have a material adverse effect on Magellan’s business and financial position.
Future securities issues
Magellan may, in certain circumstances issue further Magellan Shares or other securities without
the approval of Magellan Shareholders. Any such issue may dilute the interest a Magellan
Shareholder will have in Magellan.
Regulatory changes
Changes to the regulatory environment, including the Corporations Act and ASIC policy and their
commercial application may have a material adverse effect on a Magellan Shareholder’s
investment in Magellan Shares or otherwise have a material adverse effect on Magellan’s
business and financial position.
Accounting treatment
From 1 January 2005, the accounting standards that apply to reporting entities under the
Corporations Act will be the standards issued by the International Accounting Standards Board
(IASB).
Other changes to accounting standards by either the IASB or the Australian Accounting Standards
Board may result in a material impact on the reported earnings and financial position of Magellan
and MPAL in future periods.
-60-
8.6 NOTE ON RISK FACTORS
The above list of general and specific risk factors should not be taken as exhaustive of the risks
faced by Magellan and MPAL or by MPAL Shareholders. The above factors, and others not
specifically referred to above, may in the future materially affect the financial performance of
Magellan and MPAL and the value of the Magellan Shares. Therefore, the Magellan Shares carry
no guarantee with respect to the payment of dividends or returns of capital. Neither Magellan nor
any of its Directors guarantees that any specific objectives of Magellan and MPAL will be achieved
or that any particular performance of Magellan, MPAL or of its Securities will be achieved.
-61-
9. TAXATION IMPLICATIONS
9.1 INTRODUCTION
The following is a broad outline of the principal Australian income tax consequences for Australian
resident individual and company MPAL Shareholders associated with acceptance of the Offer and
issue of Magellan Shares and Magellan CDIs. This outline is not exhaustive of all possible income
tax considerations that could apply to particular MPAL Shareholders. There are a number of
limitations to the outline including that:
(a) it applies only to Australian resident individual and company taxpayers. It does not cover the
tax treatment for any other classes of taxpayers including individuals who are non-residents of
Australia for tax purposes, banks, insurance organisations, superannuation funds, trusts, tax
exempt organisations or employees of MPAL who acquired their MPAL Shares in respect of
their employment (such as through any employee share or option plans);
(b) it applies only where MPAL Shareholders hold their MPAL Shares on capital account. It does
not apply where the MPAL Shares are held on revenue account (e.g. shares held by MPAL
Shareholders who trade in Securities or hold MPAL Shares as trading stock);
(c) it does not consider the taxation implications of matters relating to the funding of the acquisition
of the MPAL Shares and associated tax deductions, including any matters that may arise due to
Magellan’s dividend policy; and
(d) it is based on Australian tax law in effect at the date of this Bidder’s Statement. It does not
consider or anticipate any changes in the law (including changes to legislation, judicial
authority or administrative practice).
Magellan and its advisers do not accept any liability or responsibility in respect of any statement
concerning the taxation consequences of the Offer or in respect of the taxation consequences
themselves. All MPAL Shareholders, and particularly those shareholders whose situation is not
addressed in this outline as noted above, should consult their own independent professional tax
advisers regarding the tax consequences of disposing of MPAL Shares and acquiring Magellan
CDIs.
9.2 ACCEPTANCE OF THE OFFER AND DISPOSAL OF MPAL SHARES
(a) Capital gain or loss
The disposal of MPAL Shares by an MPAL Shareholder pursuant to the Offer will constitute a
Capital Gains Tax (CGT) event for Australian income tax purposes. A capital gain will arise if the
capital proceeds (that is, the market value of the Magellan CDIs received on the date of
acquisition) exceed the cost base of the MPAL Shares.
MPAL Shareholders may realise a capital gain or a capital loss in respect of the disposal of their
MPAL Shares (refer to Section 9.2(b) below), subject to the availability of scrip for scrip roll-over
relief (refer Section 9.2(c) below).
In certain circumstances, MPAL Shareholders may be eligible to apply the CGT discount (or
indexation) to reduce their assessable capital gain (the eligibility requirements for the CGT
discount are discussed in the following paragraphs). The relevant rate of the CGT discount is 50%
for individuals.
(b) Where roll-over relief is unavailable or not chosen
To the extent that scrip for scrip roll-over relief is not available (e.g. if Magellan does not achieve an
80% ownership interest in MPAL Shares) or is not accessed (e.g. the MPAL Shareholder is not a
resident of Australia for taxation purposes, or the MPAL Shareholder chooses not to access roll-
over relief), the tax consequences should be as follows:
• a capital gain should arise to the extent that the capital proceeds from the disposal of MPAL
Shares (being the market value on the issue of the Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs, as
appropriate) exceeds the cost base of the MPAL Shares (or, in some cases, the indexed cost
base); or
-62-
• a capital loss should be realised to the extent the capital proceeds received by an MPAL
Shareholder are less than the reduced cost base of the MPAL Shares.
Any capital gain realised in respect of the disposal of the MPAL Shares should be included in the
MPAL Shareholder’s assessable income in the tax year in which the Offer is accepted (unless the
resulting capital gains are completely offset against other capital losses of the MPAL Shareholder).
Capital losses may be applied against any other capital gains derived by the MPAL Shareholder in
the same year. Any unapplied capital losses may be carried forward to be applied against future
capital gains.
The availability of indexation or a CGT discount in calculating the amount of the capital gain
included in assessable income depends on a number of factors including the date of acquisition of
the MPAL Shares, whether the Shareholders are companies or individuals and the choice made
by these MPAL Shareholders (refer to Section 9.2(b)(i) and (ii) below).
(i) MPAL Shares acquired at or before 11.45am (Eastern Standard Time) on 21 September 1999
The calculation of the cost base of the MPAL Shares depends on individual circumstances.
Generally, the cost base of MPAL Shares is equal to the amount paid by the MPAL Shareholder for
the Securities plus certain incidental costs incurred (for example, brokerage fees). If MPAL Shares
were acquired at or before 11.45am (Eastern Standard Time) on 21 September 1999, the cost
base of the MPAL Shares may be adjusted to include indexation. This is done by reference to
changes in the Consumer Price Index from the quarter in which the MPAL Shares were acquired
until the quarter ended 30 September 1999. While indexation adjustments are taken into account
for the purposes of calculating any capital gain, they are ignored when calculating the amount of
any capital loss. Indexation automatically applies to MPAL Shareholders which are companies.
Instead of applying indexation to the cost base of their MPAL Shares, individuals may instead
choose to apply the 50% CGT discount to the net capital gain resulting from the disposal of MPAL
Shares (i.e. after any capital losses have been applied). The 50% CGT discount is only available
to individuals that have held their MPAL Shares for at least 12 months prior to the date the Offer is
accepted. The 50% CGT discount means that only half of any net capital gain arising from the
disposal of the MPAL Shares is included in assessable income.
Whether it is better for a company or individual MPAL Shareholder to choose to include indexation
or not will depend upon the particular MPAL Shareholder’s individual circumstances, including the
cost base of the MPAL Shares and whether the MPAL Shareholder has any available capital
losses. MPAL Shareholders should consult their own tax advisers in this regard.
(ii) MPAL Shares acquired after 11.45am (Eastern Standard Time) on 21 September 1999
If MPAL Shares are held by an individual and:
• they were acquired after 11.45am (Eastern Standard Time) on 21 September 1999; and
• have been held for at least 12 months before the date on which the MPAL Shareholder accepted
the Offer,
then the CGT discount referred to above should generally be available.
There is no entitlement to indexation of the cost base for the MPAL Shareholder in these
circumstances.
It should be noted that the CGT discount is not available where MPAL Shares are held by a
company.
(iii) MPAL Shares acquired before 20 September 1985 (Pre-CGT MPAL Shares)
If the MPAL Shares were acquired before 20 September 1985 any capital gain or loss made on the
disposal of MPAL Shares for Magellan CDIs will be disregarded.
-63-
The Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs issued will, if subsequently disposed of, be subject to
CGT (refer to Section 9.4 below).
The cost base of each Magellan Share or Magellan CDI acquired under the Offer will be equal to
the total market value of all the MPAL Shares on the date of the disposal of the MPAL Shares,
divided by the number of Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs acquired.
(c) Scrip for scrip roll-over relief
Subdivision 124-M of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 provides scrip for scrip roll-over relief
where shareholders dispose of some or all of their shares in one company in exchange for shares
or a CHESS Unit of Foreign Security (CUFs) (being, in this case, the Magellan CDIs) in another
company. Roll-over relief may be available where:
• an MPAL Shareholder receives Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs in consideration for the
disposal of some or all of their MPAL Shares under the Offer;
• as a result of the Offer, Magellan becomes the owner of at least 80% of the MPAL Shares;
• the Offer is to be made to all MPAL Shareholders and is on the same terms for all MPAL
Shareholders and the Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs provide the same kind of rights and
obligations as those attached to the MPAL Shares;
• the MPAL Shareholder acquired their MPAL Shares on or after 20 September 1985 and, but for
the roll-over, a capital gain would arise from the exchange (refer to Section 9.2(b) above);
• the relevant MPAL Shareholder is an Australian resident; and
• the relevant MPAL Shareholder chooses that the roll-over applies.
Magellan is not in a position to confirm that the 80% requirement will be satisfied for the purposes
of determining whether roll-over relief will be available to the MPAL Shareholders. Should this
80% requirement not be satisfied, scrip for scrip roll-over relief may not be available.
Where scrip for scrip rollover relief is accessed, any capital gain resulting from the disposal by
MPAL Shareholders of MPAL Shares pursuant to the Offer is disregarded. Furthermore, the cost
base in total of the Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs acquired, pursuant to the Offer, will be
equal to the cost base in total of the MPAL Shares disposed of. The total cost base of the MPAL
shares disposed of will need to be reasonably allocated between each of the Magellan Shares or
Magellan CDIs acquired. The allocation of the total cost base for the MPAL Shares will provide the
cost base for each Magellan Share or Magellan CDI. The acquisition date for CGT purposes of the
Magellan CDIs acquired under the Offer will be the same as that for the corresponding MPAL
Shares disposed.
As a result of accessing scrip for scrip rollover relief, the CGT implications of the disposal of the
MPAL Shares is effectively only deferred until the relevant MPAL Shareholders dispose of the
Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs acquired pursuant to the Offer.
All MPAL Shareholders, and particularly those not covered by this outline as noted above, should
obtain their own independent professional taxation advice as to whether and how a roll-over
election should be made.
-64-
9.3 DIVIDENDS IN RELATION TO MAGELLAN CDIS
Dividend income received from Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs will be included in assessable
income as foreign source dividend income. Dividends paid by Magellan will not be franked and as
such will not provide tax offsets from imputation credits. As a consequence, the Australian tax
burden on any Magellan dividends may be greater than that applicable to fully franked MPAL
dividends. MPAL Shareholders should seek specific taxation advice in relation to the taxation
implications for their particular circumstances. Upon payment of the dividend Magellan may
withhold and remit a percentage of the gross dividend to the US tax authorities. That means that
the dividend will be received net of withholding tax. The withholding tax rate would generally be
15%. However, the withholding tax rate for companies may be 5% where certain criteria is
satisfied.
The gross dividend is required to be included in assessable income, being the whole dividend
received from Magellan plus any withholding tax withheld from the dividend. The US withholding
tax can generally be offset against Australian tax payable on the dividend. This offset is called a
“foreign tax credit”.
Generally the foreign tax credit that is allowable is the lesser of the actual tax withheld, or the
Australian tax payable on the dividend income (net of deductions that relate solely to the
dividends, excluding debt deductions).
If the withholding tax on the dividends exceeds the allowed foreign tax credits the excess foreign
tax credits attributable to the Magellan dividends can be offset against certain types of other foreign
income derived either in the year the excess arises or in future years (a five year limit applies to
carry forward foreign tax credits).
Whilst the Australian tax implications of receiving a dividend for Australian companies are largely
the same as for an Australian resident individual, the following exception is noted.
Where the Australian company beneficially holds 10% or more of Magellan shares and voting
interests after the Offer, the dividend will be exempt income for Australian tax purposes and no tax
will be payable on the dividend. Further in these circumstances no foreign tax credit for any US
dividend withholding tax paid will be available to the company shareholder.
9.4 FUTURE DISPOSAL OF MAGELLAN SHARES OR MAGELLAN CDIS
The income tax consequences of any disposal by an MPAL Shareholder of Magellan Shares or
Magellan CDIs should be broadly the same as for the disposal of MPAL Shares as described in
Section 9.2, subject to the differences outlined below.
Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs acquired where roll-over election was made
Where a choice to apply scrip for scrip roll-over relief was available and was made by an MPAL
Shareholder in respect of the disposal of MPAL Shares, the cost base of the Magellan Shares or
Magellan CDIs issued to the MPAL Shareholder under the Offer is equal to the total cost base of all
the MPAL Shares that were exchanged for the Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs which will be
apportioned across the Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs acquired on a reasonable basis (refer
to Section 9.2(c) above). Accordingly, the cost base of the Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs may
include indexation to 30 September 1999 if the MPAL Shares were acquired on or before 11.45am
(Eastern Standard Time) on 21 September 1999, unless the CGT discount is applied in relation to
the disposal of the Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs.
Individual MPAL Shareholders may determine whether the Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs
have been held for at least 12 months for the purpose of applying the CGT discount in relation to
any capital gain as a result of disposing of the Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs (see
Section 9.2(b) above) by reference to the date that they acquired the MPAL Shares. Therefore, if
the combined period during which the MPAL Shareholder held the MPAL Shares and the
Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs is at least 12 months, the MPAL Shareholder may be entitled
to apply the CGT discount in respect of the disposal of the Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs.
-65-
Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs acquired where roll-over relief does not apply
Where roll-over does not apply to the disposal of MPAL Shares, the cost base of each of the
Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs which are received in exchange for those MPAL Shares
includes the total market value of all the MPAL Shares disposed of at the date of acceptance of the
Offer, divided by the number of Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs acquired.
In determining whether the holding period for the discount concession for individuals has been
met, the acquisition date will be the date the Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs were acquired
under the Offer.
In relation to MPAL Shareholders that are companies no discount concession applies to the gain
on disposal of the Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs.
Conversion of Magellan CDIs to Magellan Shares
Where a MPAL Shareholder acquires Magellan CDIs under the Offer and the Magellan CDIs are
subsequently converted to Magellan Shares, no taxation implications should arise for the
shareholders from the conversion of the Magellan CDIs. MPAL Shareholders should seek specific
taxation advice in respect of any conversion of Magellan CDIs to Magellan Shares.
9.5 STAMP DUTY
All Australian States and Territories currently exempt the transfer of shares quoted on a recognised
stock exchange from stamp duty. Therefore, no stamp duty should be payable on the transfer of
MPAL Shares pursuant to the Offer for so long as MPAL remains listed. If MPAL is removed from
the Official List of ASX, stamp duty will be payable on a transfer of MPAL Shares by the transferee.
-66-
10. INFORMATION ON MPAL SECURITIES
As at the date of this Bidder’s Statement, there are 46,691,944 MPAL Shares on issue.
10.1 MPAL CAPITAL STRUCTURE
10.2 MPAL SHARE TRADING
Period
 
 
3 months prior to the date of the Announcement Date
Announcement Date to date of this Bidder’s Statement
Ave daily  
volume   
(000s)
  
70  
11
10.3 MAGELLAN INTERESTS IN MPAL
Low   
  
  
 A$1.30  
 A$1.36
High  
 
 
  A$1.50 
 A$1.585
As at the date of this Bidder’s Statement Magellan and its Associates have a Relevant Interest in
25,739,028 MPAL Shares.
As at the date of this Bidder’s Statement Magellan had Voting Power in MPAL of 55.13%.
10.4 NO COLLATERAL BENEFITS
Except as set out below, neither Magellan nor any Associate of Magellan has, during the period of
4 months ending on the day immediately before the date of Offer, given, or offered or agreed to
give, a benefit to another person likely to induce the other person, or an Associate, to:
(a) accept the Offer; or
 
(b) dispose of MPAL Shares,
which benefit was not offered to all MPAL Shareholders under the Offer.
10.5 NO ESCALATION AGREEMENTS
Neither Magellan nor any Associate of Magellan has entered into any escalation agreement that is
prohibited by section 622 of the Corporations Act.
10.6 DEALINGS IN MAGELLAN SHARES
In the four months prior to the date of the Offer, there have been no dealings in Magellan Shares by
Magellan or its Associates, Magellan’s Directors or their related entities.
-67-
11. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
11.1 ACCESS TO INFORMATION
As directors of MPAL, Walter J. McCann, Timothy L. Largay and Ronald P. Pettirossi have had
access to certain information concerning MPAL and its Subsidiaries which has not been disclosed
generally to MPAL Shareholders. Except as set out elsewhere in this Bidder’s Statement, none of
the information to which Magellan was given access was, in the opinion of Magellan, of such a
nature and quality that, if the information were generally available, a reasonable person would
expect it to have a material effect on the price or value of MPAL Shares or, in the opinion of
Magellan and except as disclosed in this Bidder’s Statement, would otherwise be material to a
decision by a MPAL Shareholder whether or not to accept the Offer.
11.2 CONDITIONS
The Conditions of the Offer are set out in Clause 7.1 of Appendix A. In summary the Conditions
and their status are set out below:
 
Condition
Quotation
Description of Condition
Status
Both an application for admission of the Magellan
Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs to quotation
on ASX is made within seven days after
commencement of the Offer Period and
permission for admission is granted no later than
seven days after the expiry of the Offer Period.
The number of MPAL Shares in which Magellan
and its Associates have a Relevant Interest at the
expiry of the Offer Period is not less than 90% of
the MPAL Shares then on issue.
All other necessary approvals for the proposed
transaction are granted, given, made or obtained
on an unconditional basis and, at the end of the
Offer Period, remain in full force and effect.
Magellan will lodge an
Appendix 1A with the ASX
within seven days of
commencement of the Offer
Period.
Magellan will monitor this
condition during the Offer
Period.
Magellan will monitor this
Condition during the Offer
Period.
90% minimum
acceptance
Other regulatory
approvals
Magellan
shareholder
approval
Registration
All resolutions necessary to approve, effect and
implement or authorise the implementation of the
Offer and the acquisition of the MPAL Shares are
passed by the requisite majority of Magellan
shareholders at a general meeting of Magellan
shareholders.
A meeting of Magellan’s
Shareholders is expected to
be held in January or
February 2006.
The U.S. Form S-4 registration statement has
All U.S. Offer Documents
been declared effective by the SEC and
have been lodged with the
SEC.
-68-
Description of Condition
Status
Magellan receives confirmation from the
SEC that all Magellan Shares issued
pursuant to the Offer will be registered
immediately on issue pursuant to the Offer.
Magellan will monitor this
Condition during the Offer
Period.
Condition
No acquisition or
disposal of material
asset
S&P ASX 200
Index
No change in
Control
No material
adverse
Except for any proposed transaction
publicly announced by MPAL before the
Announcement Date, during the period from
the Announcement Date to the end of the
Offer Period none of MPAL or any
controlled entity of MPAL:
acquires any companies, businesses
or assets for an amount in aggregate
greater than A$500,000 or makes an
announcement in that regard;
enters into, offers to enter into any
agreement, joint venture, partnership or
commitment which would require
expenditure, of an amount which is, in
aggregate, more than A$500,000, other
than in the ordinary course of business
or makes an announcement in that
regard.
(i)
(ii)
Magellan will monitor this
Condition during the Offer
Period.
Before the end of the Offer Period, the S&P
ASX 200 Index does not fall below 4,000
on any trading day.
No person having, or being entitled to have
any right to terminate or alter any
contractual relations between any person
and any MPAL Group entity or require the
sale of any Securities in an MPAL Group
entity as a result of the acquisition of MPAL
Shares by Magellan.
Magellan will monitor this
Condition during the Offer
Period.
During the period commencing on the
Announcement Date and ending on the
Magellan will monitor this
Condition during the Offer
change
expiry of the Offer Period, no change occurs
or is announced that would reasonably be
expected to adversely affect the capital
structure, business, financial or trading
position, future profitability, condition of
Period.
-69-
Condition
No litigation
No regulatory
intervention
Description of Condition
assets or liabilities of MPAL or a controlled
entity in a manner which would be material
in the context of MPAL’s operations as a
whole.
Status
Magellan will monitor this
Condition during the Offer
Period.
Magellan will monitor this
Condition during the Offer
Period.
During the period commencing on the
Announcement Date and ending on the
expiry of the Offer Period, no litigation or
arbitration proceedings have been or are
instituted or threatened against MPAL or a
controlled entity which are material in the
context of MPAL’s operations as a whole.
During the period commencing on the
Announcement Date and ending on the
expiry of the Offer Period, no Governmental
Agency or any other person takes any
action to:
(i)
(ii)
prohibit, prevent or inhibit the
acquisition of, or trading in, MPAL
Shares;
impose conditions on the Offer which
impose unduly onerous obligations
upon Magellan or would materially
affect the business or capital structure
of MPAL;
(iii)
require the divestiture by Magellan of
Securities or assets of any MPAL
Group entity,
other than an application to or a
decision or order of ASIC or the
Takeovers Panel for the purpose of or
in the exercise of the powers and
discretions conferred on it by the
Corporations Act.
No prescribed occurrences happen during
the period commencing on the
Announcement Date and ending on the
expiry of the Offer Period.
Magellan will monitor this
Condition during the Offer
Period.
At all times during the period from the
Announcement Date to the end of the Offer
Period, MPAL promptly provides to
Magellan a copy of all information that is not
generally available to Magellan or any
Magellan will monitor this
Condition during the Offer
Period.
-70-
No prescribed
occurrences
No selective
disclosure of
information
Condition
Status
Description of Condition
controlled entity or any of their respective
businesses or operations that has been provided
by MPAL or any of their respective officers,
employees, advisers or agents to any person for
the purposes of soliciting, encouraging or
facilitating a proposal or offer by that person, or by
any other person, in relation to a transaction under
which may result in a change in control of MPAL.
11.3 DATE FOR DETERMINING HOLDERS OF MPAL SHARES
For the purposes of section 633 of the Corporations Act, the date for determining the people to
whom information is to be sent under items 6 and 12 of section 633(1) is the date of the Offer.
11.4 ASIC MODIFICATIONS AND EXEMPTIONS
ASIC has published various other Class Order instruments providing for modifications and
exemptions that apply generally to all persons, including Magellan.
Magellan has been granted various modifications to the Corporations Act the effect of which is to:
(a) enable it to include, as a Condition to the Offer, that its shareholders approve the issue of new
Magellan Shares to be used as the Offer consideration; and
(b) clarify that the issue of Magellan Shares to MPAL Shareholders who are located in the U.S.
and Magellan Shares or Magellan CDIs to MPAL Shareholders in Australia constitute one offer
under Magellan’s Offer as required by the Corporations Act.
11.5 DISCLOSURE OF INTERESTS OF CERTAIN PERSONS
No director or proposed director of Magellan or any person named in this Bidder’s Statement as
performing a function in a professional, advisory or other capacity in connection with the
preparation or distribution of this Bidder’s Statement holds, or held at any time during the last 2
years, any interest in:
(a) the formation or promotion of Magellan;
(b) property acquired or proposed to be acquired by Magellan in connection with its formation or
promotion or the offer of Magellan Shares under the Offer; or
(c) Magellan Shares to be issued under the Offer,
other than as set out in this Section 11 or elsewhere in this Bidder’s Statement.
11.6 DISCLOSURE OF FEES AND BENEFITS RECEIVED BY CERTAIN PERSONS
Other than as set out below or elsewhere in this Bidder’s Statement, no amounts have been paid
or agreed to be paid and no benefits have been given or agreed to be given or agreed to be given:
(a) to a director or proposed director of Magellan, to induce them to become, or to qualify as a
director of Magellan;
(b) for services provided by any person referred to in Section 711(4) of the Corporations Act in
connection with the formation or promotion of Magellan or the offer of Magellan Shares under
the Offer.
-71-
11.7 DISCLOSURE OF ADVISER INTERESTS
Baron Partners Limited and TM Capital Corp have acted as joint financial advisers to Magellan. If
the Offer is successfully completed, the aggregate amount payable to Baron Partners Limited and
TM Capital Corp will be in excess of US$500,000, plus reimbursement for out-of-pocket expenses.
Watson Mangioni has acted as solicitors to the Offer. Magellan estimates that it will pay amounts
totalling A$160,000 (excluding disbursements and GST) to Watson Mangioni in respect of this
work.
Murtha Cullina LLP has reviewed this Bidder’s Statement to ensure consistency with the U.S.
Registration Statement. Magellan estimates that it will pay amounts totalling US$40,000 (including
disbursements) to Murtha Cullina LLP in respect of this work.
11.8 CONSENTS
Baron Partners Limited has given and before lodgement of this Bidder’s Statement has not
withdrawn its written consent to be named as joint financial adviser to the Offer in the form and
context in which it is named.
TM Capital Corp has given and before lodgement of this Bidder’s Statement has not withdrawn its
written consent to be named as joint financial adviser to the Offer in the form and context in which it
is named.
Watson Mangioni has given and before lodgement of this Bidder’s Statement has not withdrawn its
written consent to be named as Australian legal advisers to the Offer in the form and context in
which it is named.
Murtha Cullina LLP has given and before lodgement of this Bidder’s Statement has not withdrawn
its written consent to be named as U.S. legal advisers to Magellan in the form and context in which
it is named.
Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited has given and before lodgement of this Bidder’s
Statement has not withdrawn its written consent to being named as share registrar of Magellan in
the form in context in which it is named.
Each of Watson Mangioni, Murtha Cullina LLP, Baron Partners Limited, TM Capital Corp and
Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited:
(a) has not authorised or caused the issue of the Bidder’s Statement;
(b) does not make, or purport to make, any statement in this Bidder’s Statement other than as
specified as in this Section;
(c) to the maximum extent permitted by law, expressly disclaims all liability in respect of, makes no
representation regarding and takes no responsibility for, any part of this Bidder’s Statement
other than the reference to its name and the statements (if any) included in this Bidder’s
Statement with the consent of that party as specified in this Section.
In addition, this Bidder’s Statement includes statements which are made in, or based on
statements made in documents lodged with ASIC or given to ASX. Pursuant to ASIC Class Order
01/1543, the makers of those statements are not required to consent to, and have not consented to,
inclusion of those statements in this Bidder’s Statement. If you would like to receive a copy of any
of those documents (free of charge) please contact Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited
(see directory).
11.9 OTHER MATERIAL INFORMATION
There is no other information material to the making of a decision by an offeree whether or not to
accept an Offer (being information that is known to Magellan and has not previously been
disclosed to the holders of MPAL Shares) other than as disclosed in this Bidder’s Statement.
-72-
12. DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION
12.1 DEFINITIONS
The following defined terms are used throughout this Bidder’s Statement unless the context
otherwise requires. These terms are used throughout this Bidder’s Statement.
 
A$ or $
 
AASB
 
Acceptance Form
Australian Dollars.
   
  Australian Accounting Standards Board.
The acceptance form for the Offer accompanying this Bidder’s
Statement.
The date on which the Offer was announced to ASX, namely 18
October 2005.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission.
Has the same meaning given to that term in Section 9 of the
Corporations Act.
ASX Settlement and Transfer Corporation Pty Limited (ABN 49 008
504 532).
The operating rules of the settlement facility provided by ASTC.
   
  Australian Stock Exchange Limited (ABN 98 008 624 691).
   
  The market rules of ASX (being part of the operating rules of ASX).
   
  This Bidder’s Statement including the Offer.
The approximate VWAP of Magellan Shares in the period from the
Announcement Date to 28 November 2005, the last trading day prior
to the lodgement of this Bidder’s Statement.
Announcement Date
ASIC
 
Associate
ASTC
ASTC Settlement Rules
 
ASX
 
ASX Market Rules
 
Australian Offer Document
 
Benchmark Offer
Consideration
Bidder’s Statement
 
Board
Business Day
CDN
 
CDI
 
CGT
 
CHESS
CHESS Holding
 
Condition
Controlled Entity
 
Controlling Participant
 
Corporations Act
 
Director
 
EBIT
 
EBITDAX
Encumbrance
The contents of this booklet.
   
  The board of Directors of Magellan.
-73-
Monday to Friday inclusive, except New Year’s Day, Good Friday,
Easter Monday, Christmas Day, Boxing Day and any other day that
ASX declares is not a business day.
CHESS Depositary Nominees Pty Ltd (ABN 75 071 346 506).
   
  CHESS Depository Interest.
   
  Capital gains tax.
The Clearing House Electronic Subregister System which provides
for the electronic transfer, settlement and registration of securities in
Australia.
A holding of MPAL Shares on the CHESS subregister of MPAL.
A condition of the Offer being a condition set out in Clause 7.1 of
Appendix A.
Has the meaning given to that word in the Corporations Act.
   
  Has the meaning given in the ASTC Settlement Rules.
   
  The Corporations Act 2001 (Cth).
   
  A director of Magellan.
   
  Earnings before interest and tax.
Earnings before interest, tax, depreciation, amortisation and write-
off of capitalised exploration costs.
An interest or power:
reserved in or over an interest in any asset including, without
limitation, any retention of title; or
(a)
(b) created or otherwise arising in or over any interest in any asset
Foreign Law
 
Foreign Shareholder
Governmental Agency
GST
 
Holder Identification Number
Insolvency Event
(b)
(c)
under a bill of sale, mortgage, charge, lien, pledge, trust or
power,
by way of security for the payment of a debt, any other monetary
obligation or the performance of any other obligation and includes,
without limitation, any agreement to grant or create any of the
above.
-74-
A law of any jurisdiction other than an Australian jurisdiction.
Any MPAL Shareholder whose address as shown in the MPAL
Register is a place outside Australia and its external territories and
the United States of America to whom it is unlawful for Magellan to
make the Offer or for whom it is unlawful to accept the Offer.
Any government, semi-government, administrative, fiscal, judicial or
regulatory body, department, commission, authority, tribunal,
agency or entity.
Goods and services tax.
The number used to identify an MPAL Shareholder on the CHESS
Subregister of MPAL.
In relation to a body corporate:
(a)
an order is made or an application is made for the winding up
of that body corporate and that order or application is not
withdrawn or set aside within 10 Business Days;
a liquidator or provisional liquidator of that body corporate is
made or appointed or 9 an application is made for the
appointment of a liquidator or provisional liquidator and that
application is not withdrawn or set aside within 10 Business
Days;
an effective resolution is passed for the winding up of that body
corporate or a meeting is convened for the purpose of
considering any such resolution;
(d)
that body corporate is placed under any formal or informal kind
of insolvency administration or a meeting is convened for the
purpose of considering the appointment of an insolvency
administrator;
(e)
(f)
(g)
(i)
(j)
Listing Rules
 
Magellan
 
Magellan By-Laws
 
Magellan Restated
Certificate of Incorporation
 
Magellan CDI
 
Magellan CDI Holder
 
Magellan Share
a receiver, manager, receiver and manager or controller of the
main undertaking, property or material assets of that body
corporate is appointed or any step is taken for the appointment
of such a receiver, manager, receiver and manager or
controller or execution or distress or any other process is
levied or attempted or imposed against any of the main
undertaking, property or material assets of that body corporate;
that body corporate stops payment or ceases to carry on the
whole or any material part of its business or threatens to do so;
an order for payment is made or judgement is entered or
signed against that body corporate in an amount of not less
than A$100,000 and is not satisfied, stayed or set aside within
5 Business Days;
(h)
that body corporate becomes insolvent or unable to pay its
debts;
-75-
a compromise, composition or arrangement is proposed with or
becomes effective in relation to the creditors or any class of
creditors of that body corporate or that body corporate proposes
a reorganisation, moratorium or other administrative procedure
involving its creditors or any class of its creditors; or
any action is commenced to strike that body corporate’s name
off any register of companies.
The listing rules of the ASX.
 
  Magellan Petroleum Corporation.
 
  The Restated By-Laws of Magellan as of 22 July 2004.
The Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Magellan, as amended
on 12 February 1988 and 22 December 2000.
A Magellan CDI.
 
  A holder of a Magellan CDI.
 
  A share of common stock in the capital of Magellan.
Magellan Shareholder
 
MPAL
 
MPAL Constitution
 
MPAL Group
 
MPAL Register
 
MPAL Shareholder
 
MPAL Share
 
NASDAQ
Offer
Offer Consideration
 
Offer Date
 
Offer Period
Registrar
Relevant Interest
Rights
A registered holder of a Magellan Share.
 
  Magellan Petroleum Australia Limited (ABN 62 009 728 581).
 
  The Constitution of MPAL.
 
  MPAL and its controlled entities.
 
  The register of MPAL Shareholders.
 
  A registered holder of MPAL Shares.
 
  An ordinary share in the capital of MPAL.
 
  NASDAQ Capital Market.
-76-
The off market conditional offer for all of the issued MPAL Shares
that Magellan does not own, made by Magellan comprising:
the offer to acquire MPAL Shares set out in Appendix A made
under this Bidder’s Statement; and
(a)
(b)
the offer to acquire MPAL Shares held by MPAL Shareholders
with a registered address on the MPAL Register on the Offer
Date in the U.S. to be undertaken under the U.S. Offer
Document.
Consideration offered by Magellan for MPAL Shares.
   
  The date of the Offer being [     ].
The period for which the Offer remains open as set out in Section 2
of Appendix A.
Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited (ABN 48 078 279
277).
Has the same meaning given to that term in sections 608 and 609
of the Corporations Act.
All accretions, rights or benefits of whatever kind attaching to or
arising from MPAL Shares directly or indirectly after the date of this
Bidder’s Statement, including, without limitation, all dividends,
distributions, and all rights to receive dividends, distributions or to
SEC
 
Security
 
Trading Day
 
U.S.
 
US$
 
US Offer Documents
Voting Power
VWAP
receive or subscribe for Securities, stock shares, notes, bonds,
options or other securities, declared, paid or issued by MPAL or
any of its controlled entities.
The United States Securities and Exchange Commission.
   
  Has the meaning as given in Section 92 of the Corporations Act.
   
  Has the meaning given in the ASX Listing Rules.
   
  United States of America.
   
  United States dollar.
The joint proxy statement/prospectus contained within Magellan’s
registration statement and Form S-4 (File No. 333 – 129329) and
all appendices and exhibits.
-77-
Has the same meaning given to that term in Section 610 of the
Corporations Act.
Volume weighted average price.
12.2 INTERPRETATION
In this Bidder’s Statement, unless the context requires otherwise:
(a) a reference to a word includes the singular and the plural of the word and vice versa;
 
(b) a reference to a person in this Bidder’s Statement or any other document or agreement
includes its successors and permitted assigns;
(c) a reference to a gender includes any gender;
 
(d) a reference to an item in a Section, Schedule, Annexure or Appendix is a reference to an item
in the section of or schedule, annexure or appendix to this Bidder’s Statement and references
to this Bidder’s Statement include its schedules and any annexures;
(e) if a word or phrase is defined, then other parts of speech and grammatical forms of that word or
phrase have a corresponding meaning;
(f)  a term which refers to a natural person includes a company, a partnership, an association, a
corporation, a body corporate, a joint venture or a governmental agency;
(g) headings are included for convenience only and do not affect interpretation;
 
(h) a reference to a document or agreement including this Bidder’s Statement, includes a reference
to that document or agreement as amended, novated, supplemented, varied or replaced from
time to time;
(i)  a reference to a thing includes a part of that thing and includes but is not limited to a right;
 
(j)  the terms “included”, “including” and similar expressions when introducing a list of items do not
exclude a reference to other items of the same class or genus;
(k) a reference to a statute or statutory provision includes but is not limited to:
  (i)  a statute or statutory provision which amends, extends, consolidates or replaces the statute
or statutory provision;
(ii)  a statute or statutory provision which has been amended, extended, consolidated or replaced
by the statute or statutory provision; and
(iii) subordinate legislation made under the statute or statutory provision including but not limited
to an order, regulation, or instrument;
(l)  reference to “A$”, “AUD”, “Australian Dollars” or “dollars” is a reference to the lawful tender for
the time being and from time to time of the Commonwealth of Australia;
(m) reference to “US$” or “US dollars” is a reference to the lawful tender for the time being of the
US; and
(n)  a reference to an asset includes all property or title of any nature including but not limited to a
business, a right, a revenue and a benefit, whether beneficial, legal or otherwise.
This Bidder’s Statement has been approved by a unanimous resolution of the directors of
Magellan.
Dated: 29 November 2005
-78-
Signed
For and on behalf of Magellan Petroleum Corporation
Walter J. McCann
Chairman
Donald V. Basso
Director
Timothy L. Largay
Director
Ronald P. Pettirossi
Director
-79-
13. APPROVAL OF BIDDER’S STATEMENT
1. OFFER
1.1 Magellan offers to acquire your MPAL Shares on the terms and conditions of this Offer. You
may accept this Offer in respect of all of your MPAL Shares.
1.2 The consideration being offered by Magellan is 7 fully paid Magellan Shares issued for every
10 MPAL Shares.
1.3 If you have a registered address in the MPAL Register:
  (a) in the United States, you will receive your share consideration in the form of Magellan Shares
(traded primarily on NASDAQ);
(b) in Australia you will be offered your share consideration in the form of either
(ii) Magellan CDIs (to be traded in the ASX). One Magellan CDI will be issued for each
(i)  Magellan Shares; or
Magellan Share which you otherwise would be entitled to receive by accepting this Offer.
If you do not choose the form of Offer Consideration on your Acceptance Form, you are
deemed to have chosen to receive your Offer Consideration in the form of Magellan CDIs;
and
(c) in any other jurisdiction, you will not receive or be entitled to receive Magellan Shares or
Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs. Instead, Magellan will be undertaking the
actions set out in Clause 1.7.
Whatever form of share consideration you receive, it will be equivalent to 7 Magellan Shares for
every 10 MPAL Shares.
1.4 If you accept this Offer and Magellan acquires your MPAL Shares, Magellan is also entitled to
any Rights in respect of those MPAL Shares.
1.5 The number of MPAL Shares that you hold may mean that, if you accept this Offer, you will be
entitled to a number of Magellan Shares or Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs that
is not a whole number. In this case, your entitlement to Magellan Shares or Magellan Shares in
the form of Magellan CDIs will be rounded up to the next greater whole number.
1.6 Magellan intends for any Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs issued pursuant to the
Offer to be listed on ASX after the Offer has been completed. This Offer is subject to a condition
that the application for admission to quotation of Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs
issued pursuant to this Offer is made within seven days from the commencement of the Offer
Period and permission for admission to quotation is granted no later than seven days after the
end of the Offer Period.
1.7 If you are a Foreign Shareholder and you accept the Offer, Magellan will:
  (a) arrange for the allotment to a nominee approved by ASIC (Nominee) of the number of
Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs to be issued in accordance with the Offer to
which you and all other Foreign Shareholders will have been entitled but for this Clause 1.7;
(b) cause those Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs so allotted to be offered for sale
within 21 days of the end of the Offer Period in such a manner, such a price and on such
other terms and conditions as are determined by the Nominee;
(c) cause the Nominee to pay to you the amount (Offer Payment Amount) ascertained in
accordance with the following formula:
Net Proceeds of Sale X NCS/TCS
= Offer Payment Amount
-80-
Where:
Net Proceeds of Sale means the amount (if any) remaining after deducting from the proceeds of
the sale of the Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs to which the Foreign Shareholders
would be entitled under this Offer but for this Clause 1.7 the expenses of the sale of the Magellan
Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs allotted to the Nominee under this Clause 1.7.
NCS means the number of Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs to which you would be
entitled under this Offer but for this Clause 1.7.
TCS means total number of Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs allotted to the Nominee
under this Clause 1.7 in respect of Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs held by Foreign
Shareholders.
Payment of the Offer Payment Amount will be made by cheque in Australian dollars. The cheque
will be sent to you at your risk by pre-paid airmail to your address as shown on the MPAL Register
as at the date the Offer Payment Amount is calculated. Under no circumstances will interest be
paid to accepting MPAL Shareholders on the proceeds of this sale, regardless of any reasonable
delay in remitting these proceeds to you.
2. OFFER PERIOD
Unless withdrawn, this Offer remains open for acceptance during the period commencing on the
date of this Offer and ending at 7.00pm on [  ] Sydney time, subject to any extension of that period
in accordance with sections 650C and 650D of the Corporations Act.
3. WHO MAY ACCEPT
3.1 An offer in the form of this Offer is being made to:
  (a) each holder of MPAL Shares registered, or entitled to be registered, in the register of
members of MPAL at 7.00pm Sydney time on the Offer Date; and
(b) each other holder of MPAL Shares who becomes so registered before the end of the Offer
Period,
other than those MPAL Shareholders who have a registered address, as shown in the MPAL
Register, in the United States. Such MPAL Shareholders will receive the US Offer, being an offer,
as described in Sections 1.2 and 7.9 of the Bidder’s Statement, upon the U.S. Form S-4
registration statement being declared effective by the SEC.
3.2 If at the time this Offer is made to you another person is, or at any time during the Offer Period
and before this Offer is accepted becomes, the holder of, or entitled to be registered as the
holder of, some or all of your MPAL Shares (transferred shares), Magellan is deemed, in
place of this Offer, to have made at that time a corresponding Offer:
(a) to the other person, relating to the transferred shares; and
 
  (b) to you, relating to your MPAL Shares other than the transferred shares (if any).
3.3 If at any time during the Offer Period and before this Offer is accepted, you hold your MPAL
Shares in two or more distinct portions (for example, you hold some as trustee, nominee or
otherwise on account of another person) within the meaning of section 653B of the
Corporations Act:
(a) this Offer is deemed to consist of a separate corresponding Offer to you in relation to each
distinct portion of your MPAL Shares;
(b) to accept any of those corresponding Offers, you must specify:
 
(i)  by written notice accompanying your Acceptance Form; or
(ii) if the notice relates to MPAL Shares in a CHESS Holding, in an electronic form approved
by the ASTC Settlement Rules,
that your MPAL Shares consist of distinct portions and the number of the MPAL Shares to
which the acceptance relates; and
-81-
(c) otherwise, section 653B of the Corporations Act applies to this Offer in respect of your MPAL
Shares and any acceptance of this Offer by you.
4. HOW TO ACCEPT THE OFFER
4.1 You may accept this Offer in respect of all of your MPAL Shares.
 
4.2 You may only accept this Offer during the Offer Period.
4.3 If your MPAL Shares are held in a CHESS Holding, you can only accept this Offer in
accordance with the ASTC Settlement Rules.
4.4 To accept this Offer, you should proceed as follows:
  (a) you may complete the Acceptance Form in accordance with the instructions on the
Acceptance Form and return it so that the envelope in which it is sent is received by Magellan
in accordance with the Acceptance Form before the end of the Offer Period; and
(b) if your MPAL Shares are held in a CHESS Holding (as an alternative to completing the
Acceptance Form) you may either:
(i)  instruct your Controlling Participant to initiate acceptance of the Offer in accordance with
the sponsorship agreement between you and the Controlling Participant, to initiate
acceptance in accordance with Rule 14.14 of the ASTC Settlement Rules before the end
of the Offer Period; or
(ii) if you are a General Settlement Participant, initiate acceptance of the Offer in accordance
with Rule 14.14 of the ASTC Settlement Rules before the end of the Offer Period.
5. EFFECT OF ACCEPTANCE
5.1 By accepting the Offer in accordance with Clause 4.4, you will have:
  (a) accepted this Offer in respect of all of your MPAL Shares;
 
  (b) agreed to transfer your MPAL Shares to Magellan (subject to this Offer and the contract
resulting from your acceptance of it becoming unconditional);
(c) represented and warranted to Magellan that your MPAL Shares will at the time of acceptance
of this Offer and at the time of their transfer to Magellan be fully paid up and that Magellan will
acquire good title to and beneficial ownership of your MPAL Shares free from all
Encumbrances and other adverse third party interests of any kind;
(d) agreed to accept the Offer Consideration to which you become entitled by acceptance of the
Offer, subject to the terms of the Offer, the Magellan Restated Certificate of Incorporation and
the Magellan By-Laws and the provisions relating to holding of Magellan Shares directly and,
where appropriate, in the form of Magellan CDIs and authorised appropriate entries to be
placed in the relevant registrar of holders (including CDN being entered in the depository
register and Magellan Register in relation to those Magellan Shares);
(e) on the Offer or the contract resulting from your acceptance of the Offer becoming
unconditional, irrevocably appointed Magellan and each of its directors, secretaries and
officers severally from time to time as your attorney to do all things which you could lawfully
do in relation to your MPAL Shares or in exercise of any right derived from the holding of
such MPAL Shares, including:
(i)  attending and voting at any general meeting of MPAL Shareholders;
(ii)  notifying MPAL that your address in the records of MPAL for all purposes including the
dispatch of notices of meeting, annual reports and dividends should be altered to an
address nominated by Magellan; and
(iii) doing all things incidental and ancillary to any of the above.
This appointment terminates on the registration of Magellan as the registered holder of your
MPAL Shares.
-82-
Magellan must indemnify you and keep you indemnified in respect of all costs, expenses and
obligations which might otherwise be incurred or undertaken as a result of the exercise by an
attorney of any powers under this Clause 5.1(e);
(f)  agreed that in exercising the powers conferred by the power of attorney under Clause 5.1(e)
the attorney may act in the interests of Magellan as the intended registered holder and
beneficial holder of those MPAL Shares;
(g) after the Offer has been declared free of all Conditions, agreed not to attend or vote in person
at any general meeting of MPAL or to exercise or purport to exercise any of the powers
conferred on an attorney under Clause 5.1(e);
(h) represented and warranted to Magellan that the making of the Offer to you and your
acceptance of this Offer is lawful under any Foreign Law which applies to you, to the making
of this Offer or to your acceptance of this Offer;
(i)  agreed to indemnify Magellan and MPAL fully in respect of any claim, demand, action, suit or
proceeding made or brought against MPAL and any loss, expense, damage or liability
whatsoever suffered or incurred by Magellan, in each case as a result of any representation
or warranty made by you not being true; and
(j)  irrevocably authorised and directed MPAL to pay to Magellan or to account to Magellan for all
dividends and other distributions and entitlements which are declared, paid or made or which
arise or accrue after the Announcement Date in respect of the MPAL Shares which Magellan
acquires pursuant to this Offer, subject if your acceptance of this Offer is validly withdrawn
pursuant to section 650E of the Corporations Act or the contract resulting from that
acceptance becomes void, to Magellan accounting to you for any such dividends,
distributions and entitlements received by it.
5.2 By completing and returning the Acceptance Form, you will also have:
  (a) authorised Magellan and each of its directors, secretaries, officers and agents severally to
complete the Acceptance Form by correcting any errors in or omissions from the Acceptance
Form as may be necessary for either or both of the following purposes:
(i)  to make the Acceptance Form an effectual acceptance of this Offer; and
(b) authorised Magellan and each of its directors, secretaries, officers and agents severally on
(ii) to enable registration of the transfer to Magellan of your MPAL Shares; and
your behalf to initiate acceptance or instruct your Controlling Participant to initiate acceptance
in accordance with Rule 14.14 of the ASTC Settlement Rules.
5.3 Magellan may at any time in its absolute discretion:
  (a) treat the receipt by it of an Acceptance Form during the Offer Period as a valid acceptance
although all of the requirements for a valid acceptance have not been complied with; and
(b) where you have satisfied the requirements for acceptance in respect of only some of your
MPAL Shares, treat the acceptance as a valid acceptance only in respect of those MPAL
Shares.
In respect of any part of an acceptance treated by Magellan as valid, Magellan must provide you
with the relevant consideration in accordance with Clause 6.1.
-83-
6.1 Magellan must provide the consideration for your MPAL Shares no later than the following
6. PROVISION OF CONSIDERATION
times:
(a) if you give the necessary transfer documents with your acceptance under Clause 4.4 — no
later than one month after this Offer is accepted or this Offer (or the contract resulting from its
acceptance) becomes unconditional, whichever is the later, but in any event not later than
21 days after the end of the Offer Period;
(b) if you have given the necessary transfer documents after delivery of your acceptance under
Clause 4.4 but during the Offer Period — not later than one month after delivery of the
necessary transfer documents; or
(c) if you have given the necessary transfer documents after delivery of your acceptance under
Clause 4.4 but after expiry of the Offer Period — not later than 21 days after the Magellan
receives the necessary transfer documents.
6.2 If you accept this Offer, Magellan is entitled to all Rights in respect of your MPAL Shares.
Magellan may require you to give it any documents necessary or desirable to vest in it title to
those Rights. If you do not do so, or if you have received the benefit of those Rights before
Magellan has sent the Offer Consideration to you, Magellan may deduct from the consideration
otherwise due to you the amount (or value, as reasonably assessed by Magellan) of those
Rights.
6.3 If, at the time of acceptance of this Offer, any authority or clearance of the Reserve Bank of
Australia or of the Australian Taxation Office is required for you to receive any consideration
under this Offer or you are resident in or a resident of a place to which, or you are a person to
whom:
(a) the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations 1959 (Cth);
 
  (b) the Charter of the United Nations (Terrorism and Dealing with Assets) Regulations 2002
(Cth);
(c) the Charter of the United Nations (Sanctions – Afghanistan) Regulations 2001 (Cth);
 
  (d) The Iraq (Reconstruction and Repeal of Sanctions) Regulations 2003 (Cth); or
 
  (e) any other law of Australia that would make it unlawful for Magellan to provide consideration
for your MPAL Shares,
applies then acceptance of this Offer will not create or transfer to you any right (contractual or
contingent) to receive the consideration specified in this Offer unless and until all requisite
authorities or clearances have been obtained by Magellan.
6.4 Payment of any cash amount to which you become entitled by accepting this Offer will be
made by cheque in Australian currency.
6.5 Magellan will send any relevant cheques by pre-paid mail (airmail in the case of overseas
shareholders) to your address as shown in the Acceptance Form.
7. CONDITIONS OF THE OFFER
7.1 Subject to Clause 7.2, this Offer and the contract that results from acceptance of this Offer are
each conditional on the following occurrences:
(a) Registration: the U.S. Form S-4 registration statement is declared effective by the U.S.
Securities Exchange Commission (SEC) and Magellan receives confirmation from the SEC
that all Magellan Shares issued pursuant to the Offer will be registered immediately on issue
pursuant to the Offer;
(b) Magellan shareholder approval: all resolutions necessary to approve, effect and implement
or authorise the implementation of the Offer and the acquisition of the MPAL Shares are
passed by the requisite majority of Magellan shareholders at a general meeting of Magellan
shareholders expected to be held during January or February 2006;
-84-
(c) Other regulatory approvals: all other necessary approvals for the proposed transaction are
granted, given, made or obtained on an unconditional basis and, at the end of the Offer
Period, remain in full force and effect in all respects and are not subject to any notice,
intention or indication of intention to revoke, suspend, restrict, modify or not renew those
approvals;
(d) 90% relevant interest: the number of MPAL Shares in which Magellan and its Associates
have a Relevant Interest at the expiry of the Offer Period is not less than 90% of the MPAL
Shares then on issue and Magellan satisfies any other requirements to effect compulsory
acquisition of all outstanding MPAL Shares;
(e) Quotation: both:
(i)  an application for admission of the Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs to be
issued under this Offer to quotation on ASX is made within seven days after
commencement of the Offer Period; and
(ii) permission for admission of the Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs to be
issued under this Offer to quotation on ASX is granted no later than seven days after the
expiry of the Offer Period;
(f)  No acquisition or disposal of material asset: except for any proposed transaction publicly
announced by MPAL before the Announcement Date none of the following events occurs
during the period from the Announcement Date to the end of the Offer Period:
(i)  MPAL or any controlled entity of MPAL acquires, offers to acquire or agrees to acquire
one or more companies, businesses or assets (or any interest in one or more companies,
businesses or assets) for an amount in aggregate greater than A$500,000 or makes an
announcement in relation to such an acquisition, offer or agreement; or
(ii) MPAL or a controlled entity of MPAL enters into, offers to enter into or agrees to enter into
any agreement, joint venture, partnership or commitment which would require
expenditure, or the foregoing of revenue by MPAL and/or its controlled entities of an
amount which is, in aggregate, more than A$500,000, other than in the ordinary course of
business or makes an announcement in relation to such an entry, offer or agreement;
  (g) S&P ASX 200 Index: before the end of the Offer Period, the S&P ASX 200 Index does not
fall below 4,000 on any trading day;
(h) No change in Control: no person has, or is entitled to have any right to:
(i)  terminate or alter any contractual relations between any person and any MPAL Group
Entity; or
as a result of the acquisition of MPAL Shares by Magellan;
(ii) require the sale of any Securities in an MPAL Group Entity,
(i)  No material adverse change: during the period commencing on the Announcement Date
and ending on the expiry of the Offer Period, no change occurs or is announced that would
reasonably be expected to affect the capital structure, business, financial or trading position,
future profitability, condition of assets or liabilities of MPAL or a controlled entity of MPAL in a
manner which would be material in the context of MPAL’s operations as a whole;
(j)  No litigation: during the period commencing on the Announcement Date and ending on the
expiry of the Offer Period, no litigation or arbitration proceedings have been or are instituted
or threatened against MPAL or a controlled entity of MPAL which are material in the context
of MPAL’s operations as a whole;
(k) No regulatory intervention: during the period commencing on the Announcement Date and
ending on the expiry of the Offer Period, no Governmental Agency or any other person takes
any action to:
(i)  prohibit, prevent or inhibit the acquisition of, or trading in, MPAL Shares;
(ii) impose conditions on the Offer which impose unduly onerous obligations upon Magellan
or would materially affect the business or capital structure of MPAL;
-85-
(iii) require the divestiture by Magellan of Securities or assets of any MPAL Group Entity,
other than an application to or a decision or order of ASIC or the Takeovers Panel for the purpose
of or in the exercise of the powers and discretions conferred on it by the Corporations Act;
  (l)  No prescribed occurrences: none of the following happens during the period commencing
on the Announcement Date and ending on the expiry of the Offer Period (each being a
separate condition):
(i)  the shares of MPAL or any of the controlled entities of MPAL are converted into a larger
or smaller number of shares;
(ii)  MPAL or a controlled entity of MPAL resolves to reduce its share capital in any way;
(iii) MPAL or a controlled entity of MPAL:
(A) enters into a buy-back agreement; or
(B) resolves to approve the terms of a buy-back agreement under sections 257C or 257D
of the Corporations Act;
(iv)  MPAL or a controlled entity of MPAL makes an issue of or grants an option to subscribe
for any Securities or agrees to make such an allotment or grant such an option;
(v)
MPAL or a controlled entity of MPAL issues or agrees to issue convertible notes;
(vi)  MPAL or a controlled entity of MPAL disposes or agrees to dispose of the whole or a
substantial part of its business or property;
(vii)  MPAL or a controlled entity of MPAL grants or agrees to grant an Encumbrance over the
whole or a substantial part of its business or property; or
(m) No selective disclosure of information: at all times during the period from the
(viii) an Insolvency Event occurs with respect to MPAL or a controlled entity of MPAL; and
Announcement Date to the end of the Offer Period, MPAL promptly (and in any event within
two Business Days) provides to Magellan a copy of all information that is not generally
available (within the meaning of the Corporations Act) relating to MPAL or any controlled
entity of MPAL or any of their respective businesses or operations that has been provided by
MPAL or any of their respective officers, employees, advisers or agents to any person (other
than Magellan) for the purposes of soliciting, encouraging or facilitating a proposal or offer by
that person, or by any other person, in relation to a transaction under which:
(i)  any person (together with its Associates) may acquire Voting Power of 10% or more in
MPAL or any controlled entity of MPAL (whether by way of takeover bid, compromise or
arrangement under Part 5.1 of the Corporations Act or otherwise);
(ii)  any person may acquire, directly or indirectly (including by way of joint venture, dual
listed company structure or otherwise), any interest in all or a substantial part of the
business or assets of MPAL or any controlled entity of MPAL; or
(iii) that person may otherwise acquire control or merge or amalgamate with MPAL or any
controlled entity of MPAL.
7.2 The conditions in Clause 7.1 are conditions subsequent. Subject to section 650G of the
Corporations Act, the non-fulfilment of any of the conditions subsequent does not prevent your
acceptance of this Offer resulting in a contract to sell your MPAL Shares but entitles Magellan
by a notice given to MPAL to rescind that contract.
7.3 Subject to the Corporations Act and Clause 7.5, Magellan alone is entitled to the benefit of the
Conditions or to rely on the non-fulfilment of any Condition.
-86-
7.4 Subject to the Corporations Act and Clause 7.5, Magellan may declare the Offer free from any
of the Conditions by giving notice in writing to MPAL. If at the end of the Offer Period, any of the
Conditions has not been fulfilled and Magellan has not declared the Offer (and they have not
become) free from all the Conditions, all the contracts resulting from acceptance of the Offer
are automatically void.
7.5 Unless permitted by the Corporations Act, Magellan may not waive compliance with the
Condition set out in Clause 7.1(a) and may not declare the Offers free from that Condition
under Clause 7.4.
7.6 The date for publication of the notice under section 630(1) of the Corporations Act is [ ] 2005
(subject to extension in accordance with section 630(2) if the Offer Period is extended under
section 650C of the Corporations Act).
8. WITHDRAWAL OF OFFERS
8.1 This Offer may be withdrawn by Magellan, but only with ASIC’s written consent (which consent
may be given subject to any conditions which may be imposed by ASIC).
8.2 Subject to ASIC’s consent (and any conditions imposed by ASIC), withdrawal of this Offer may
be effected by written notice from Magellan given to MPAL.
8.3 Subject to any conditions imposed by ASIC on its consent, where Magellan withdraws this
Offer:
(a) this Offer, if not previously accepted, automatically becomes incapable of acceptance; and
 
  (b) any contract resulting from an acceptance of this Offer before the withdrawal (and for this
purpose this Offer is treated as having continued in existence notwithstanding that
acceptance) is automatically void.
9. VARIATION
Magellan may vary this Offer in accordance with the Corporations Act.
10. MAGELLAN’S RELEVANT INTERESTS
At the date of this Offer, there are 46,691,944 MPAL Shares on issue. Immediately before this Offer
was sent, Magellan had a Relevant Interest in 25,739,028 MPAL Shares. At the date of this Offer,
Magellan has Voting Power in MPAL of 55.13%.
Magellan must pay all stamp duty payable on the transfer of your MPAL Shares to it if you accept
this Offer.
11. NO STAMP DUTY
12. INTERPRETATION
12.1 Terms defined in Section 12 of the Bidder’s Statement have the same meaning in this Offer.
12.2 In this Offer and the Acceptance Form, the following principles of interpretation apply unless
the context otherwise requires:
(a) words and phrases have the same meaning that is given to them in the Corporations Act (if
any);
(b) a reference to any legislation or legislative provision includes any statutory modification or re-
enactment of, or any legislative provision substituted for, and any subordinate legislation
issued under, that legislation or legislative provision;
(c) the singular includes the plural and vice versa;
 
  (d) a reference to an individual or person includes a corporation, partnership, joint venture,
association, authority, trust, state or government, and vice versa;
(e) a reference to any gender includes both genders;
 
  (f)  a reference to a Clause, Schedule or Annexure is to a clause, schedule or annexure of or to
this Offer;
(g) where an expression is defined, another part of speech or grammatical form of that
expression has a corresponding meaning;
(h) a reference to “dollars” or “$” is to Australian currency;
 
  (i)  a reference to a time is to that time in Sydney, Australia;
-87-
(j)  a reference to a period of time (including without limitation a year, a quarter, a month and a
day) is to a calendar period;
(k)  schedules and annexures to this Offer each form a part of it;
 
  (l)  a statement made in this Offer is made as at the date of this Offer;
 
  (m) a term referred to in this Offer that relates to CHESS and is not specifically defined in this
Offer, has the meaning given to it in the Corporations Act or the ASTC Settlement Rules (if
any) as the context requires; and
(n)  a reference to the Corporations Act is a reference to the Corporations Act as modified in its
application to this Offer or Magellan by ASIC under section 655A of the Corporations Act.
12.3 In this Offer, headings are for ease of reference only and do not affect its interpretation.
12.4 This Offer and any contract that results from an acceptance of it is governed by the laws of the
State of New South Wales.
This Offer is dated [  ].
-88-
APPENDIX B: ASX ANNOUNCEMENT REGARDING OFFER
MAGELLAN PETROLEUM CORPORATION ANNOUNCES OFFER
FOR MINORITY INTEREST IN MAGELLAN PETROLEUM AUSTRALIA LIMITED
HARTFORD, Conn., United States, SYDNEY, Australia October 18, 2005 – Magellan Petroleum
Corporation (NASDAQ Capital Market — trading symbol MPET) (“Magellan”) today announced its
intention to commence an exchange offer (the “Offer”) to acquire all of the ordinary shares of
Magellan Petroleum Australia Limited (“MPAL”) (Australian Stock Exchange – code MAG) that it
does not currently own. Magellan currently has a 55.13% ownership interest in MPAL.
The Offer consideration will be seven (7) newly-issued shares of Magellan common stock for each
ten (10) outstanding MPAL shares. If the Offer is successful, new Magellan shares will be issued to
MPAL’s Australian shareholders in the form of CDIs (CHESS Depository Interests), which will be
listed on the Australian Stock Exchange (“ASX”).
Based on Magellan’s closing share price of US$1.93 on October 17, 2005 on the NASDAQ Capital
Market and an A$/US$ exchange rate of 0.75, the Offer values MPAL at A$84.1 million in total
(including the shares currently owned by Magellan), or A$1.80 per share. Accordingly, the
proposed consideration in aggregate for the 44.87% of MPAL’s shares which Magellan does not
already own is approximately 14.7 million Magellan shares, with an aggregate value of
A$37.7 million based on the above.
Magellan has retained TM Capital Corp. of New York, N.Y. and Baron Partners Limited of Sydney,
Australia to serve as its financial advisers in relation to the Offer.
The Offer consideration exceeds the highest price at which MPAL shares have traded since
January 2003 and represents a premium of:
• approximately 28% to MPAL’s volume weighted average price of A$1.41 in the 3-month period
prior to this announcement; and
• approximately 33% to MPAL’s closing share price of A$1.35 on October 18, 2005.
Following successful completion of the Offer and the compulsory acquisition, non-Magellan
shareholders of MPAL would collectively own approximately 36.3% of Magellan’s issued and
outstanding shares.
Offer Timing & Conditions
Magellan intends, as soon as practicable, to file with the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission a Registration Statement on Form S-4, which will contain a prospectus/proxy
statement in connection with the proposed Offer.
A Bidder’s Statement will be filed with ASX and the Australian Securities and Investments
Commission as soon as practicable. A copy of the Bidder’s Statement will also be posted to MPAL
shareholders and made available on Magellan’s website at: www.magpet.com.
-89-
Magellan anticipates that the Offer will remain open for a minimum of eight (8) weeks after the
dispatch of the Bidder’s Statement to MPAL’s shareholders.
The Offer will be subject to certain conditions including Magellan acquiring at least 90% of MPAL’s
outstanding shares on or before the end of the prescribed Offer Period, and approval of the
issuance of Magellan common stock in the Offer by Magellan’s shareholders at the upcoming 2005
annual meeting of shareholders. Other conditions to the Offer are more fully described in the
attached Schedule A.
Benefits to MPAL Shareholders
Magellan believes that the benefits of the Offer for MPAL and its shareholders are numerous. While
retaining an interest in the underlying MPAL assets and business prospects, MPAL shareholders
will enjoy the following benefits:
• a value premium of 28% on MPAL’s volume weighted average trading price on the ASX for the
last 3 months;
• shares in a more liquid security with significantly higher average trading volumes;
• potentially cheaper access to capital;
• potential cost savings from organisational efficiencies arising from the simplified capital structure;
• tax roll-over relief under Australian law; and
• full alignment of the strategies of both companies.
Magellan’s Chairman, Mr. Walter McCann, said: “We believe that the current shareholding
structure of MPAL is not necessarily in the best interests of either Magellan or MPAL shareholders.
We also believe that the existing ownership structure has not provided optimal benefits in
transparency as to pricing or market understanding of MPAL’s assets nor fostered liquidity or
access to capital in either the United States or Australia. We believe that a successful takeover will
lead to a stronger company which will be better positioned to thrive in the current competitive
atmosphere and to improve overall shareholder returns.”
Magellan’s Intentions if the Offer is Successful
It is Magellan’s present intention, following the completion of the Offer, to maintain the current
board of directors of MPAL and to own 100% of MPAL’s outstanding shares.
Magellan’s specific intentions for the near term future of MPAL will be described in Magellan’s
relevant U.S. and Australian regulatory filings. In summary, Magellan envisages the following with
respect to the continuation of the business, the position of the employees and the protection of
MPAL’s assets:
• Business: Magellan expects MPAL to continue as an oil and gas exploration and production
company in substantially the same manner as it is presently operated.
• Board of Directors and Executive Management: Magellan will maintain the current board of
directors. Magellan will also seek to retain key members of the MPAL executive management
team, whose performance will continue to be reviewed in line with current procedures. Additional
members of the executive management team will be added, as appropriate.
• Employees and Consultants: Magellan intends to continue the monitoring and review process
which is currently in place in regard to MPAL’s employees and the usage of consultancy
services.
• Headquarters: MPAL, as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Magellan, will continue to be
headquartered in Brisbane. Magellan’s headquarters will continue to be based in Hartford,
Connecticut, USA.
• MPAL Business Policies and Practices: Consistent with Magellan’s enhanced ownership
position, Magellan intends to continue to review MPAL’s important business policies and
practices, including corporate governance, exploration and development efforts, capital
expenditures, existing and planned joint ventures, acquisition prospects, and investment policies,
with the aim to maximise overall shareholder return.
-90-
• Strategic Initiatives: Magellan intends to continue to review strategic options in light of the new
ownership structure, in cooperation with the MPAL Board, its executive management, and taking
into account the strategic review undertaken by MPAL’s Business Development Committee.
• Cash Resources: Magellan believes that MPAL’s existing cash resources are currently
sufficient to continue its business without a major effort to raise additional capital.
• Other Actions: Magellan intends to undertake all other actions consistent with Magellan’s role
and the interests of the combined companies and the shareholders.
• Compulsory Acquisition: If the Offer is successful, Magellan will proceed with the compulsory
acquisition of the remaining MPAL shares in accordance with the provisions of the Corporations
Act.
• Removal from Official List: Magellan intends to request ASX to remove MPAL from the Official
List of the ASX following successful completion of the Offer.
The statements described above reflect Magellan’s current intentions only, which may change as
new information becomes available or as circumstances change.
About Magellan
Magellan was established in 1957, and was incorporated in the State of Delaware in 1967.
Magellan’s common stock is quoted on the NASDAQ Capital Market (symbol: MPET). The
company is engaged in the sale of oil and gas resulting from the exploration for and development
of oil and gas reserves. Magellan’s most significant asset is its 55.13% equity ownership interest in
MPAL. Magellan also has a direct 2.67% carried interest in the Kotaneelee Gas Field in the Yukon
Territory of Canada. Magellan has approximately 6,750 record shareholders.
About MPAL
MPAL was established in 1964, and is headquartered in Brisbane, Australia. MPAL shares are
quoted on the ASX. The company is engaged in the sale of oil and gas resulting from the
exploration for and development of oil and gas reserves. The company’s oil and gas production
assets are principally located in the Amadeus Basin of the Northern Territory in Australia, where
MPAL operates the Palm Valley gas field. Other reserves and prospects are located elsewhere in
Australia, and also in New Zealand and the United Kingdom. MPAL has approximately 1,790
record shareholders.
Forward Looking Statements
Statements in this release which are not historical in nature are intended to be, and are hereby
identified as, forward-looking statements for purposes of the Private Securities Litigation Reform
Act of 1995. These statements about Magellan and MPAL relate to their businesses and prospects,
revenues, expenses, operating cash flows, the benefits of the proposed Offer, and other matters
that involve a number of uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially from
expectations. Among these risks and uncertainties are the successful completion of the Offer,
pricing and production levels from the properties in which Magellan and MPAL have interests, the
extent of the recoverable reserves at those properties, the future outcome of the negotiations for
gas sales contracts for the remaining uncontracted reserves at both the Mereenie and Palm Valley
gas fields in the Amadeus Basin. In addition, MPAL has a large number of exploration permits and
faces the risk that any wells drilled may fail to encounter hydrocarbons in commercially
recoverable quantities. Any forward-looking information provided in this release should be
considered with these factors in mind. Magellan assumes no obligation to update any forward-
looking statements contained in this release, whether as a result of new information, future events
or otherwise.
-91-
This press release is for informational purposes only and shall not constitute an offer to sell or a
solicitation of an offer to buy any securities of Magellan. The offer to exchange Magellan shares for
MPAL shares will be made only by Magellan’s Bidder’s Statement and prospectus/proxy
statement. Magellan intends to file with the Securities and Exchange Commission a Registration
Statement on Form S-4, which will contain a prospectus/proxy statement in connection with the
proposed Offer. The prospectus/proxy statement will be mailed to the stockholders of Magellan
when it is finalized. Shareholders of Magellan are advised to read the prospectus/proxy statement
when it becomes available, because it will contain important information. Such prospectus/proxy
statement (when available) and other relevant documents may also be obtained, free of charge, on
the Securities and Exchange Commission’s website (http://www.sec.gov) or by request from the
contacts listed below.
Magellan and certain persons may be deemed to be participants in the solicitation of proxies
relating to the proposed Offer. The participants in such solicitation may include Magellan’s
executive officers and directors. Further information regarding persons who may be deemed
participants will be available in Magellan’s proxy statement/prospectus to be filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission in connection with the proposed Offer.
For Further Information:
In Australia
Paul Young / Peter Fraser
Baron Partners Limited
Tel: +61 2 9232 5500
In the United States
Daniel J. Samela
President and Chief Executive Officer of Magellan
Tel: +1 (860) 293-2006
W. Gregory Robertson
TM Capital Corp.
Tel +1 (212) 809-1410
SCHEDULE A – SUMMARY OF CONDITIONS AND FURTHER TERMS OF THE OFFER
The Offer will be subject to conditions substantially as set out below:
1. Quotation: Both:
  (a) an application for admission of the Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs to be
issued under the Offer to quotation on ASX is made within 7 days after commencement of the
Offer Period; and
(b) permission for admission of the Magellan Shares in the form of Magellan CDIs to be issued
under the Offer to quotation on ASX is granted no later than 7 days after the expiry of the Offer
Period;
2. 90% minimum acceptance: The number of MPAL Shares in which Magellan and its
Associates have a Relevant Interest at the expiry of the Offer Period is not less than 90% of the
MPAL Shares then on issue, and Magellan satisfies any other requirements to effect compulsory
acquisition of all outstanding MPAL Shares;
3. Other regulatory approvals: All other necessary approvals for the proposed transaction are
granted, given, made or obtained on an unconditional basis and, at the end of the Offer Period,
remain in full force and effect in all respects and are not subject to any notice, intention or
indication of intention to revoke, suspend, restrict, modify or not renew those approvals;
4. Magellan shareholder approval: All resolutions necessary to approve, effect and implement or
authorise the implementation of the Offer and the acquisition of the MPAL shares are passed by
the requisite majority of Magellan shareholders at a general meeting of Magellan shareholders
expected to be held during January 2006;
-92-
5. U.S. Registration Statement: The U.S. Registration statement is declared effective by the SEC
and Magellan receives confirmation that all Magellan shares issued pursuant to the Offer will be
registered with the SEC and freely tradeable immediately following their issuance;
6. No acquisition or disposal of material asset: Except for any proposed transaction publicly
announced by MPAL before the announcement of the offer (the “Announcement Date”) none of
the following events occurs during the period from the Announcement Date to the end of the
Offer Period:
(a) MPAL or any controlled entity of MPAL acquires, offers to acquire or agrees to acquire one or
more companies, businesses or assets (or any interest in one or more companies,
businesses or assets) for an amount in aggregate greater than $500,000 or makes an
announcement in relation to such an acquisition, offer or agreement; or
(b) MPAL or a controlled entity of MPAL enters into, offers to enter into or agrees to enter into any
agreement, joint venture, partnership or commitment which would require expenditure, or the
foregoing of revenue by MPAL and/or its controlled entities of an amount which is, in
aggregate, more than $500,000, other than in the ordinary course of business or makes an
announcement in relation to such an entry, offer or agreement;
7. S&P ASX 200 Index: Before the end of the Offer Period, the S&P ASX 200 Index does not fall
below 4,000 on any trading day;
8. No change in control: No person has, or is entitled to have any right to:
  (a) terminate or alter any contractual relations between any person and any MPAL group entity;
or
(b) require the sale of any securities in an MPAL group entity; as a result of the acquisition of
MPAL shares by Magellan;
9. No material adverse change: During the period commencing on the Announcement Date and
ending on the expiry of the Offer Period, no change occurs or is announced that would
reasonably be expected to affect the capital structure, business, financial or trading position,
future profitability, condition of assets or liabilities of MPAL or a controlled entity of MPAL in a
manner which would be material in the context of MPAL ’s operations as a whole;
10. No litigation: During the period commencing on the Announcement Date and ending on the
expiry of the Offer Period, no litigation or arbitration proceedings have been or are instituted or
threatened against MPAL or a controlled entity of MPAL which are material in the context of
MPAL’s operations as a whole;
11. No regulatory intervention: During the period commencing on the Announcement Date and
ending on the expiry of the Offer Period, no governmental agency or any other person takes
any action to:
(a) prohibit, prevent or inhibit the acquisition of, or trading in, MPAL shares;
(b) impose conditions on the Offer which impose unduly onerous obligations upon Magellan or
would materially affect the business or capital structure of MPAL; or
(c) require the divestiture by Magellan of securities or assets of any MPAL group Entity;
other than an application to or a decision or order of ASIC or the Takeovers Panel for the purpose
of or in the exercise of the powers and discretions conferred on it by the Corporations Act;
12. No prescribed occurrences: None of the following happens during the period commencing
on the Announcement Date and ending on the expiry of the Offer Period (each being a
separate condition):
(a) the shares of MPAL or any of the controlled entities of MPAL are converted into a larger or
smaller number of shares;
(b) MPAL or a controlled entity of MPAL resolves to reduce its share capital in any way;
 
  (c) MPAL or a controlled entity of MPAL:
-93-
a.  enters into a buy-back agreement; or
b.  resolves to approve the terms of a buy-back agreement under sections 257C or 257D of
the Corporations Act; or
c.  makes an issue of or grants an option to subscribe for any securities or agrees to make
such an allotment or grant such an option; or
d.  issues or agrees to issue convertible notes; or
e.  disposes or agrees to dispose of the whole or a substantial part of its business or
property; or
f.
grants or agrees to grant an encumbrance over the whole or a substantial part of its
business or property;
(d) an insolvency event occurs with respect to MPAL or a controlled entity of MPAL.
13. No selective disclosure of information: At all times during the period from the
Announcement Date to the end of the Offer Period, MPAL promptly (and in any event within 2
business days) provides to Magellan a copy of all information that is not generally available
(within the meaning of the Corporations Act) relating to MPAL or any controlled entity of MPAL
or any of their respective businesses or operations that has been provided by MPAL or any of
their respective officers, employees, advisers or agents to any person (other than Magellan) for
the purposes of soliciting, encouraging or facilitating a proposal or offer by that person, or by
any other person, in relation to a transaction under which:
(a) any person (together with its Associates) may acquire voting power of 10% or more in MPAL
or any controlled entity of MPAL (whether by way of takeover bid, compromise or
arrangement under Part 5.1 of the Corporations Act or otherwise);
(b) any person may acquire, directly or indirectly (including by way of joint venture, dual listed
company structure or otherwise), any interest in all or a substantial part of the business or
assets of MPAL or any controlled entity of MPAL; or
(c) that person may otherwise acquire control or merge or amalgamate with MPAL or any
controlled entity
-94-
APPENDIX C: MAGELLAN ANNOUNCEMENTS TO SEC SINCE 30 JUNE 2005
 
Date
14 November 2005
Announcement
Form 10-Q – quarterly report pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Form S-4 – Registration Statement
Form 8-K – Current Report pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
 
Form 425 – Written communication pursuant to Rule 425 of the
Securities Act of 1933
 
Form 10-K – Annual Report pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
-95-
31 October 2005
 
18 October 2005
18 October 2005
28 September 2005
Announcement
APPENDIX D: MPAL ANNOUNCEMENTS TO ASX SINCE 30 JUNE 2005
(excluding Announcements regarding drilling results)
 
Date
18 November 2005
 
7 November 2005
 
3 November 2005
 
28 October 2005
 
28 October 2005
 
27 October 2005
Appointment of Independent Expert
 
  Shareholder update on proposed Magellan Offer
 
  Preliminary S-4 lodged with the SEC
 
  Results of AGM
 
  Chairman’s address to shareholders & presentation
 
  First Quarter Activities Report
19 October 2005
 
18 October 2005
 
30 September 2005
 
29 September 2005
 
23 September 2005
 
13 September 2005
 
12 September 2005
 
26 August 2005
 
16 August 2005
 
8 August 2005
 
3 August 2005
 
28 July 2005
 
28 July 2005
 
26 July 2005
Offer from Magellan Petroleum Corporation
 
  Magellan Petroleum Corporation offer for minority interest in MAG
 
  Ceasing to be a substantial holder
 
  Change in substantial holding from CBA
 
  Annual Report
 
  Preliminary Final Report (Appendix 4E) and Media Release
 
  Change in substantial holding
 
  Change in substantial holding from CBA
 
  Change in substantial holding from 452 Capital
 
  Change in substantial holding from ORG
 
  Change in substantial holding from Paradice Cooper
 
  Fourth Quarter Activities Report
 
  Forthcoming United Kingdom Drilling Activity Weald Basin UK
 
  Farms in to Cooper Basin Blocks
-96-
APPENDIX E: COMPARISON OF MPAL AND MAGELLAN SHAREHOLDER RIGHTS
The following summary does not contain all the information that may be important to MPAL
Shareholders and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the laws of Delaware and Australia and
the governing corporate documents of Magellan and MPAL. Magellan will provide a copy of each
of the Magellan Restated Certificate of Incorporation, the Magellan By Laws and MPAL
Constitution free of charge on request. To obtain a copy, please contact Magellan’s information
agent in Australia, Georgeson Shareholder (contact details shown in Corporate Directory).
Authorised Capital Stock
As at the date of this Bidder’s Statement, there were 46,691,944 MPAL Shares on issue.
The Magellan Restated Certificate of Incorporation currently authorises 200,000,000 shares of
common stock, par value $0.01 per share. As at the date of this Bidder’s Statement, there were
25,783,243 Magellan Shares on issue.
-97-
Shareholder
Voting
Rights
Rights of holders of MPAL Shares   Rights of holders of Magellan Shares
All voting rights are vested in the
holders of Common Stock, each share
voting equally with every other share. A
1968 Amendment to the Magellan
Restated Certificate of Incorporation by
the addition of the 12th Article, provides
that in matters to be voted on at
meetings of shareholders, the vote of a
majority of those present in person or by
proxy will be required in addition to a
majority of the shares represented. The
12th Article provides that when shares
are held by members or shareholders of
another company, association or similar
entity and such persons act in concert,
or when shares are held by or for a
group of shareholders whose members
act in concert by virtue of any contract,
agreement or understanding, such
persons shall be deemed to be 1
shareholder for the purposes of the 12th
Article. Magellan has the power to
determine whether shareholders are
acting in concert, depending on the
circumstances and the evidence, if any,
that shareholders were in fact so acting
and should therefore be treated as 1
shareholder.
Section 6 of Article II of the Magellan By-
Laws provides that at all meetings of the
shareholders, subject to the provisions
of the Magellan Restated Certificate of
Incorporation and Section 8 of Article II
of the Magellan By-Laws, each
shareholder having the right to vote at
such meeting is entitled to one vote for
each share standing registered in his
name on the date for such a meeting.
Each MPAL Share (subject to any
specific terms of issue) confers a right
to vote at all general meetings. On a
show of hands, each MPAL
Shareholder present in person, or by
proxy, representative or attorney, has 1
vote. If a poll is held, MPAL
Shareholders present in person or by
their proxy, representative or attorney
will have 1 vote for each fully paid
MPAL Share held (and the equivalent
fraction for partly paid shares).
The constitution provides that a poll
may be demanded by the chairman of
the general meeting, at least 5 voting
members, or by members holding
either not less than 10% of the total
voting rights of all members having the
right to vote at the meeting or holding
shares conferring a right to vote at the
meeting on which an aggregate sum
has been paid equal to not less than
10% of the total sum paid on all MPAL
Shares conferring that right. However,
the Corporations Act also allows
shareholders with at least 5% of the
votes that may be cast on the
resolution on a poll to demand a poll.
Unless the Corporations Act or the
constitution requires a special
resolution, resolutions are passed by a
simple majority of votes cast on the
resolution.
Under the Corporations Act, a special
resolution may be passed by the
company if not less than 28 days’
notice of a general meeting is given,
specifying the intention to propose the
special resolution and stating the
resolution. A special resolution must be
passed by at least 75% of the votes
cast by shareholders entitled to vote.
-98-
Restrictions
on issues of
securities
Rights of holders of MPAL Shares   Rights of holders of Magellan Shares
The Corporations Act requires certain
matters to be resolved by a company
by special resolution, including:
• the change of name of the company;
• a selective reduction of capital or
selective buy-back;
• the conversion of the company from
one type or form to another; and
• a decision to wind-up the company
voluntarily.
The Corporations Act requires voting
by separate classes of MPAL Shares
only with respect to a variation of class
rights.
Section 8 of Article II provides that all
elections will be by ballot and any
matter to be voted on at the
shareholders’ meeting must be
approved, not only by a majority of the
shares voted at such meeting (or such
greater number of shares as would
otherwise be required by law or the
Magellan Restated Certificate of
Incorporation), but also by a majority of
the shareholders present in person or by
proxy. In the case of the election of
Directors, if no candidate receives both
such majorities then each person who
receives the majority in number of the
shareholders present in person or by
proxy will be entitled to fill such
vacancies by virtue of having received
such majority.
When shares are held by members or
shareholders of another company,
association or similar entity and such
persons act in concert, or when the
shares are held by a group of
shareholders whose members act in
concert by virtue of any contract,
agreement or understanding, such
persons will be deemed to be one
shareholder for the purposes of
Section 8 of Article II.
-99-
Rights of holders of MPAL Shares   Rights of holders of Magellan Shares
Under the Magellan Restated Certificate
of Incorporation, the Directors have the
power to issue additional Magellan
Shares.
Under the MPAL Constitution, the
MPAL directors may allot or otherwise
dispose of shares with preferred,
deferred or other rights subject to such
restrictions as to dividends, voting,
return of capital, payment of calls or
Nasdaq Marketplace Rules require
otherwise to such persons and on such
terms and conditions as they think fit.
shareholder approval prior to the
issuance of additional Magellan Shares
in the following circumstances:
ASX Listing Rule 7.1 requires MPAL
Shareholder approval if MPAL wishes
to issue 15% or more of its capital in
any 12 month period, unless an
exception applies. Exceptions include
issues under offers to all ordinary
shareholders in proportion to their
respective holdings, issues under
takeover bids or schemes of
arrangements and issues under
dividend reinvestment plans.
The MPAL Constitution provides that
the MPAL directors must not, without
the prior approval of MPAL
Shareholders, issue shares or grant
options which would (on exercise of
the option) result in the transfer of a
controlling interest in MPAL, or result in
50% or more of the votes exercisable
on a poll, being registered in the name
of the transferee except if an offer of
shares or options has been made to all
ordinary shareholders in proportion to
their respective shareholding.
Under the MPAL Constitution, an
MPAL director and his or her
Associates cannot participate in the
issue of MPAL Shares or grant options
unless MPAL has first by special
resolution approved the number of
shares or options to be issued to the
director or associate or except in cases
permitted by the ASX Listing Rules.
This does not apply to pro rata issues
or issues to executive directors.
ASX Listing Rules 10.11 and 10.14
allow the issue of shares or options to
directors with the approval of
shareholders by ordinary resolution.
(a) when the issue or potential issue will
result in a change of control of Magellan;
(b) in connection with the acquisition of
the stock or assets of another company
if:
(i) any director, officer or substantial
shareholder of Magellan has a 5% or
greater interest (or such persons
collectively have a 10% or greater
interest), directly or indirectly, in the
company or assets to be acquired or in
the consideration to be paid in the
transaction or series of related
transactions and the present or potential
issuance of common stock, or securities
convertible into or exercisable for
common stock, could result in an
increase in outstanding common shares
or voting power of 5% or more; or
(ii) where, due to the present or potential
issue of Magellan Shares, or securities
convertible into or exercisable for
Magellan Shares, other than a public
offering for cash:
(A) the Magellan Shares have or will
have upon issuance voting power equal
to or in excess of 20% of the voting
power outstanding before the issuance
of stock or securities convertible into or
exercisable for Magellan Shares; or
(B) the number of Magellan Shares to be
issued is or will be equal to or in excess
of 20% of the number of Magellan
Shares outstanding before the issuance
of the stock or securities; or
(c) in connection with a transaction other
than a public offering involving:
(i) the sale, issue or potential issue by
Magellan of Magellan Shares (or
securities convertible into or exercisable
for Magellan Shares) at a price less than
the greater of book or market value
which together with sales by officers,
directors or substantial shareholders of
Magellan equals 20% or more of
Magellan Shares or 20% or more of the
voting power outstanding before the
issuance; or
(ii) the sale, issuance or potential
issuance by Magellan of Magellan
Shares (or securities convertible into or
exercisable Magellan Shares) equal to
20% or more of the Magellan Shares or
20% or more of the voting power
outstanding before the issuance for less
than the greater of book or market value
of the shares.
-100-
Rights of holders of MPAL Shares   Rights of holders of Magellan Shares
Under the Corporations Act, a
company may by special resolution
(75% of shareholders who vote) amend
or repeal its constitution or any
provision of its constitution. The
Corporations Act requires voting by
separate classes of shares only if the
amendment to the constitution varies
class rights.
Under the Delaware General
Corporation Law and the Magellan
Restated Certificate of Incorporation, a
proposed amendment to the Restated
Certificate of Incorporation, including but
not limited to an amendment to change
the number or type of shares of
authorised capital stock, requires:
• the approval of the board of directors;
• the affirmative vote of a majority of the
outstanding shares entitled to vote on
the matter; and
• the affirmative vote of a majority of the
outstanding shares of each class
entitled to vote thereon as a class.
If an amendment would change the
aggregate number of authorised shares
of a particular class or series of shares,
Amending
constituent
documents
change the par value of the shares of
such class or series or alter the powers,
preferences or special rights of the
shares of such class or series so as to
affect them adversely, a majority of the
outstanding shares of that class or
series, voting as a class, also must vote
to authorise the amendment.
Article 12th of the Magellan Restated
Certificate of Incorporation provides that
in matters to be voted on at meetings of
shareholders, the vote of a majority of
those present in person or by proxy will
be required in addition to a majority of
the shares represented. Article 12th
provides that when shares are held by
members or shareholders of another
company, association or similar entity
and such persons act in concert, or
when shares are held by or for a group
of shareholders whose members act in
concert by virtue of any contract,
agreement or understanding, such
persons shall be deemed to be one
shareholder for the purposes of Article
12th.
Under the Delaware General
Corporation Law, a proposed
amendment to a Delaware corporation’s
Certificate of Incorporation requires an
affirmative vote of a majority of all
shares entitled to vote thereon. If any
such amendment would adversely affect
the rights of any shareholders of a
particular class or series of shares, the
vote of the majority of all outstanding
shares of that class or series, voting as a
class is also necessary to authorise the
amendment.
Under the Delaware General
Corporation Law, the power to adopt,
alter and repeal a Delaware
corporation’s By-Laws is vested in the
shareholders, except to the extent that
the Certificate of Incorporation also
vests such powers in the Board of
Directors. The Magellan Restated
Certificate of Incorporation grants these
powers to the Board of Directors. This
grant of authority does not limit the
power of the shareholders to adopt,
amend or repeal the Magellan By-Laws.
The Magellan By-Laws may be altered,
amended or repealed by a vote of a
majority of the directors at any regular or
special meeting of the Board or by the
shareholders at a meeting called for that
purpose by the favourable vote of
662/3% of the voting power of all
outstanding voting shares generally
entitled to vote at such meeting and
662/3% of the shareholders present in
person or by proxy and entitled to vote at
such meeting.
-101-
Under the MPAL Constitution, 3
MPAL Shareholders present in
person or by proxy, attorney or
representative authorised
pursuant to the Corporations Act
comprise a quorum at a general
meeting. However, if a quorum is
not present within 15 minutes of
the time appointed for the meeting,
the meeting stands adjourned and
at the adjourned meeting, the
quorum is 2 members present in
person or by proxy, attorney or
representative authorised
 
pursuant to the Corporations Act.
 
 
MPAL, as a public company, is not
permitted to pass resolutions on
the basis of a written consent from
MPAL Shareholders.
Under the Magellan By-Laws, the
holders for the time being of
331/3% of the total number of
shares issued and outstanding
and entitled to be voted at any
meeting, present in person or by
proxy, constitutes a quorum for the
transaction of business, unless
the representation of a larger
number is required by law.
Under the Delaware General
Corporation Law, any action
required or permitted to be taken
at a Magellan shareholders’
meeting may be taken without a
meeting, without prior notice and
without a vote if a written consent,
Quorum of
Shareholders
Shareholder
Action
by Written
Consent
setting forth the action so taken, is
signed by the holders of
outstanding shares having not
less than the minimum number of
votes that would be necessary to
authorise or take such action at a
meeting at which all shares
entitled to vote upon such action
were present and voted in
accordance with the requirements
of Article 12th of Magellan’s
Restated Certificate of
Incorporation.
 
Under the Delaware General
Corporation Law, a merger,
consolidation, or sale of all or
substantially all of a corporation’s
assets must be approved by the
board of directors and by at least a
majority of the outstanding shares
of the corporation entitled to vote
thereon. The Magellan Restated
Certificate of Incorporation also
requires such approval to be
given by a majority vote of the
shareholders present in person or
by proxy and entitled to vote
thereon.
Mergers and
Other
Transactions
The Corporations Act prohibits an
acquisition of a relevant interest in
shares in a company if, after the
acquisition:
• any person’s voting power in the
company would increase beyond
20%; or
• any person’s voting power in a
company that is above 20% and
below 90%, increases.
There are a number of permitted
methods to exceed the 20% level,
including:
• an off-market takeover bid made
to all shareholders which may be
for all or a nominated portion of
their shareholding;
• an unconditional on-market take
over bid on the ASX;
• acquisitions of not more than 3%
of voting shares every six months,
by a person who already holds at
least 19% of voting power;
• acquisitions approved by
ordinary resolution of
shareholders who are
unassociated with the parties to
the transaction; and
• acquisitions under a scheme of
arrangement approved by the
court.
-102-
Dissenters’ Rights
There are no directly equivalent
rights under the Corporations Act.
If Magellan is entitled to proceed
to compulsory acquisition under
the Corporations Act, it must lodge
a compulsory acquisition notice
with ASIC and despatch those
notices to those MPAL
Shareholders who did not accept
the Offer. Anyone who holds
MPAL Shares covered in a
compulsory acquisition notice may
apply to the court to stop the
acquisition. Within 1 month after
the compulsory acquisition notice
is lodged with ASIC, the holder of
MPAL Shares may ask Magellan
for a written statement of the
names and addresses of everyone
else Magellan has given the
notice to. Magellan must give this
notice within 7 days after the
request. The application for the
stop order must be made before
the later of 1 month after the
holder is given the compulsory
acquisition notice or the end of 14
days after the holder is given the
notice of everyone else’s names
and addresses. In such a case,
the court will only prevent a
compulsory acquisition if it is
satisfied that the consideration
does not constitute fair value for
the MPAL Shares.
Under the Delaware General
Corporation Law, shareholders of
a corporation who have neither
voted in favor of a merger or
consolidation nor consented to it
have the right to demand and
receive payment of the fair value
of their shares in the event of a
merger or consolidation of the
corporation. However, except as
the Delaware General
Corporation Law provides
otherwise, shareholders do not
have appraisal rights if, among
other things, their shares, as of the
record date, were either:
• listed on a national securities
exchange or designated as a
national market security on an
inter-dealer quotation system by
the National Association of
Securities Dealers, Inc. or
• held of record by more than
2,000 shareholders.
Notwithstanding the exception
described above, appraisal rights
are available to shareholders if
the holders thereof are required by
the terms of the agreement of
merger or consolidation to accept
as consideration for such shares
anything except:
• shares of the company surviving
or resulting from the merger or
consolidation;
-103-
There are no directly equivalent
rights under the Corporations Act.
Business
Combinations
with
Interested
Shareholders
• shares of any other company
which, at the record date fixed to
determine shareholders entitled to
vote on the merger or
consolidation, were either listed
on a national securities exchange
or designated as a national
market security on an inter-dealer
quotation system by the National
Association of Securities Dealers,
Inc. or held of record by more than
2,000 shareholders;
• cash in lieu of fractional shares
of the corporations described in
the above two clauses; or
• any combination of shares and
cash in lieu of fractional shares of
the corporations described in the
above three clauses.
With some exceptions,
Section 203 of the Delaware
General Corporation Law
prohibits a Delaware corporation
from engaging in a business
combination with an interested
shareholder for three years
following the time such person
becomes an interested
shareholder. In general, an
interested shareholder is a person
or entity owning 15% or more of
the corporation’s outstanding
voting shares. The definition also
includes any affiliate of such
person or entity. The three-year
moratorium which Section 203
imposes on business
combinations does not apply if:
• prior to the date at which the
shareholder became an interested
shareholder, the corporation’s
board of directors approved either
the business combination or the
transaction which resulted in the
person becoming an interested
shareholder;
• the interested shareholder
owned at least 85% of the
corporation’s voting shares upon
consummation of the transaction
which made him or her an
interested shareholder; or
• on or after the date a
shareholder becomes an
interested shareholder, the board
of directors approves the business
combination, which is also
approved at a shareholder
meeting by two-thirds of the
outstanding voting shares not
owned by the interested
shareholder.
A Delaware corporation may elect
to opt out of, and not be governed
by, Section 203 through a
provision in its original certificate
of incorporation or an amendment
to its certificate of incorporation or
by-laws, if the amendment is
approved by the vote of a majority
of the shares entitled to vote. With
a limited exception, such an
amendment would not become
effective until 12 months following
its adoption. Magellan has not
opted out of the application of
Section 203 to Magellan.
The 13th Article of Magellan’s
Restated Certificate of
Incorporation provides that a
“Business Combination” with a
“Related Person” (including a
merger, issue of shares worth
more than US$5 million or the
sale of any assets worth
US$5 million or more) requires the
approval of shareholders holding
at least 662/3% of the vote in
power and 662/3% of shareholders
present in person or by proxy and
who are entitled to vote under
resolution. There are several
exceptions to this higher voting
requirement in the 13th Article
including if the Business
Combination has been approved
by a majority of the Directors, the
Business Combination is solely
between Magellan and a
subsidiary (and such a
combination would not have the
effect of reclassifying or
recapitalising Magellan to
increase the voting power of a
Related Person) or the Business
Combination will be
consummated within 3 years after
the date the Related Person
became a Related Person and
certain conditions were met.
Under the Delaware General
Corporation Law, shareholders of
a Delaware corporation do not
possess pre-emptive rights unless
the corporation’s certificate of
incorporation specifically grants
such rights or unless they are
given such rights under contract.
The Magellan Restated Certificate
of Incorporation does not grant
general pre-emptive rights to
Magellan’s common
shareholders.
 
Under the Delaware General
Corporation Law, a Delaware
-104-
Under Australian law,
shareholders of a company do not
have any pre-emptive rights
unless they are provided for in a
shareholders agreement or a
company’s constitution. MPAL
shareholders do not have any pre-
emptive rights under MPAL’s
Constitution.
Under the Corporations Act, a
dividend may only be paid out of
Pre-emptive
Rights
Dividends
the profits of a company.
MPAL Shares will participate fully
in all dividends in proportion to the
amounts paid or credited as paid
on the shares. MPAL
Shareholders registered as at a
record date are entitled to receive
dividends as declared by it.
MPAL may establish dividend
reinvestment plans for cash
dividends paid by it.
-105-
corporation’s board of directors
may authorise the payment of
dividends to the corporation’s
shareholders (on an equal per
share basis) either:
• out of surplus; or
• if there is no surplus, out of net
profits for the fiscal year in which
the dividend is declared and/or
the preceding fiscal year.
However, a Delaware corporation
may not make a distribution out of
net profits unless and until its
capital is greater than the amount
of capital represented by the
issued and outstanding shares of
all classes having a preference
upon the distribution of assets. In
addition, the Delaware General
Corporation Law generally
provides that a Delaware
corporation may redeem or
repurchase its shares only if such
redemption or repurchase would
not impair the corporation’s
capital.
Annual
Shareholders’
Meetings
Under the Corporations Act, MPAL must hold a meeting of members once in each calendar year
and within 5 months of the end of its financial year. The business of an annual general meeting is
to receive and consider the statement of financial position, the statement of financial performance
and the reports of the directors and the auditor, to elect directors in place of those retiring, to
appoint the auditor and fix their remuneration (if required) and to transact any other business in
accordance with the MPAL Constitution. A resolution that MPAL’s remuneration report be adopted
must also be put to the vote. Such a resolution is advisory only and does not bind MPAL or its
Directors.
At least 28 days’ notice must be given of a meeting of a listed company’s shareholders. Each
shareholder is entitled to individual written notice of each general meeting and has a right to be
present and to speak at that meeting.
The chair of an annual general meeting must allow a reasonable opportunity for the shareholders
as a whole at the meeting to ask questions about or make comments on the management of the
company. The auditor or their representative is required to be present, and the shareholders must
also be allowed a reasonable opportunity to ask questions relevant to the conduct of the audit and
the preparation and content of the auditor’s report. Shareholders have a right to submit written
questions to the auditor related to the audit and the company’s financial statements before ‘ the
annual general meeting.
Magellan will hold an annual meeting in each year at such place and on such date and at such
time as our board of directors designates by resolution, for the purpose of electing directors and
transacting such other business as may properly be brought before the meeting. The Magellan By-
Laws provide:
• that the annual meeting of the shareholders for the election of directors and for the transaction of
such other business as may properly come before the meeting shall be held on such date as the
board of directors shall each year fix; and
• that the day, place and hour of each annual meeting is specified in the notice of annual meeting.
Written notice of an annual shareholders’ meeting stating the time, place and purposes of the
meeting must be given personally or by mail, not less than 10 days nor more than 60 days before
the date on which the meeting is to be held, to each shareholder entitled to vote at the meeting.
-106-
Special
Shareholders’
Meetings
The Corporations Act and the MPAL Constitution allows a director of MPAL to call a shareholders
meeting.
Directors must call and arrange to hold a general meeting on the request of either members
holding at least 5% of the votes that may be cast at the meeting, or at least 100 members entitled to
vote at the meeting. The directors must call the meeting within 21 days after the request is given to
the company, and the meeting must be held not later than 2 months after the request is given to the
company.
If the directors fail to call the requisitioned meeting within 21 days, members holding at least 50%
of the votes held by all requisitionists may call and arrange to hold the meeting. The meeting must
be held not later than 3 months after the initial request is given to the company. Under the
Corporations Act, members holding at least 5% of the votes that can be cast at a general meeting
may also call, and arrange to hold, a general meeting, but this must be done at their own expense.
The Delaware General Corporation Law provides that a special shareholders’ meeting, other than
those required by a provision of the Delaware General Corporation Law, may be called by the
corporation’s board of directors or by such person or persons as the certificate of incorporation or
the by-laws may authorise. The Magellan By-Laws provide that the only persons who may call a
special meeting (other than those required by statute) are the following:
• the Chairman of the Board of Directors;
 
• the President; or
• the Board of Directors pursuant to a resolution approved by a majority of the members of the
Board then in office.
Written notice of a special shareholders’ meeting stating the time, place and purposes of the
meeting, must be given personally or by mail, not less than 10 days nor more than 60 days before
the date on which the meeting is to be held, to each shareholder entitled to vote at that meeting.
Record Date
Under the Corporations Act and the Corporations Regulations, the time for determining which
MPAL Shareholders are entitled to receive a notice of meeting is not more than 48 hours before the
meeting.
Magellan’s Board may fix a record date which shall not be more than 60 days nor less than
10 days before the date of any meeting of shareholders, nor more than 60 days prior to the time for
such action such as determining entitlements to a dividend, conversion or exchange of shares. If
no record date is fixed by Magellan’s board, the record date for determining shareholders entitled
to notice of a meeting shall be at the close of business on the day next preceding the day on which
the notice is given and for determining shareholders entitled to receive dividends, conversion or
exchange of shares, the record date shall be the close of business on the day on which the board
of directors adopts the resolution giving effect to that action.
-107-
Proxy lodgement
Under the Corporations Act, for an appointment of a proxy for a meeting of a Company’s
shareholders to be effective, the proxy’s appointment must be signed and sent to the Company so
as to be received at least 48 hours before the meeting.
Magellan’s By-Laws provide that at any meeting of Magellan Shareholders, every Magellan
Shareholder entitled to vote thereon may vote in person or by proxy authorised by an instrument or
by a transmission permitted by law filed with Magellan (or its transfer agent) in accordance with the
procedures established from time to time for any shareholders’ meeting. Proxies must be received
by Magellan (or its transfer agent) a reasonable amount of time prior to the date of the meeting.
Under Delaware law, a proxy may be revoked at any time before it is voted by:
• so notifying Magellan in writing;
 
• signing and dating a new and different proxy card of a later date; or
 
• voting shares in person or by a duly appointed agent at the meeting.
Shareholder
requisitioned
resolutions
Under the Corporations Act, shareholders with at least 5% of the votes that may be cast at a
general meeting or at least 100 shareholders who are entitled to vote at the general meeting may
give a company notice of a resolution that they propose to move at a general meeting or request
that the directors of the Company call and arrange to hold a general meeting. A company which
has received such a notice must distribute that notice to all its shareholders or call and arrange the
meeting.
Magellan Shareholders may only bring business before an annual meeting. To be properly brought
before an annual meeting, business must be specified in the notice of meeting given by or at the
direction of the board, properly brought before the meeting by or at the direction of the board or
otherwise properly brought before the meeting by a Magellan Shareholder. In order for a Magellan
Shareholder to bring a business before an annual meeting, the Magellan Shareholder must have
given notice not less than 60 days nor more than 90 days prior to the meeting. However, if less
than 70 days notice or prior public disclosure (when disclosure of the date of the meeting is first
made in a press release) of the date of the meeting is given or made to Magellan Shareholders,
notice by the Magellan Shareholder to be timely must be received no later than the close of
business on the 10th day following the date on which such notice of the date of the annual meeting
was mailed or such public disclosure was made.
-108-
Board of
Directors
The Corporations Act requires that MPAL have at least 3 directors (excluding alternate directors) at
least 2 of which reside in Australia. The MPAL Constitution specifies that there will be not less than
4 or more than 8 directors. MPAL may in general meeting vary the number of its directors provided
that the variation falls within the above requirements of the Corporations Act.
Each director other than a managing director cannot retain office for more than 3 years or beyond
the 3rd annual general meeting following his/her election (whichever is the longer period) without
submitting him/herself for re-election. At each annual general meeting, one third of the directors
(other than the managing director) will retire from office and will be eligible for re-election.
The Delaware General Corporation Law permits a Delaware corporation’s certificate of
incorporation or by-laws to contain provisions governing the number and terms of directors.
Directors may be elected at the annual shareholders’ meeting, or at a different shareholders’
meeting if the corporation’s by-laws so provide. Shareholders also may elect directors by written
consent in lieu of a shareholders’ meeting.
The Magellan By-Laws provide that the number of directors is fixed at four members, but such
number may be altered from time to time by an amendment of the by laws. Directors are divided
into three classes. Each director is elected for a term of office to expire at the third succeeding
annual meeting of shareholders after their election, or in each case thereafter when their respective
successors are elected and have qualified or upon their earlier death, resignation or removal.
Directors need not be shareholders. No decrease in the number of directors constituting the board
of directors will shorten the term of any incumbent director.
All directors elected at a meeting must be by written ballot. Magellan’s By-Laws and the 12th
Article of the Restated Certificate of Incorporation provide that election of directors is by majority of
shares voted and a majority in number of shareholders present. However, if no board candidate
receives such majorities, the person who receives a majority in number of shareholder votes is
elected.
Removal of
Directors
Any director of MPAL may resign at any time by giving written notice to MPAL. The Corporations
Act provides that directors may be removed by a vote of the majority of shareholders present and
voting at a meeting of which special notice has been given. The directors cannot remove a director
from office or require a director to vacate their office.
The Delaware General Corporation Law provides that a director or directors may be removed with
or without cause by the holders of a majority of the shares then entitled to vote at an election of
directors, except that in the case of a corporation whose board is classified, the shareholders may
effect such removal only for cause.
The Magellan By-Laws provide that any director, or the entire board of directors, may be removed
from office at any time, but only for cause and only by the affirmative vote of at least a majority of
the votes cast at a shareholders’ meeting called to consider such removal and a majority of the
shareholders present in person or by proxy and entitled to vote thereon. The term “cause” is not
defined in Magellan’s By-Laws or in the Delaware General Corporation Law.
-109-
Board Vacancies
The MPAL Directors have the power at any time and from time to time to appoint any person as a
director either to fill a casual vacancy or as an addition to the board but so that the total number of
directors does not at any time exceed the set limit. A director appointed as a casual vacancy or an
addition to the board only holds office until the next general meeting where he/she will eligible for
re-election.
Directors of MPAL may be appointed at the annual general meeting of MPAL Shareholders, or at
any other general meeting requisitioned by shareholders.
A person must give MPAL a signed consent to act as a director before being appointed.
Except in the case of existing directors retiring automatically under the constitution, any person not
recommended for appointment by the board is only eligible for appointment where the signed
consent is received at least 28 days (including at least 20 business days) before the general
meeting
Under the Delaware General Corporation Law, vacancies on the board of directors and newly
created directorships resulting from an increase in the authorised number of directors may be filled
by:
• a majority of the directors then in office, although less than a quorum; or
 
• by the sole remaining director.
The Magellan By-Laws provide that newly created directorships resulting from an increase in the
authorised number of directors or any vacancies in the board of directors resulting from death,
resignation, retirement, disqualification, removal from office or other cause shall only be filled by or
in the manner directed by a majority vote of the directors then in office, and directors so chosen will
hold office for a term expiring at the Annual Meeting of Shareholders at which the term of the class
to which they have been elected expires. The Magellan By-Laws also provide that no decrease in
the number of directors constituting the board of directors shall shorten the term of any incumbent
director.
-110-
Indemnification
of Directors and
Officers
The Corporations Act provides that a
company and its related bodies must
not exempt or indemnify the company’s
officers or auditor from liability owed to
the company or a related body. The
company must also not indemnify its
officers or auditor from liability for fines
and compensation orders, and liability
owed to anyone arising out of conduct
which was not in good faith. In these
circumstances the person is also not
allowed an indemnity for related legal
costs.
The company can otherwise indemnify
for costs incurred defending or resisting
criminal proceedings in which the
person is not found guilty and
proceedings brought by ASIC or a
liquidator where the grounds for the
court order are not established. Legal
costs are allowed in proceedings for
relief granted by the court.
The company must not pay an
insurance premium for liabilities of its
officers or auditor where the liabilities
arise out of a wilful breach of duty
against the company, or an improper
use of position or company information.
Section 1318 of the Corporations Act
allows the court to grant relief to any
officer or auditor of a company in a civil
proceeding for negligence, default,
breach of duty or breach of trust, if it
Section 145 of the Delaware General
Corporation Law provides that a
corporation may indemnify its directors
and officers as well as other
employees and individuals against
expenses (including attorneys’ fees),
judgments, fines and amounts paid in
settlement actually and reasonably
incurred by such person in connection
with any threatened, pending or
completed actions, suits or
proceedings in which such person is
made a party by reason of such person
being or having been a director, officer,
employee or agent to such corporation,
if such person acted in good faith and
in a manner the person reasonably
believed to be in or not opposed to the
best interests of the corporation and not
unlawful.
The Delaware General Corporation
Law provides that Section 145 is not
exclusive of other rights to which those
seeking indemnification may be
entitled under any bylaw, agreement,
vote of shareholders or disinterested
directors or otherwise.
The Magellan Restated Certificate of
Incorporation and By-Laws provide for
indemnification by Magellan of its
directors, officers and employees to the
fullest extent permitted by the
Delaware General Corporation Law for
litigation expenses. The Magellan
Restated Certificate of Incorporation
and the Magellan By-Laws also
provide for the prepayment of
expenses to persons entitled to
indemnification (subject to certain
conditions).
appears to the court that the person is
or may be liable but has acted honestly
and, having regard to all the
circumstances of the case, including
those connected with the appointment,
that person ought fairly to be excused.
The court may relieve the person from
liability either wholly or partly, on such
terms as the court deems fit.
Under the MPAL Constitution, MPAL
will indemnify every officer or auditor of
the company to the maximum extent
permitted by law against any liability
incurred by the officer, auditor or
employee because of any act or thing
done or omitted to be done by that
person in that capacity or in any way in
the discharge of that person’s duties.
This does not apply in respect of any
liability to MPAL or any liability arising
out of conduct involving a lack of good
faith.
Every officer, auditor or employee of
MPAL will be indemnified by MPAL
against any liability for costs and
expenses incurred in defending
proceedings in which judgements
given in favour of that person or in
which he/she is acquitted or in
connection with an application in which
the court grants relief to a person under
the Corporations Act.
-111-
Limitation of
Personal
Liability of
Directors
Under Australian common law,
directors are required to comply with
certain fiduciary obligations to the
company. There fiduciary duties
include the duty to act in good faith in
the interests of the company, the duty to
act with a proper purpose, the duty not
to fetter their discretion, the duty to
exercise care, skill and diligence, the
The fiduciary duties owed by directors
of a Delaware corporation are the
common law duties of due care and
loyalty. The fiduciary duty of due care
requires that directors use that amount
of care which ordinarily careful and
prudent persons would use in similar
circumstances, and consider all
material information reasonably
duty to avoid conflicts of interest, the
duty not to use their position to their
advantage, and to account to the
company for any subsequent gain, and
the duty not to misappropriate company
property for their own or third party
benefit. In addition to these common
law or duties, directors of Australian
companies are required to comply with
a number of statutory duties imposed
by the Corporations Act, which are, in
part, similar to the fiduciary duties of
directors.
The Corporations Act prohibits a
company from exempting a person from
a liability to the company as an officer
of the company (eg for breach of
fiduciary or statutory duty).
available in making business
decisions, and that deficiencies in the
directors’ process are actionable only if
the directors’ actions are grossly
negligent. In the duty of care context
with respect to corporate fiduciaries,
gross negligence has been defined as
reckless indifference to or a deliberate
disregard of the whole body of
shareholders’ or actions which are
without the bounds of reason. The
fiduciary duty of loyalty mandates that
the best interest of the corporation and
its shareholders take precedence over
any interest possessed by a director,
officer or controlling shareholder and
not shared by the shareholders
generally. In addition to these common
law duties, directors of a Delaware
corporation are subject to the duties
and requirements of the Delaware
General Corporation Law.
The Delaware General Corporation
Law provides that a Delaware
corporation’s certificate of incorporation
may include a provision limiting a
director’s personal liability, to the
corporation or its shareholders, for
monetary damages for breach of the
director’s fiduciary duty. However, no
such provision can eliminate or limit
liability for:
• any breach of the director’s duty of
loyalty to the corporation or its
shareholders;
• acts or omissions not in good faith or
which involve intentional misconduct or
a knowing violation of the law;
• violation of certain provisions of the
Delaware General Corporation Law;
• any transaction from which the
director derived an improper personal
benefit; or
• any act or omission prior to the
adoption of such a provision in the
certificate of incorporation.
The Magellan Restated Certificate of
Incorporation contains a provision
eliminating its directors’ personal
liability for monetary damages to the
fullest extent permitted under the
Delaware General Corporation Law.
Under Delaware common law, a
shareholder may bring a derivative
action on behalf of the corporation
where those in control of the
corporation have refused to assert a
claim belonging to the corporation (and
to the shareholders collectively). Under
Delaware law, a shareholder who
wishes to bring a derivative suit must
meet certain eligibility and standing
requirements, including a requirement
that the plaintiff have been a
shareholder of the corporation at the
time of the act of which he complains
and that he maintain his status as a
shareholder throughout the course of
the litigation. In addition, a derivative
plaintiff must make a demand on the
directors of the corporation to assert the
corporate claim, unless that demand
would be futile. Settlement or dismissal
of a derivative action requires the
approval of the Court and notice to
shareholders of the proposed
dismissal.
-112-
Derivative
Actions
By
Shareholders
Under Australian law, a shareholder of
a company no longer has the right to
bring a common law action on behalf of
the company. The shareholder must
instead bring a statutory derivative
action under the Corporations Act.
Under the Corporations Act, a statutory
derivative action may be instituted by a
shareholder, former shareholder or a
person entitled to be registered as a
shareholder of a company. It can also
be brought by an officer or former
officer. In all cases, leave of the court is
required. This will be granted if it is
probable that the company will not itself
bring the proceedings or properly take
responsibility for them, the applicant is
acting in good faith, the granting of
leave is in the best interest of the
company and there is a serious
question to be tried. 14 days’ written
notice must usually be given to the
company before making the
application. The proceedings can be
instituted even if the company has
ratified or approved of the conduct,
although the court will take the
ratification into account when making
orders. Bringing a statutory derivative
action will not prevent a shareholder
bringing, or intervening in, proceedings
on their own behalf in respect of a
Oppression
personal right.
   
Under the Corporations Act, any
shareholder can bring an action in
cases of conduct which is either
contrary to the interests of the
shareholders as a whole, oppressive
to, unfairly prejudicial to or unfairly
discriminatory against any shareholder
in their capacity as shareholder or
themselves in their capacity other than
as a shareholder. Former shareholders
can also bring an action if it relates to
the circumstances in which they
ceased to be a shareholder. The court
may make orders that it considers
appropriate, including orders regulating
the future conduct of the company’s
affairs or for the purchase of any shares
by any shareholder. The court can also
order the modification or repeal of the
company’s existing constitution.
-113-
There are no equivalent rights
applicable to the Magellan shares
under Delaware law.
Directors with
Conflicting
Interest
The Corporations Act prohibits a
public company from giving
directors and other related parties
a financial benefit unless it obtains
the approval of the shareholders
or the financial benefit is exempt.
Exempt financial benefits include
indemnities, insurance premiums
and payment for legal costs which
are not otherwise prohibited by the
Corporations Act, and benefits
given an arm’s length terms.
The Corporations Act generally
requires a director of a company
who has a material personal
interest in a matter that relates to
the affairs of the company to give
the other directors notice of the
interest. Such a director must not
be present at a meeting where that
Under the Delaware General
Corporation Law, certain contracts
or transactions in which one or
more of a corporation’s directors
or officers have an interest are
neither void nor voidable solely on
that basis, or solely because such
directors or officers participate in
the meeting in which the
transaction is authorised, or solely
because any such director’s or
officer’s votes are counted for
such purpose, provided certain
conditions are met. These
conditions include obtaining the
required approval and fulfilling the
requirements of good faith and full
disclosure. Under the Delaware
General Corporation Law, either:
• the shareholders or the board of
Right to Inspect
Corporate Books
and Records
matter is being considered or vote
on the matter unless the other
directors or ASIC approve, or the
matter is not one which requires
disclosure under the Corporations
Act. Such a director does not form
part of the quorum at the directors
meeting for that part of the
business.
Directors, in entering into
transactions involving the
company, are subject to their
common law and statutory duties
to avoid conflicts of interest. The
ASX Listing Rules also require
shareholder approval of certain
transactions with directors
(including some issuances of
securities to directors).
-114-
Under the Corporations Act, every
shareholder of a company at the
shareholder’s request and on
payment of any fee (up to a
prescribed amount) must be sent a
copy of the constitution within
7 days. The constitution of a
public company (and any
modification to it) is also lodged
with ASIC and may be obtained
by any member of the public on
payment of a prescribed fee.
MPAL’s certificate of registration is
issued by ASIC. ASIC keeps a
copy of the registration and is
obliged to give a person, upon
request, a copy of the certificate.
Under the Corporations Act, each
shareholder is entitled to receive a
copy of MPAL’s last annual
financial report, director’s report
and auditor’s report or a concise
directors must approve any such
contract or transaction after full
disclosure of the material facts as
to the director’s or officer’s
interest; or
• the contract or transaction must
have been fair to the company at
the time it was approved. If board
approval is sought, the contract or
transaction must be approved by a
majority of disinterested directors,
even though the disinterested
directors may be less than a
quorum.
The Magellan Restated Certificate
of Incorporation as amended on
12 February 1988 and 22
December 2000 is on file with the
Secretary of State of Delaware
and has also been filed with the
SEC as an exhibit to the Magellan
Form S-8 registration statement
dated 14 January 1999.
The Delaware General
Corporation Law provides that for
every shareholder meeting, a
complete list of the shareholders
entitled to vote at the meeting
must be made and be open to the
examination of any shareholder
during ordinary business hours for
at least 10 days prior to the
meeting at the corporation’s
principal place of business.
Delaware law provides that the
shareholder list may also be made
report for that financial year by the
later of 7 days after the request is
received and either 4 months after
the end of the financial year or
21 days before the next annual
general meeting (whichever is
earlier).
Under the MPAL Constitution, a
shareholder has no right to inspect
any of the books of MPAL except
as conferred by law or authorised
by the directors or the resolution of
MPAL in general meeting and is
not entitled to require or receive
any information concerning the
business, trading or customers of
MPAL or any trade secret or secret
process of or used by MPAL.
Under the Corporations Act, a
shareholder must obtain a court
order to obtain access to the
corporate books and records.
The Corporations Act allows
shareholders to inspect a
company’s general meeting
minute books.
 
Under the Corporations Act, the
register of shareholders of a
company is usually kept at the
registered office or principal place
of business in Australia and must
be available for inspection at all
times when the registered office is
open to the public. The MPAL
Constitution states that subject to
the Corporations Act, the ASX
Listing Rules and the SCH
Business Rules, MPAL may close
the register at such times as it
determines. Shareholders may
inspect the register free of charge
and any other person may inspect
on payment of any fee (up to a
prescribed amount) required by
MPAL. MPAL must give a person
available on a reasonably
accessible electronic network,
provided that the information
required to gain access to the list
is provided with the notice of the
meeting. The list must be
produced at the meeting and be
subject at all times during the
meeting to the inspection of any
shareholder present.
Delaware law provides that any
shareholder must, upon written
demand under oath stating the
purpose thereof, have the right
during the usual hours for
business to inspect for any proper
purpose the corporation’s shares
ledger, shareholder list and its
other books records and to make
copies or extracts therefrom. If the
corporation refuses to permit the
shareholder’s inspection or does
not reply to the shareholder’s
written demand within five
business days, the shareholder
may seek remedy in the Delaware
Court of Chancery.
Right to Inspect
the Register of
Shareholders
Auditors
Winding Up
a copy of the register (or any part
of the register) within 7 days if the
person asks for a copy and pays
the requested fee (up to a
prescribed amount).
This also applies in respect of
MPAL’s register of optionholders.
In addition, MPAL must keep a
register of charges which may be
inspected by shareholders on
payment of a fee.
-115-
Under the Corporations Act, all
public companies must prepare a
financial report and a directors
report for each financial year. A
listed public company must
prepare a financial report and
directors report for each half year
period. While the annual report
must be audited, the half year
report may be audit reviewed.
In the winding up, each MPAL
Share confers on its holder the
right to receive payment in
proportion to the amount paid up
on a MPAL Share. MPAL may
also be wound up voluntarily or
otherwise appoint a liquidator with
the sanction of a special
resolution and to distribute
MPAL’s assets among the
shareholders.
Under the U.S. Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, U.S. public
companies are required to deliver
audited financial statements in
connection with certain of their
periodic public reports. These
financial statements are audited
by the company’s independent
auditors. The company’s
relationship with the independent
auditors is managed by the audit
committee of the company’s board
of directors in accordance with the
pre-approval and independence
requirements and the standards
for audit committee conduct set
forth in the rules and regulations
of the SEC and Nasdaq.
 
Under the Delaware General
Corporation Law, a Delaware
corporation may be dissolved by a
vote of the Board of Directors and
a vote of a majority of the
outstanding shares. The
Delaware General Corporation
Law contains specific provisions
regarding methods of winding up
the affairs of dissolved
corporations and distributing
assets among creditors and
shareholders. These methods are
calculated to enable the
shareholders and directors of the
corporation to limit their post-
dissolution exposure to claims of
creditors, while at the same time
establishing procedures that fairly
balance and address the
legitimate claims of creditors
against the assets of the dissolved
corporation. In general, valid
corporate debts are to be paid or
provided for before a liquidating
distribution to shareholders of the
corporation is made. The liability
of any shareholder for claims
against the dissolved corporation
may not exceed the amount
distributed to such shareholder in
dissolution.
-116-