
MINCO
GOLD CORPORATION
明科金矿公司
For Immediate Release
TSX: MMM
AMEX: MGH
FSE: MI5
May 29, 2007
NEWS RELEASE
MINCO GOLD ACQUIRES XIAOSHAN POLYMETALLIC PROJECT
Minco Gold Corporation (the "Company" or "Minco Gold") (MMM-TSX/MGH-AMEX/MI5-FSE) is pleased to 
announce that its wholly owned subsidiary, Minco Mining (China) Corporation, has entered into a cooperative joint-
venture agreement with Henan Nonferrous Geological Mining Co., Ltd. (“HNGM”) to jointly explore and develop the 
Xiaoshan polymetallic project located in Henan Province, China.  Under the terms of the agreement, Minco can earn up 
to 70% equity interests in Xiaoshan with a total contribution of RMB 35 million (approx US$ 4.57 million).  Minco will 
make an initial payment of RMB 15 million (approx US$ 1.96 million) to secure the exploration permits and fund RMB 
20 million (approx US$ 2.61 million) in exploration and development before the end of June, 2009.  The agreement is 
subject to Chinese government approval. 
 
The Xiaoshan project consists of two exploration permits, the 17.1 square kilometre (km2) Huluyu permit and the 12 
km2  Dafangshan  permit,  for  a  total  land  package  of  29.1  km2.    Located  in  Shanxian  County,  Northwest  Henan 
Province,  the  region  covers  the  eastern  portion  of  the  famous  Qinling  metallogenic  belt  which  is  one  of  the  most 
important gold producing regions in China.    
 
Xiaoshan is located on a structural zone parallel to Silvercorp's Ying Silver Project located 30 kilometres to the 
south.    The  Xiaoshan  and  Ying  projects  demonstrate  very  similar  geological  settings,  structures,  and 
mineralization styles.  Regionally, both projects sit on the Southern rim of the North China Craton where the 
Archean metamorphosed rocks of the Taihua Group are the dominant host for the large gold-silver deposits in 
the East section of the Qinling belt.  In this region, the Archean migmatite, schist and gneiss (Taihua Group) 
have  been  intruded  by  Proterozoic  diabase  dykes  and  Mesozoic  acidic  dykes.    Vein-alteration  zones  in  the 
region  are  dominantly  controlled  by  N-NW  (North-Northwest)  and  NW-W  (Northwest-West)  trending  faults 
with the mineral deposit type similar to the mesothermal veins of the Coeur d’Alene District in Idaho, U.S.A..  
  
Within the Huluyu permit there are three sets of faults trending NW (Northwest), N-NW, and NE (Northeast).  
Thirteen gold and silver veins have been mapped at surface in this area and the largest vein has been traced for a 
length  of  4,150  metres.    Sampling  by  the  Henan  Nonferrous  Exploration  and  Mining  Company  from 
underground workings at Huluyu have returned values ranging from 3.0 g/t to 74.6 g/t gold, 121 g/t to 726 g/t 
silver, 3% to 29% lead, and 1% to 23% zinc.  One grab sample from underground workings returned 21.3 g/t 
gold, 520 g/t silver, 18.3% lead, and 16.66 % zinc while another grab sample yielded 45.8 g/t gold, 145 g/t silver, 
6.26% lead, and 12.90 % zinc. 
 
In  the  Dafangshan  area,  7  gold  veins  have  been  mapped  at  surface.    The  mineralization  is  strata  bound  and 
occurs as thin veins.  Sampling by the Henan Nonferrous Exploration and Mining Company returned values for 
veins that vary in length from 212 m to 772 m with average widths from  0.42 m to 0.65 m and average gold 
grades from 3.00 g/t to 5.77 g/t.  Two grab samples returned gold values of 12.8 g/t and 21.7 g/t respectively. 
 
While  mining  activities  for  gold  and  silver  can  be  traced  back  for  hundreds  of  years,  the  Xiaoshan  project 
remains largely under-explored by modern techniques.  Exploration in the region has been limited to surface 
mapping, stream sediment sampling, trenching, and sampling of old workings and artisanal tunnels.  Minco’s 
geological team is preparing a work program to investigate the numerous veins identified on the property with a 
focus on the deep part of the known mineralized zones.
ON BEHALF OF THE BOARD
“Ken Z. Cai”
President, CEO & Director
- 2 -
This news release has been reviewed and approved for release by William Meyer, P. Eng, Chairman of Board 
and a Qualified Person in accordance with National Instrument 43-101. 
 
About Minco Gold 
 
Minco  Gold  Corporation  (MMM-TSX/MGH-AMEX/MI5-FSE)  (formerly  “Minco  Mining  &  Metals 
Corporation”) is a Canadian mining company involved in the direct acquisition and development of high-grade, 
advanced stage gold and base metals properties in China. The Company owns an exploration property portfolio 
covering more than 1,500 square kilometres of mineral rights in China including the past producing Gold Bull 
Mountain  mine.  For  more 
the  website  at 
www.mincomining.ca or contact Ute Koessler at 1-888-288-8288 or (604) 688-8002 info@mincomining.ca.
information  on  Minco  and
its  properties,  please  visit
The TSX has neither approved nor disapproved of the information contained herein. The statements that are not 
historical  facts  are  forward-looking  statements  involving  known  and  unknown  risks  and  uncertainties  which 
could cause actual results to vary considerably from these statements. The risks and uncertainties include those 
described  in  Minco  Gold’s  annual  report  on  Form  20-F  filed  with  the  U.S.  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission.  Forward Looking Statements: Statements in this news are forward-looking statements within the 
meaning of the United States Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward looking statements are 
statements that are not historical facts and that are subject to a variety of risks and uncertainties which could 
cause  actual  events  or  results  to  differ  materially  from  those  reflected  in  the  forward-looking  statements, 
including    risks  related  to  the  exploration  stage  of  the  company’s  projects;  market  fluctuations  in  prices  for 
securities  of  exploration  stage  companies;  uncertainties  about  the  availability  of  additional  financing; 
uncertainties related to fluctuations in gold prices; the possibility that Minco Gold Corporation may change its 
plans  with  respect  to  one  or  more  properties;  and  other  risks  and  uncertainties  described  in  the  company’s 
annual  report  on  Form  20-F  and  Reports  on  Form  6-K  filed  with  or  furnished  to  the  U.S.  Securities  and 
Exchange Commission. Although we believe the expectations reflected in our forward looking statements are 
reasonable,  results  may  vary,  and  we  cannot  guarantee  future  results,  levels  of  activity,  performance  or 
achievements.