
8-K 1 a8-kpreferrredunitsclosing.htm 8-K - PREFERRED UNIT CLOSING, ACQUISITION AND
CREDIT AGREEMENT AMENDMENT Document
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 8-K
CURRENT REPORT
Pursuant to Section 13 OR 15(d) of The Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Date of Report (Date of earliest event reported): August 11, 2016
Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware    001-35374    45-2842469
(State or other jurisdiction    (Commission    (IRS Employer
of incorporation)    File Number)    Identification No.)
2431 East 61st Street, Suite 850
Tulsa, Oklahoma 74136
(Address of principal executive offices) (Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code: (918) 743-7575
Check the appropriate box below if the Form 8-K filing is intended to simultaneously satisfy the
filing obligation of the registrant under any of the following provisions:
¨Written communications pursuant to Rule 425 under the Securities Act (17 CFR 230.425)
¨Soliciting material pursuant to Rule 14a-12 under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.14a-12)
Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 14d-2(b) under the Exchange Act (17
¨
CFR 240.14d-2(b))
Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 13e-4(c) under the Exchange Act (17
¨
CFR 240.13e-4(c))
Item 1.01    Entry into a Material Definitive Agreement
On August 11, 2016, Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP, a Delaware limited partnership (the
“Partnership”), completed its previously announced private placement (the “Private Placement”)
of $25 million aggregate principal amount of the Partnership’s Class A Convertible Preferred
Units (the “Preferred Units”) pursuant to that certain Class A Convertible Preferred Unit Purchase
Agreement, dated July 31, 2016 (the “Purchase Agreement”), by and among the Partnership and
each of the purchasers named on Schedule A thereto (collectively, the “Purchasers”). Pursuant to
the Purchase Agreement, the Purchasers acquired the Preferred Units at a price of $2.15 per
Preferred Unit (the “Unit Purchase Price”).
As permitted by the terms of the Purchase Agreement, prior to the closing date of the Private
Placement (the “Closing Date”), Mid-Con Energy III, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company
and an affiliate of Mid-Con Energy GP, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and the
general partner of the Partnership (the “General Partner”), was joined as a Purchaser under the
Purchase Agreement. Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, Mid-Con III acquired $2 million of
the Preferred Units issued in the Private Placement; such Preferred Units were purchased on the
same terms and subject to the same conditions as the Preferred Units purchased by the other
Purchasers.
The Partnership used net proceeds from the Private Placement to fund its previously announced
acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties located in Nolan County, Texas, and excess
net proceeds will be used for general partnership purposes, including repayment of borrowings
outstanding under the Partnership’s revolving credit facility.
The description of the Purchase Agreement contained in this Item 1.01 does not purport to be
complete and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Purchase Agreement,
which is filed as Exhibit 10.1 to the Partnership’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission on August 3, 2016.
Registration Rights Agreement
On August 11, 2016, in connection with the closing of the Private Placement, the Partnership
entered into a Registration Rights Agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) by and
among the Partnership and the Purchasers.
Pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement, within 90 days of the Closing Date, the
Partnership is required to prepare and file a registration statement (the “Registration Statement”)
to permit the public resale of the Common Units issued or issuable upon conversion of the
Preferred Units, including any Common Units issued or issuable upon conversion of any PIK
Units (as defined in the Partnership Agreement Amendment (as defined in Item 5.03 hereof)).
The Partnership is also required to use its commercially reasonable efforts to cause the
Registration Statement to become effective no later than 180 days after the Closing Date. In
addition, the Registration Rights Agreement grants the Purchasers demand and piggyback
registration rights under certain circumstances. These registration rights are transferable to
affiliates of the Purchasers and, in certain circumstances, to third parties.
The description of the Registration Rights Agreement contained in this Item 1.01 does not purport
to be complete and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Registration Rights
Agreement, which is filed as Exhibit 4.1 hereto and incorporated by reference herein.
Credit Agreement Amendment
On August 11, 2016, in connection with the Acquisition and the Private Placement, the
Partnership and its lenders entered into Amendment No. 10 to that certain Credit Agreement,
dated as of December 20, 2011, among Mid-Con Properties, LLC, as borrower, Wells Fargo
Bank, National Association, as administrative agent and collateral agent, and the lenders party
thereto (the “Credit Agreement Amendment”).
Among other changes, the Credit Agreement Amendment increased the conforming borrowing
base of the Partnership’s senior secured revolving credit facility to $140 million, modified the
definition of “Indebtedness” to exclude the Preferred Units and modified the limitations on
restricted payments to specifically provide for the payment of cash distributions on the Preferred
Units. Pro forma for net proceeds from the Acquisition and the Private Placement, debt
outstanding under the credit facility will be approximately $133 million. The Partnership’s next
regularly scheduled bi-annual redetermination is expected to occur on or about November 1,
2016.
The description of the Credit Agreement Amendment contained in this Item 1.01 does not purport
to be complete and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Credit Agreement
Amendment, which is filed as Exhibit 10.1 hereto and incorporated by reference herein.
1
Item 2.01    Completion of Acquisition or Disposition of Assets
On August 11, 2016, Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the
Partnership (“Mid-Con Properties”), closed its previously announced acquisition of certain oil and
natural gas properties located in Nolan County, Texas pursuant to that certain Purchase and
Sale Agreement, dated as of July 28, 2016 (the “Purchase and Sale Agreement”), by and among
Mid-Con Properties, as purchaser, and Walter Exploration Company, JMW LTD, and Wildcat
Properties L.P., as sellers, for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $19.5 million,
subject to post-closing adjustments (the “Acquisition”). As described in Item 1.01 hereof, the
Acquisition was funded using net proceeds from the Private Placement, including net proceeds
received from the sale of Preferred Units to Mid-Con III, an affiliate of the General Partner.
The description of the Purchase and Sale Agreement contained in this Item 2.01 does not purport
to be complete and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Purchase and Sale
Agreement, which is filed as Exhibit 10.8 to the Partnership’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for
the quarterly period ended June 30, 2016, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
on August 4, 2016.
 
Item 2.03    Creation of Direct Financial Obligation or an Obligation Under an Off-Balance Sheet
Arrangement of a Registrant
The information regarding the Credit Agreement Amendment set forth in Item 1.01 of this Current
Report is incorporated by reference into this Item 2.03.
 
Item 3.02    Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities
On August 11, 2016, the Partnership completed its Private Placement of 11,627,906 Preferred
Units for an aggregate offering price of $25 million. Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, the
Private Placement was made in reliance upon an exemption from the registration requirements of
the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), pursuant to Section 4(a)(2) thereof,
as a transaction by an issuer not involving any public offering. The terms of the Preferred Units,
and the Common Units issuable upon conversion thereof, are set forth in the Partnership
Agreement Amendment.
At any time during the period beginning on February 11, 2017 and ending immediately prior to
the first to occur of (i) the fifth anniversary of the Closing Date or (ii) the effective date of a Change
of Control (as defined in the Partnership Agreement Amendment), each holder of Preferred Units
(a “Holder”) shall have the right, subject to certain conditions, to convert all or any portion of such
Holder’s Preferred Units into common units representing limited partner interests in the
Partnership (“Common Units”) on a one-for-one basis, subject to adjustment for splits, reverse
splits, subdivisions, combinations and reclassifications.
Upon a Change of Control, each Holder shall have the right, at its election, to either (i) if the
Partnership is the surviving entity of such Change of Control, continue to hold Preferred Units; or
(ii) convert all or any portion of the Preferred Units held by such Holder into Common Units on a
one-for-one basis, subject to adjustment for splits, reverse splits, subdivisions, combinations and
reclassifications. If any Preferred Units remain outstanding following a Change of Control in
which the Partnership is not the surviving entity, then immediately following effectiveness of such
Change of Control, the Partnership shall redeem in cash all, but not less than all, of the
outstanding Preferred Units at a price per Preferred Unit equal to the Unit Purchase Price
multiplied by the change of control redemption multiple then in effect.
On the fifth anniversary of the Closing Date, each Holder shall have the right to cause the
Partnership to redeem all or any portion of such Holder’s outstanding Preferred Units for cash at
the Unit Purchase Price, and any remaining Preferred Units will thereafter be converted to
Common Units on a one-for-one basis, subject to adjustment for splits, reverse splits,
subdivisions, combinations and reclassifications.
Upon any conversion or redemption of Preferred Units, the Partnership shall pay any accrued but
unpaid and accumulated distributions on such Preferred Units in cash.
The description of the Preferred Units contained in this Item 3.02 does not purport to be complete
and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Partnership Agreement
Amendment, which is filed as Exhibit 3.1 hereto and incorporated by reference herein. The
information regarding the Preferred Units set forth in Item 5.03 of this Current Report is
incorporated by reference into this Item 3.02.
2
Item 3.03    Material Modification to Rights of Security Holders
As described in the First Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited Partnership of the
Partnership, as amended by the Partnership Agreement Amendment (the “Amended Partnership
Agreement”), the Preferred Units entitle the Holders to certain rights that are senior to the rights of
holders of Common Units, such as rights to certain distributions and rights upon liquidation of the
Partnership.
If the Partnership fails to pay any Preferred Unit distribution in full on the applicable payment
date, then the Partnership shall not be permitted to, and shall not, declare or make any
distributions in respect of any Junior Securities (as defined in the Partnership Agreement
Amendment), including Common Units, or Parity Securities (as defined in the Partnership
Agreement Amendment), other than distributions on the Preferred Units, until such time as all
accrued and unpaid Preferred Unit distributions have been paid in full in cash. The Preferred
Units also rank senior to the Junior Securities, including the Common Units, in respect of
liquidation. Upon liquidation of the Partnership, each Preferred Unit Holder shall be entitled to
receive, in respect of each Preferred Unit then-owned, a liquidation preference equal to the sum
of the Unit Purchase Price (subject to adjustments for any stock splits, combinations or
recapitalization with respect to the Preferred Units), plus all accrued but unpaid and accumulated
distributions, if any, on such Preferred Unit to, but not including, the liquidation date.
The description of the Preferred Units contained in this Item 3.03 does not purport to be complete
and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Partnership Agreement
Amendment, which is filed as Exhibit 3.1 hereto and is incorporated by reference herein. The
information regarding the Preferred Units set forth in Items 1.01, 3.02 and 5.03 hereof is
incorporated by reference into this Item 3.03.
Item 5.03    Amendments to Articles of Incorporation or Bylaws; Change in Fiscal Year
Partnership Agreement Amendment
On August 11, 2016, in connection with the closing of the Private Placement, the General Partner
executed the First Amendment to the First Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited
Partnership of the Partnership (the “Partnership Agreement Amendment”), setting forth the terms
of the Preferred Units and the preferences, rights, powers and duties of the Holders. The
Partnership Agreement Amendment is effective as of August 11, 2016.
The Partnership will pay Holders a cumulative, quarterly distribution in cash at an annual rate of
8.00% or, under certain circumstances, in additional Preferred Units at an annual rate of 10.00%.
The Preferred Units rank senior to the Common Units, with respect to the payment of distributions
and distribution of assets upon liquidation, dissolution and winding up, in each case, as
described in Item 3.03 hereof. As described in Item 3.02 hereof, if not earlier redeemed or
converted, on the fifth anniversary of the Closing Date, all outstanding Preferred Units will be
redeemed by the Partnership or converted into Common Units, at the Holder’s election. The
Preferred Units are not subject to any sinking fund.
The Preferred Units vote together with the Common Units, as a single class, with each Preferred
Unit having such voting rights as such Preferred Unit would have if it were converted into
Common Units, at the conversion rate then in effect, except that the Preferred Units shall be
entitled to vote as a separate class on any matter on which unitholders are entitled to vote that
adversely affects the rights, powers, privileges or preferences of the Preferred Units in relation to
other classes of Partnership Interests (as defined in the Amended Partnership Agreement) or as
required by law. The consent of a majority of the then-outstanding Preferred Units, with one vote
per Preferred Unit, shall be required to approve any matter for which the Preferred Unit Holders
are entitled to vote as a separate class.
The description of the Partnership Agreement Amendment contained in this Item 5.03 does not
purport to be complete and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Partnership
Agreement Amendment, which is filed as Exhibit 3.1 hereto and incorporated by reference
herein. The information regarding the Preferred Units set forth in Items 3.02 and 3.03 hereof is
incorporated by reference into this Item 5.03.
 
Item 8.01    Other Events
On August 11, 2016, the Partnership issued a press release announcing the consummation of
the Acquisition, the closing of the Private Placement and the entry into the Credit Agreement
Amendment. A copy of the press release is attached as Exhibit 99.1 to this Current Report on
Form 8-K and incorporated by reference herein.
3
Item 9.01    Financial Statements and Exhibits
(a)    Financial Statements of Businesses Acquired
To the extent required by this Item 9.01, Acquisition financial statements will be filed as part of an
amendment to this Current Report on Form 8-K not later than 71 calendar days after the date this
Current Report is required to be filed.
(b)    Pro Forma Financial Information
To the extent required by this Item 9.01, pro forma financial information will be filed as part of an
amendment to this Current Report on Form 8-K not later than 71 calendar days after the date this
Current Report is required to be filed.
(d)    Exhibits
 
Exhibit
No.
Description
3.1
4.1
10.1
First Amendment to First Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited Partnership of
Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP, dated as of August 11, 2016.
Registration Rights Agreement, dated August 11, 2016, by and among Mid-Con Energy
Partners, LP and the Purchasers named therein.
Amendment No. 10 to Credit Agreement, dated as of August 11, 2016, among Mid-Con
Energy Properties, LLC, as Borrower, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as
Administrative Agent and Collateral Agent and the lenders party thereto.
99.1 Press release dated August 11, 2016.
4
SIGNATURES
 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned hereunto duly authorized.
 
 
 
 
 
 
August 15, 2016
 
 
EXHIBIT INDEX
 
 
Exhibit
No.
MID-CON ENERGY PARTNERS, LP
By: Mid-Con Energy GP, LLC
 
 
 
By:
its general partner
 
 
/s/ Charles L. McLawhorn, III
Charles L. McLawhorn, III
Vice President, General Counsel & Secretary
Description
3.1
4.1
10.1
First Amendment to First Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited Partnership of
Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP, dated as of August 11, 2016.
Registration Rights Agreement, dated August 11, 2016, by and among Mid-Con Energy
Partners, LP and the Purchasers named therein.
Amendment No. 10 to Credit Agreement, dated as of August 11, 2016, among Mid-Con
Energy Properties, LLC, as Borrower, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as
Administrative Agent and Collateral Agent and the lenders party thereto.
99.1 Press release dated August 11, 2016.