
S-4 1 fs42014_stratexoil.htm REGISTRATION STATEMENT
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 26, 2014
Registration No. 333-
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM S-4
REGISTRATION STATEMENT
UNDER
THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
STRATEX OIL & GAS HOLDINGS, INC.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Colorado
(State or other jurisdiction of
94-3364776
 1311
(Primary Standard Industrial
(I.R.S. Employer
 
 
Classification Code Number)
incorporation or organization)
Identification Number)
30 Echo Lake Road
Watertown, CT 06795
(713) 353-4786
(Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of registrant’s principal executive
offices)
Stephen Funk
Chief Executive Officer
30 Echo Lake Road
Watertown, CT 06795
(713) 353-4786
(Name, address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of agent for service)
Copies to:
Brian North, Esquire
Buchanan Ingersoll & Rooney PC
Two Liberty Place, 32nd Floor
Philadelphia, PA 19102
(215) 665-3828
(801) 519 8500
Michael A. Cederstrom, Esquire
175 S. Main Street, 9th Floor
Salt Lake City, Utah 84111
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale of the securities to the public: As soon as practicable
after this registration statement becomes effective and upon completion of the merger described in the
enclosed document.
If the securities being registered on this Form are being offered in connection with the formation of a holding
company and there is compliance with General Instruction G, check the following box.  ¨
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities
Act, check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective
registration statement for the same offering.  ¨
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act, check the
following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration
statement for the same offering.  ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-
accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated
filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act (check one):
Large accelerated filer¨ 
¨
Non-accelerated filer ¨(Do not check if a smaller reporting company)Smaller reporting companyþ
Accelerated filer
If applicable, place an X in the box to designate the appropriate rule provision relied upon in conducting this
transaction:
Exchange Act Rule 13e-4(i) (Cross-Border Issuer Tender Offer)  ¨
Exchange Act Rule 14d-1(d) (Cross-Border Third-Party Tender Offer)   ¨
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Title of each class of  
securities to be registered
Common Stock, par value
$0.01 per share
Amount
  
to be
registered(1)
Proposed
maximum offering price
per share
Proposed maximum
aggregate
offering  price(2)
Amount of
registration
 fee(3)
60,616,448
N/A
$13,941,783.04
$1,796.00
(1)
Represents the maximum number of shares of the Registrant’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share, to be
issued in connection with the merger described in the proxy statement/prospectus contained herein.
(2)
Estimated solely for the purpose of calculating the registration fee required by Section 6(b) of the Securities Act and
calculated pursuant to Rules 457(f)(1) and 457(c) under the Securities Act. The proposed maximum aggregate
offering price of the Registrant’s common stock was calculated based upon the market value of shares of Richfield
common stock (the securities to be canceled in the merger) in accordance with Rule 457(c) and is equal to the
product of (a) $0.23,  the last reported sale price per share of Richfield common stock on August 22, 2014 as
reported by OTCQX,  multiplied by (b)  60,616,448, the estimated maximum number of shares of Richfield common
stock outstanding as of August 22, 2014 that may be cancelled and exchanged for Stratex common stock pursuant
to the merger agreement.
(3)Calculated pursuant to Section 6(b) of the Securities Act.
The Registrant hereby amends this Registration Statement on such date or dates as may be necessary to
delay its effective date until the Registrant shall file a further amendment which specifically states that this
Registration Statement shall thereafter become effective in accordance with Section 8(a) of the Securities Act
of 1933, as amended, or until this Registration Statement shall become effective on such date as the
Securities and Exchange Commission, acting pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine.
Information contained herein is subject to completion or amendment. A registration statement relating to
these securities has been filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. These securities may not be
sold nor may offers to buy be accepted prior to the time the registration statement becomes effective. This
proxy statement/prospectus shall not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy nor shall
there be any sale of these securities in any jurisdiction in which such offer, solicitation or sale is not
permitted.
PRELIMINARY—SUBJECT TO COMPLETION—DATED AUGUST 26, 2014
MERGER PROPOSED—YOUR VOTE IS VERY IMPORTANT
Dear Richfield Stockholders:
The board of directors of Richfield Oil & Gas Company, which we refer to as Richfield, has adopted and
approved an Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of May 6, 2014 and an amendment dated July 17, 2014,
which we collectively refer to as the merger agreement, pursuant to which Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.,
which we refer to as Stratex, will acquire Richfield. Upon completion of the merger of Richfield Acquisition
Corp., a wholly owned subsidiary of Stratex, which we refer to as Merger Sub, with and into Richfield, with
Richfield as the surviving corporation, Richfield will become a wholly owned subsidiary of Stratex. We refer to
this transaction as the merger. We are sending you the accompanying proxy statement/prospectus to notify
you of the special meeting of Richfield stockholders being held to approve the merger agreement and related
matters, which we refer to as the special meeting or the Richfield special meeting, and to ask you to vote to
approve the merger agreement at the special meeting.
If the merger is completed, Richfield stockholders will collectively have the right to receive at the effective time
of the merger a total aggregate of 60,616,448 shares of Stratex common stock. For each share of Richfield
common stock that you hold, you will receive such number of shares of Stratex common stock equal to the
quotient of (i) 60,616,448 divided by (ii) the total number of shares of Richfield common stock outstanding as
of the close of business on the day before the consummation of the merger.
Based on the number shares of Richfield common stock outstanding on August [*], 2014, each outstanding
share of Richfield common stock (other than shares held by those Richfield stockholders properly exercising
dissenters’ rights) would be converted into one share of Stratex common stock
The number of shares you will have the right to receive in the merger is subject to adjustment in the event that
additional shares of Richfield common stock are issued prior to the consummation of the merger, as
described in the proxy statement/prospectus. Cash will be paid in lieu of any fractional shares. Stratex
common stock is quoted on the OTCQB under the symbol “STTX.” Richfield common stock is quoted on the
OTCQX under the symbol “ROIL.”
We cannot complete the merger unless the holders of a majority of the outstanding shares of Richfield
common stock approve the merger agreement. A failure to vote on the proposal to approve the merger
agreement has the same effect as a vote by you AGAINST the approval of the merger agreement. Therefore,
your vote is very important, regardless of the number of shares of common stock you own. Whether or not
you expect to attend the Richfield special meeting in person, we urge you to submit your voting instructions
as promptly as possible by (1) accessing the Internet website specified on your proxy card, (2) calling the toll-
free number specified on your proxy card, or (3) signing and returning all proxy cards that you receive in the
postage-paid envelope provided, so that your shares may be represented and voted at the Richfield special
meeting.
The Richfield board of directors unanimously recommends that you vote “FOR” the proposal to approve the
merger agreement and “FOR” the adjournment proposal (as more fully described in this proxy
statement/prospectus).
The obligations of Stratex and Richfield to complete the merger are subject to the satisfaction or waiver of
several conditions set forth in the merger agreement. More information about Stratex, Richfield and the
merger is contained in the proxy statement/prospectus. We encourage you to read the enclosed proxy
statement/prospectus carefully, including the section entitled “Risk Factors” beginning on page 14, which
provides a discussion of risk factors that you should consider in evaluating the merger and the other matters
on which you are being asked to vote.
The Richfield special meeting will be held at             , local time, on                     , 2014 at .
We look forward to the successful acquisition of Richfield by Stratex.
Sincerely,
President and Chief Executive Officer
Richfield Oil & Gas Company
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved or
disapproved of the securities to be issued under this proxy statement/prospectus or determined if this proxy
statement/prospectus is accurate or complete. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
The proxy statement/prospectus is dated                     , 2014, and is first being mailed to Richfield stockholders
on or about                     , 2014.
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
175 South Main Street, Suite 900
Salt Lake City, UT 84111
NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETING OF STOCKHOLDERS
TO BE HELD ON [______________], 2014
Dear Stockholder:
You are cordially invited to attend a special meeting of Stockholders of Richfield Oil & Gas Company, a
Nevada corporation. The meeting will be held at [____________________________] on [____________],
[__________________], 2014, at [_______] a.m., local time, for the following purposes:
1.
To approve the Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated May 6, 2014, as amended on July 17, 2014, by and among
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc., a Colorado corporation which we refer to as Stratex, Richfield Acquisition Corp., a
wholly owned subsidiary of Stratex which we refer to as Merger Sub, and Richfield Oil & Gas Company, a Nevada
corporation, which we refer to as Richfield, pursuant to which Merger Sub will be merged with and into Richfield,
with Richfield as the surviving corporation, resulting in Richfield becoming a wholly owned subsidiary of
Stratex.  Each outstanding share of common stock of Richfield will be converted into the right to receive a number
of shares of Stratex common stock equal to the quotient of (i) 60,616,448 divided by (ii) the total number of
outstanding shares of Richfield common stock, and cash will be paid in lieu of any fractional shares, subject to
adjustment as set forth in the merger agreement.
2.
To approve the adjournment of the Richfield special meeting, if necessary or appropriate in the view of the Richfield
board of directors, to solicit additional proxies in favor of the proposal to approve the merger agreement if there are
not sufficient votes at the time of such adjournment to approve the merger agreement.
Stockholders also will be asked to consider such other matters as may properly come before the special
meeting or any adjournment or postponement thereof.
This proxy statement/prospectus is being furnished to holders of common stock, par value $0.01 per share,
of Richfield in connection with the solicitation by our board of directors of proxies to be voted at the special
meeting. Only stockholders of record as of the close of business on ________________ __, 2014 are entitled
to notice of and to vote at the special meeting or at any adjournment or postponement thereof. A complete list
of stockholders of record of Richfield entitled to vote at the Richfield special meeting will be available
beginning two (2) business days after notice of the special meeting is given through the special meeting at
Richfield’s executive offices and principal place of business at 175 South Main Street, Suite 900, Salt Lake
City, UT 84111, for inspection by stockholders of Richfield during ordinary business hours for any purpose
germane to the Richfield special meeting. The list will also be available at the Richfield special meeting for
examination by any stockholder of record of Richfield present at the special meeting. All stockholders of
record are cordially invited to attend the special meeting in person.
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF RICHFIELD UNANIMOUSLY RECOMMENDS THAT YOU VOTE “FOR” THE
MERGER PROPOSAL AND “FOR” THE ADJOURNMENT PROPOSAL.
In connection with Richfield’s solicitation of proxies for the special meeting, we expect to begin mailing the
accompanying proxy statement/prospectus and proxy card on or about [__________________], 2014. The
approval of the merger agreement requires the affirmative vote of the holders of a majority of the outstanding
shares of Richfield common stock entitled to vote thereon. The adjournment proposal requires the affirmative
vote of holders of a majority of the shares of Richfield common stock entitled to vote on the proposal present
or represented by proxy at the Richfield special meeting.
A failure to vote on the proposal to approve the merger agreement has the same effect as a vote by you
AGAINST the approval of the merger agreement. Therefore, your vote is important, regardless of the number
of shares of common stock you own. Whether or not you expect to attend the Richfield special meeting in
person, please submit your voting instructions as promptly as possible by (1) accessing the Internet website
specified on your proxy card, (2) calling the toll-free number specified on your proxy card or (3) signing and
returning all proxy cards that you receive in the postage-paid envelope provided, so that your shares may be
represented and voted at the Richfield special meeting.
Your vote is very important. Please submit your voting instructions using one of the methods above to
ensure that your vote will be counted. Your proxy may be revoked by you at any time before the vote at the
special meeting by following the procedures outlined in the accompanying proxy statement/prospectus.
By order of the Board of Directors,
  
 /s/ Douglas C. Hewitt, Sr.
 Douglas C. Hewitt, Sr.
 Chief Executive Officer
Salt Lake City, UT
[______________], 2014
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
ABOUT THIS DOCUMENT
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
SUMMARY
The Companies
The Merger and the Merger Agreement
The Loan Agreement
The Voting Agreements
The Richfield Special Meeting
Risk Factors
COMPARATIVE STOCK PRICES
RISK FACTORS
Risks Relating to the Merger
Risks Relating To Stratex’ Business and the Oil and Gas Industry
Risks Relating to Richfield’s Business and the Oil and Gas Industry
Risks Relating to Stratex’ Common Stock
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
THE COMPANIES
Richfield
Stratex
Merger Sub
THE RICHFIELD SPECIAL MEETING
Date, Time and Place
Purpose of the Richfield Special Meeting
Recommendations of the Board of Directors of Richfield
Record Date; Stock Entitled to Vote
Quorum
iii
iii
1
6
6
7
11
11
11
12
13
14
14
18
30
41
45
47
47
47
48
48
48
48
48
48
48
Required Vote
Abstentions, Failures to Vote and Broker Non-Votes
Voting at the Special Meeting
49
49
49
49
Voting in Person
49
Voting by Proxy
49
Revocation of Proxies or Voting Instructions
50
Solicitation of Proxies
50
PROPOSALS TO BE CONSIDERED AT THE RICHFIELD SPECIAL MEETING
50
The Merger Proposal
50
The Adjournment Proposal
51
THE MERGER
51
Effects of the Merger
Background of the Merger
51
Richfield’s Reasons for the Merger and Recommendation of Richfield’s Board of Directors52
54
Stratex’s Reasons for the Merger
Directors and Management After the Merger
55
55
Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Merger
57
Accounting Treatment
Exchange of Shares in the Merger
58
58
Rights of Dissenting Shareholders
58
Financial Interests of Richfield’s Directors and Executive Officers in the Merger
59
Director and Officer Indemnification
Dividends
59
59
Listing of Stratex Common Stock
59
No Stratex Shareholder Approval Required
Deregistration of Richfield Common Stock
59
i
Table of Contents
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED FINANCIAL INFORMATION
THE MERGER AGREEMENT
Structure of the Merger
Completion and Effectiveness of the Merger
Merger Consideration
Fractional Shares
Procedures for Surrendering Richfield Stock Certificates
Treatment of Richfield Warrants
Treatment of Richfield Convertible Notes
Conditions to Completion of the Merger
Representations and Warranties
Definition of “Material Adverse Effect”
Conduct of Business Pending the Merger
Obligation of the Richfield Board of Directors to Recommend the Merger Agreement and Call and Hold a
Stockholders’ Meeting
No Solicitation by Richfield
Reasonable Best Efforts Covenant
Proxy Statement/Prospectus and Registration Statement Covenant
Directors and Officers Insurance
Employee Matters
Other Agreements
Termination of the Merger Agreement
Termination Fees and Expenses
Fees and Expenses
Third-Party Beneficiaries
59
67
67
67
67
68
68
69
69
69
71
73
73
77
77
78
78
78
79
79
79
80
81
81
Amendments; Waivers
Explanatory Note Regarding the Merger Agreement and the Summary of the Merger Agreement: Representations,
Warranties and Covenants in the Merger Agreement Are Not Intended to Function or Be Relied on as Public
Disclosures
THE LOAN AGREEMENT
THE VOTING AGREEMENTS
Voting
Restrictions on Transfer
Representations and Warranties
Termination
Other Capacities
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT
Richfield
Stratex
DIRECTORS AND EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF SURVIVING STRATEX
Richfield Executive Compensation
Stratex Executive Compensation
Certain Related Party Transactions
Involvement in Certain Legal Proceedings
DESCRIPTION OF STRATEX CAPITAL STOCK
MARKET INFORMATION AND DIVIDENDS
Market Prices
Richfield Dividend Policy
Stratex Dividend Policy
COMPARISON OF STOCKHOLDER RIGHTS
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
STOCKHOLDER PROPOSALS
OTHER MATTERS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
INFORMATION WITH RESPECT TO RICHFIELD
The Business
Properties
Legal Proceedings
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
INFORMATION WITH RESPECT TO STRATEX
The Business
Properties
Legal Proceedings
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
HISTORICAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF RICHFIELD
HISTORICAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF STRATEX
ANNEX A MERGER AGREEMENT AND AMENDMENT NO. 1
ANNEX B RIGHTS OF DISSENTING OWNERS
ANNEX C FORM OF VOTING AGREEMENT
ii
Table of Contents
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
81
81
82
82
82
83
83
83
83
83
83
84
86
88
91
93
95
95
97
97
97
97
97
105
105
106
106
106
107
107
108
109
109
121
121
121
129
133
133
140
F-1
F-
52
 
A-1
 B-
1
C-1
This proxy statement/prospectus incorporates important business and financial information about Stratex
from other documents that are not included in or delivered with this proxy statement/prospectus. This
information is available to you without charge upon your request. You can obtain the documents
incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus by requesting them in writing or by telephone
from Stratex at the following address or telephone number:
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
30 Echo Lake Road
Watertown, CT 06795
(713) 353-4786
Attn: Stephen P. Funk
This proxy statement/prospectus also incorporates important business and financial information about
Richfield from other documents that are not included in or delivered with this proxy statement/prospectus.
This information is available to you without charge upon request. You can obtain the documents
incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus by requesting them in writing or by telephone
from Richfield at the following address or telephone number:
Richfield Oil & Gas Company
175 S Main Street 9th Floor
Salt Lake City, Utah 84111
(801) 519-8500
Attn: Michael A. Cederstrom
In addition, if you have questions about the merger transaction or this proxy statement/prospectus, would like
additional copies of this proxy statement/prospectus or need to obtain proxy cards or other information
related to the proxy solicitation, you may contact Richfield’s general counsel, at the address and telephone
number listed below. You will not be charged for any of such documents that you request.
Richfield Oil & Gas Company
175 S Main Street 9th Floor
Salt Lake City, Utah 84111
(801) 519-8500
Attn: Michael A. Cederstrom
Investors may also consult Richfield’s and Stratex’s websites for more information concerning the merger
described in this proxy statement/prospectus. Richfield’s website is www.richfieldoilandgas.com and
Stratex’s website is www.stratexoil.com. Information included on these websites is not incorporated by
reference into this proxy statement/prospectus.
To obtain timely delivery of the documents in advance of the special meeting of stockholders, you must
request the information no later than _______________, 2014 (which is five business days prior to the date of
the special meeting).
For more information, see the section entitled “Where You Can Find More Information” on page 106.
ABOUT THIS DOCUMENT
This document, which forms part of a registration statement on Form S-4 filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission, which we refer to as the SEC, by Stratex (File No. 333- ), constitutes a prospectus of
Stratex under Section 5 of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, which we refer to as the Securities Act,
with respect to the shares of Stratex common stock to be issued to Richfield’s stockholders as required by
the merger agreement. This document also constitutes a proxy statement of Richfield under Section 14(a) of
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, which we refer to as the Exchange Act, with respect to the
special meeting of Richfield stockholders, at which Richfield stockholders will be asked to vote upon a
proposal to approve the merger agreement and other proposals.
iii
Table of Contents
You should rely only on the information contained or incorporated by reference into this proxy
statement/prospectus. No one has been authorized to provide you with information that is different from that
contained in, or incorporated by reference into, this proxy statement/prospectus. This proxy
statement/prospectus is dated    , 2014. You should not assume that the information contained in, or
incorporated by reference into, this proxy statement/prospectus is accurate as of any date other than the date
on the front cover of such documents. Neither the mailing of this proxy statement/prospectus to Richfield’s
stockholders nor the issuance by Stratex of common stock in connection with the merger will create any
implication to the contrary.
This proxy statement/prospectus does not constitute an offer to sell, or a solicitation of an offer to buy, any
securities, or the solicitation of a proxy, in any jurisdiction in which or from any person to whom it is unlawful
to make any such offer or solicitation in such jurisdiction. Information contained in this proxy
statement/prospectus regarding Stratex has been provided by Stratex and information contained in this
proxy statement/prospectus regarding Richfield has been provided by Richfield.
iv
Table of Contents
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
The following are answers to some questions that you, as a stockholder of Richfield, may have regarding the
merger, the merger agreement and the other matters being considered at the stockholders meeting of
Richfield, which we refer to as the special meeting or the Richfield special meeting. Richfield urges you to
read carefully the remainder of this proxy statement/prospectus because the information in this section does
not provide all the information that might be important to you about the merger, the merger agreement and the
other matters being considered at the special meeting. Additional important information is also contained in
the annexes to and the documents incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus. For more
information, see the section entitled “Where You Can Find More Information” on page 106.
Questions About the Merger
Q:Why am I receiving this proxy statement/prospectus?
A:
Stratex and Richfield have agreed to an acquisition of Richfield by Stratex under the terms of a merger agreement
that is described in this proxy statement/prospectus. A copy of the merger agreement, and an amendment to that
agreement, is attached to this proxy statement/prospectus as Annex A. We refer to the merger agreement as
amended as the merger agreement.
In order to complete the merger, Richfield stockholders must vote to approve the merger agreement, and all
other conditions to the merger must be satisfied or waived.
Richfield is holding the special meeting to obtain stockholder approval of the proposal to approve the merger
agreement, which we refer to as the merger proposal. This proxy statement/prospectus contains important
information about the merger and the Richfield special meeting, and you should read it carefully. The
enclosed proxy materials allow you to submit your instructions on how to vote your shares without attending
the special meeting in person.
You are also being asked to vote on a proposal to adjourn the Richfield special meeting, if necessary or
appropriate in the view of the Richfield board of directors, to solicit additional proxies in favor of the merger
proposal if there are not sufficient votes at the time of such adjournment to approve the merger agreement,
which we refer to as the adjournment proposal.
Your vote is important. We encourage you to vote as soon as possible. For more information on how to vote
your shares, please see the section entitled “The Richfield Special Meeting” beginning on page 48.
Q:What vote is required to approve each proposal?
The merger proposal requires the affirmative vote of holders of a majority of the outstanding shares of Richfield
common stock entitled to vote on the proposal.
A:
Each member of Richfield’s board of directors, certain shareholders (including its largest creditor), and each of its
executive officers, owning an aggregate of approximately 46% of Richfield’s outstanding common stock, have
entered into voting agreements with Stratex in which each agreed to vote their Richfield stock in favor of the merger.
The voting agreements are described in “THE VOTING AGREEMENTS” beginning on page 82.
The adjournment proposal requires the affirmative vote of holders of a majority of the shares of Richfield
common stock entitled to vote on the proposal present or represented by proxy at the special meeting.
Q:What will happen in the merger?
A:
At the effective time, a wholly owned subsidiary of Stratex will merge with and into Richfield, with Richfield
continuing as the surviving entity and a wholly owned subsidiary of Stratex. We refer to this transaction as the
merger. For more information, see “The Merger” and “The Merger Agreement” beginning on pages 51 and 67,
respectively.
1
Table of Contents
Q:What will I receive for my shares of Richfield common stock in the merger?
If the merger is completed, each outstanding share of Richfield common stock, other than shares held by those
Richfield stockholders who have properly exercised their dissenters’ rights, will be converted into a number of
shares of Stratex common stock equal to a number of shares, or a fraction of a share, of Stratex common stock
equal to a fraction, the numerator of which is 60,616,448 and the denominator of which is the number of shares of
Richfield common stock outstanding at the close of business on the day immediately preceding the effective time of
the merger. We call this fraction the exchange ratio.
Based on the number shares of Richfield common stock outstanding on August 18, 2014, each outstanding share of
Richfield common stock (other than shares held by those Richfield stockholders properly exercising dissenters’
rights) would be converted into one share of Stratex common stock.
A:
However, the number of shares of Stratex common stock that may actually be issued with respect to a share of
Richfield common stock is subject to decrease based on the formula set forth in the merger agreement in the event
additional shares of Richfield common stock are issued prior to the consummation of the merger, including, subject
to certain limited exceptions, shares of Richfield common stock issued upon exercise of Richfield’s outstanding
warrants or upon conversion of Richfield’s outstanding convertible notes. These adjustments to the exchange ratio
are described under “The Merger Agreement—Merger Consideration beginning on page 67.
No fractional shares of Stratex common stock shall be issued in the merger and Richfield stockholders who would
otherwise have been entitled to receive a fraction of a share (after taking into account all Richfield shares
exchanged by such holder) will receive cash in lieu of fractional shares. For more information, see “The Merger
Agreement - Fractional Shares” on page 68.
Q:Do you expect the merger to be taxable to Richfield stockholders who are U.S. Residents?
Generally, no. The merger is intended to qualify as a reorganization for United States income tax purposes.
A:
Assuming the merger qualifies as a reorganization, receipt of Stratex common stock in exchange for Richfield
common stock pursuant to the merger will not be a taxable transaction for United States income tax purposes. A
Richfield stockholder who receives cash in lieu of fractional shares of Stratex common stock in the merger will
generally recognize capital gain or loss for United States federal income tax purposes equal to the difference, if any,
between (i) the cash received and (ii) the stockholder’s adjusted tax basis allocated to such fractional share of
Richfield common stock.
You should read the section entitled “The Merger—Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the
Merger” beginning on page 56 for a more complete discussion of the United States federal income tax
consequences of the merger. Tax matters can be complicated and the tax consequences of the merger to you
will depend on your particular tax situation. You should consult your tax advisor to determine the tax
consequences of the merger to you.
Q:What conditions must be satisfied to consummate the merger?
A:
In addition to the Richfield stockholder approval described above, the consummation of the merger is subject to a
number of conditions. These conditions include:
●
the declaration of the effectiveness of the registration statement on Form S-4 (of which this proxy
statement/prospectus forms a part) under the Securities Act;
●
the absence of any injunction by any court or other tribunal of competent jurisdiction or any law that prohibits the
consummation of the merger;
●
the exchange of all outstanding shares of Stratex’s Series A Preferred Stock for 7,000,000 shares of Stratex
common stock;
●
the representations and warranties of each party to the merger agreement remaining true and correct at signing and
the effective time;
●
the performance or compliance by each party to the merger agreement in all material respects with its obligations
and covenants under the merger agreement; and
●
the absence of any continuing material adverse effect concerning the business, financial condition or results of
operation of Richfield or Stratex since the date of the merger agreement.
2
Table of Contents
The obligation of Richfield to effect the merger is also subject to the following additional conditions:
●Stratex having at least $2,000,000 of cash on hand; and
●
Stratex having advanced all of the funds under that certain Note and Security Agreement, dated May 6, 2014, as
amended by that certain Amended and Restated Note and Security Agreement, dated July 17, 2014, which we refer
to as the loan agreement, with Stratex which Richfield has become entitled to receive. For more information on the
loan agreement, see “THE Loan Agreement” beginning on page 82.
The obligation of Stratex to effect the merger is also subject to the following additional conditions:
●
Richfield’s liabilities (excluding liabilities under the loan agreement, capital leases, deferred rent obligations, any
accrued liability for employee severance compensation which has been approved in writing by Stratex, and
plugging and abandonment liabilities) not exceeding $6,650,000 immediately prior to the closing (which $6,650,000
limit may be increased by up to an aggregate amount of $500,000 in field-related payables so long as there are
corresponding field-related receivables and/or deposits);
●
Richfield having either extended the maturity/payment dates for a period of one year beyond the effective time of the
merger (two years in the case of one note holder), or reached an accommodation with the holders of Richfield’s
outstanding promissory notes, in a manner acceptable to Stratex;
●Richfield’s chief executive officer having resigned and having entered into a consulting agreement with Stratex that
is satisfactory to Stratex; and
●The holders of no more than 10% of Richfield’s outstanding common stock shall have taken the steps required by
Nevada law to obtain payment for the fair value of their shares.
Q:Do I need to do anything with my Richfield common stock certificates now?
A:
No. After the merger is completed, if you held certificates representing shares of Richfield common stock prior to the
merger, Stratex’s exchange agent will send you a letter of transmittal and instructions for exchanging your shares of
Richfield common stock for the merger consideration. Upon surrender of the certificates for cancellation along with
the executed letter of transmittal and other required documents described in the instructions, a Richfield stockholder
will receive the merger consideration.
Q:Will I have dissenters’ rights in connection with the Merger?
A:
Yes. In order to exercise your dissenters’ rights, you must follow the requirements of Nevada law. A copy of the
applicable Nevada statute is attached to this proxy statement/prospectus as Annex B and a summary of its
requirements can be found in the section captioned “The Merger –Rights of Dissenting Stockholders” on page 58.
The failure to follow precisely any of the statutory procedures set forth in Annex B may result in the loss or waiver of
dissenters’ rights under Nevada law.
Questions About the Richfield Special Meeting
Q:When and where will the meeting be held?
A:The Richfield special meeting will be held at         a.m. local time, on                              , 2014 at         .
3
Table of Contents
Q:How do I vote?
A:
If you are a stockholder of record of Richfield as of the record date for the special meeting, you may vote in person
by attending the special meeting or, to ensure your shares are represented at the special meeting if you do not
attend the special meeting, you may submit your voting instructions by:
● accessing the Internet website specified on your proxy card;
● calling the toll-free number specified on your proxy card; or
● signing and returning the enclosed proxy card in the postage-paid envelope provided.
If you hold Richfield shares in the name of a broker, bank or nominee, please follow the voting instructions
provided by your broker, bank or nominee to ensure that your shares are represented at the special meeting.
Q:How does the Richfield board of directors recommend that I vote?
A:
The Richfield board of directors unanimously recommends that holders of Richfield common stock vote “FOR” the
merger proposal and “FOR” the adjournment proposal.
Q:How many votes do I and others have?
A:
You are entitled to one vote for each share of Richfield common stock that you owned as of the record date. As of
the close of business on                                       , 2014, there were                                  outstanding shares of Richfield
common stock.
Each member of Richfield’s board of directors, certain stockholders (including its largest creditor) and each
of its executive officers, owning an aggregate of approximately 46% of Richfield’s outstanding common
stock, have entered into voting agreements with Stratex in which each agreed to vote their Richfield stock in
favor of the merger. The voting agreements are described in “THE VOTING AGREEMENTS” beginning on
page 82.
Q:What will happen if I fail to vote or I abstain from voting?
A:
Your failure to vote will have the same effect as a vote against the proposal to approve the merger agreement, but
will have no effect on the adjournment proposal. Your abstention from voting will have the same effect as a vote
against the proposal to approve the merger agreement and the adjournment proposal.
Q:What constitutes a quorum?
A:
Stockholders who hold at least a majority of the issued and outstanding Richfield common stock and who are
entitled to vote must be present or represented by proxy in order to constitute a quorum to conduct the special
meeting.
Q:If my shares are held in street name by my broker, bank or nominee, will my broker, bank or nominee vote
my shares for me?
A:
If you hold your shares in a stock brokerage account or if your shares are held by a broker, bank or nominee (that is,
in street name), you must provide your broker, bank or nominee with instructions on how to vote your shares.
Please follow the voting instructions provided by your broker, bank or nominee. Please note that you may not vote
shares held in street name by returning a proxy card directly to Richfield or by voting in person at the special
meeting unless you provide a “legal proxy,” which you must obtain from your broker, bank or nominee. Further,
brokers, banks and nominees who hold shares of Richfield common stock on behalf of their customers may not give
a proxy to Richfield to vote those shares without specific instructions from their customers.
If you do not instruct your bank, broker or other nominee on how to vote your shares, your bank, broker or
other nominee may not vote your shares on the proposal to approve the merger agreement or the
adjournment proposal. A broker non-vote will have the same effect as a vote against the proposal to approve
the merger agreement, but will have no effect on the adjournment proposal.
Q:What will happen if I return my proxy card without indicating how to vote?
A:
If you sign and return your proxy card without indicating how to vote on any particular proposal, the Richfield
common stock represented by your proxy will be voted in favor of that proposal.
4
Table of Contents
Q:Can I change my vote after I have returned a proxy or voting instruction card?
A:Yes. You can change your vote at any time before your proxy is voted at the special meeting. You can do this in one
of three ways:
● you can grant a new, valid proxy bearing a later date;
● you can send a signed notice of revocation; or
●
if you are a holder of record, you can attend the special meeting and vote in person, which will automatically cancel
any proxy previously given, or you may revoke your proxy in person, but your attendance alone will not revoke any
proxy that you have previously given.
If you choose either of the first two methods, your notice of revocation or your new proxy must be received by
Richfield’s Corporate Secretary no later than the beginning of the special meeting. If your shares are held in
street name by your broker, bank or nominee, you should contact them to change your vote.
Q:When do you expect the merger to be completed?
A:
We hope to complete the merger in the fourth quarter of 2014. However, the merger is subject to approvals and
other conditions, and it is possible that factors outside the control of both companies could result in the merger
being completed at a later time, or not at all.
Q:What do I need to do now?
A:
Carefully read and consider the information contained in and incorporated by reference into this proxy
statement/prospectus, including its annexes.
In order for your shares to be represented at the Richfield special meeting:
●
you can submit voting instructions through the Internet or by telephone by following the instructions included on
your proxy card;
●
you can indicate on the enclosed proxy card how you would like to vote and return the card in the accompanying
pre-addressed postage paid envelope; or
● you can attend the special meeting in person.
Q:What happens if I sell my shares after the record date but before the special meeting?
A:
The record date for the special meeting is earlier than the date of the special meeting and earlier than the date that
the merger is expected to be completed. If you sell or otherwise transfer your Richfield common stock after the
record date but before the date of the special meeting, you will retain your right to vote at the special meeting.
However, you will not have the right to receive the merger consideration to be received by Richfield stockholders in
the merger. In order to receive the merger consideration, you must hold your shares through completion of the
merger.
Q:Do I need identification to attend the Richfield special meeting in person?
A:
Yes. Please bring proper identification, together with proof that you are a record owner of Richfield common stock. If
your shares are held in street name, please bring acceptable proof of ownership, such as a letter from your broker or
an account statement stating or showing that you beneficially owned shares of Richfield common stock on the
record date.
Q:Will a proxy solicitor be used?
A:
No. Richfield has not retained a proxy solicitor. Proxies will be solicited by officers and directors and regular
employees of Richfield, without additional remuneration, by mail, personal interview, telephone, facsimile or
otherwise, but no additional compensation will be paid to them.
Q:Who can help answer my questions?
If you have questions about the merger or the other matters to be voted on at the special meeting or desire
additional copies of this proxy statement/prospectus or additional proxy cards, you should contact:
Richfield Oil & Gas Company
A:
175 S Main Street 9th Floor
Salt Lake City, Utah 84111
(801) 519-8500
Attn: Michael A. Cederstrom
5
Table of Contents
SUMMARY
This summary highlights information contained elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus and may not
contain all the information that is important to you. We urge you to read carefully the remainder of this proxy
statement/prospectus, including the attached annexes, and the other documents to which we have referred
you because this section does not provide all the information that might be important to you with respect to
the merger and the related matters being considered at the Richfield special meeting. See also the section
entitled “Where You Can Find More Information” on page 106. We have included page references to direct
you to a more complete description of the topics presented in this summary.
The Companies
Richfield (See page 107)
Richfield is an independent oil and gas exploration and production company with projects in Kansas, Utah
and Wyoming. Richfield focuses on acquiring, retrofitting and operating or selling oil and gas assets and
related production.
Richfield was incorporated on April 8, 2011 and its principal executive offices are located at 175 South Main
Street, Suite 900, Salt Lake City, Utah 84111, and its telephone number is (801) 519-8500. Richfield currently
has approximately eight full-time equivalent employees and two consultants providing services. Additional
information about Richfield and its subsidiaries is included in this proxy statement/prospectus and the
documents incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus. See the section entitled “Where
You Can Find More Information” on page 106.
Stratex (See page 121)
Stratex is an independent oil and gas company focused on the acquisition and subsequent exploitation and
development of predominantly crude oil in Texas and Kansas as well as varied non-operated working
interests in North Dakota, Montana and Utah.  In Texas, Stratex has an interest in a property located in Zavala
County. Stratex’s Zavala County acreage lies within the established oil rim of the prolific Eagle Ford Shale
play, one of the most actively drilled formations in the United States. Stratex intends to target multiple stacked
pay zones present on its Zavala County acreage, specifically the San Miguel, Austin Chalk and Buda
formations, which all produce locally. Stratex’s management presently views its Zavala County property as an
integral component of its current development program.
Stratex was originally incorporated as Poway Muffler and Brake Inc. in California on August 15, 2003 to enter
the muffler and brakes business.  On December 15, 2008, a merger was effected with Ross Investments Inc., a
Colorado shell corporation.    Ross Investments was the acquirer and the surviving corporation.  Ross
Investments Inc. then changed its name to Poway Brake and Muffler Inc. On May 25, 2012, Stratex filed an
Amendment to its Certificate of Incorporation by which the company changed its name from Poway Muffler
and Brake, Inc., a Colorado corporation, to Stratex Oil and Gas Holdings, Inc.
On July 6, 2012, Stratex Acquisition Corp., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
merged with and into Stratex Oil & Gas, Inc., a Delaware corporation, which we refer to as SOG. SOG was the
surviving corporation of that merger transaction. As a result of that merger, Stratex acquired the business of
SOG, and continued the business operations of SOG as a wholly-owned subsidiary.
Stratex’s principal executive offices are located at 30 Echo Lake Road, Watertown, Connecticut 06795, and its
telephone number is (713) 353-4786. Stratex currently has 4 employees.
Additional information about Stratex and its subsidiaries is included in this proxy statement/prospectus and
the documents incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus. See the section entitled
“Where You Can Find More Information” on page 106.
Merger Sub (See page 48)
Merger Sub, a wholly owned subsidiary of Stratex, is a Nevada corporation formed on April 30, 2014 for the
purpose of effecting the merger.
6
Table of Contents
Merger Sub has not conducted any activities other than those incidental to its formation and the matters
contemplated by the merger agreement. The address for Merger Sub is 30 Echo Lake Road, Watertown,
Connecticut 06795, and its phone number is (713) 353-4786.
The Merger and the Merger Agreement
A copy of the merger agreement is attached as Annex A to this proxy statement/prospectus. We encourage
you to read the entire merger agreement carefully because it is the principal document governing the merger.
Form of Merger
Subject to the terms and conditions of the merger agreement, at the effective time of the merger, Merger Sub
will merge with and into Richfield. Richfield will survive the merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of Stratex.
Consideration to be Received in the Merger; Treatment of Warrants and Convertible Notes (See page 67)
Treatment of Outstanding Shares. In the merger, each share of Richfield common stock, other than those
shares held by those Richfield stockholders who properly exercise dissenters’ rights, will be converted into
the right to receive a number of shares, or a fraction of a share, of Stratex common stock equal to a fraction,
the numerator of which is 60,616,448 and the denominator of which is the number of shares of Richfield
common stock outstanding at the close of business on the day immediately preceding the effective time of
the merger. We call this fraction the exchange ratio.
Based on the number shares of Richfield common stock outstanding on August 18, 2014, each outstanding
share of Richfield common stock (other than shares held by those Richfield stockholders properly exercising
dissenters’ rights) would be converted into one share of Stratex common stock.
However, the number of shares of Stratex common stock that may actually be issued with respect to a share
of Richfield common stock is subject to decrease based on the formula set forth in the merger agreement in
the event additional shares of Richfield common stock are issued prior to the consummation of the merger,
including, subject to certain limited exceptions, shares of Richfield common stock issued upon exercise of
Richfield’s outstanding warrants or upon conversion of Richfield’s outstanding convertible notes. These
adjustments to the exchange ratio are described under “The Merger Agreement—Merger Consideration”
beginning on page 67. Cash will be paid in lieu of the issuance of any fractional shares as described under
“The Merger Agreement—Fractional Shares” on page 68.
A description of the Stratex common stock is set forth in “DESCRIPTION OF STRATEX CAPITAL STOCK”
beginning on page 95. A comparison of the material differences between the rights of holders of Richfield
common stock and the rights of holders of Stratex common stock is set forth in “COMPARISON OF
STOCKHOLDER RIGHTS” beginning on page 97.
Treatment of Warrants. The merger agreement requires Richfield to take all requisite action so that, as of the
effective time of the merger, each warrant to purchase shares of Richfield common stock issued by Richfield
is converted, by virtue of the merger and without any action on the part of the warrant holder, into a warrant
exercisable for that number of shares of Stratex common stock equal to the product of (i) the aggregate
number of shares of Richfield common stock, as the case may be, for which such warrant was exercisable
and (ii) the exchange ratio, rounded down to the nearest whole share. In addition, Richfield is required to take
all requisite action so that, as of the effective time of the merger, the exercise price per share of such warrant
is equal to the quotient obtained from dividing (x) the exercise price per share of such warrant immediately
prior to the effective time by (y) the exchange ratio, with the result rounded up to the nearest whole cent. All
other terms and conditions of the warrants shall remain the same.
Treatment of Convertible Notes. Pursuant to, and as further described in, the merger agreement, Richfield is
required to take all requisite action so that, as of the effective time of the merger, each Richfield convertible
note which is convertible into Richfield common stock is converted, by virtue of the merger and without any
action on the part of the convertible note holder, into that number of shares of Stratex common stock equal to
the product of (i) the aggregate number of shares of Richfield common stock, as the case may be, into which
such note was convertible and (ii) the exchange ratio, rounded down to the nearest whole share. All other
terms and conditions of the convertible notes shall remain the same.
7
Table of Contents
Treatment of Dissenting Stockholders (See page 58)
Any issued and outstanding shares of Richfield common stock held by a person who has not voted in favor
of, or consented to, the approval of the merger agreement and has complied with all of the provisions of the
Nevada Revised Statues, which we refer to as the NRS, concerning rights of holders of shares of Richfield
common stock to demand appraisal of their shares, which we refer to as the appraisal provisions, to the
extent the appraisal provisions are applicable, will not be converted into the right to receive shares of Stratex
common stock. Instead, shares of Richfield common stock held by these dissenting stockholders shall
become the right to receive such consideration as may be determined to be due to such dissenting
stockholders pursuant to the procedures set forth in the NRS. If a dissenting stockholder withdraws its
demand for appraisal or fails to perfect or otherwise loses its right of appraisal, in any case pursuant to the
NRS, the dissenting stockholder’s shares of Richfield common stock will be deemed to have converted into
and to have become, as of the effective time of the merger, the right to receive shares of Stratex common
stock equal to the exchange ratio. A copy of the NRS appraisal provisions are attached to this proxy
statement/prospectus as Annex B.
Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Merger (See page 55)
The merger is intended to qualify as a tax-free reorganization for United States income tax purposes.
Assuming the merger qualifies as a reorganization, a Richfield stockholder who is a U.S. Holder will not
recognize gain or loss as a result of such stockholder’s Richfield common shares being exchanged in the
merger for shares of Stratex common stock, except as described below with respect to the receipt of cash in
lieu of a fractional share of Stratex common stock. A Richfield stockholder who receives cash in lieu of a
fractional share of Stratex common stock or a Richfield stockholder who exercises dissenters’ rights and
receives cash in lieu of Stratex shares pursuant to the merger will generally recognize capital gain or loss for
U.S. residents under United States federal income tax purposes equal to the difference, if any, between (a) the
cash received and (b) the stockholder’s adjusted tax basis allocated to such fractional share of Stratex
common stock.
A Richfield stockholder’s aggregate tax basis in shares of Stratex common stock received in the merger,
including any fractional share interests deemed received and exchanged as described below, will equal the
aggregate tax basis of the Richfield common stock surrendered in the merger. A Richfield stockholder’s
holding period for shares of Stratex common stock received in the merger will include the stockholder’s
holding period for the shares of Richfield common stock surrendered in the merger.
Tax matters are very complicated, and the tax consequences of the merger to a particular stockholder will
depend on such stockholder’s circumstances. Accordingly, Stratex and Richfield urge Richfield stockholders
to consult their tax advisors for a full understanding of the tax consequences of the merger to them, including
the applicability and effect of U.S. federal, state, local and foreign income and other tax laws.
Richfield’s Reasons for the Merger and Recommendations of Richfield’s Board of Directors (See page 52)
After careful consideration, on May 1, 2014, the Richfield board of directors adopted and approved the merger
agreement by a vote of the directors with Alan D. Gaines abstaining. On July 17, 2014, the Richfield board of
directors adopted and approved the amendment to the merger agreement by a unanimous written consent of
the directors. For the factors considered by the Richfield board of directors in reaching its decision to
approve the merger agreement and the amendment, see the section entitled “The Merger—Richfield’s
Reasons for the Merger and Recommendation of Richfield’s Board of Directors” beginning on page 52. The
Richfield board of directors unanimously recommends that the Richfield stockholders vote “FOR” the
proposal to approve the merger agreement and “FOR” the adjournment proposal at the Richfield special
meeting.
8
Table of Contents
Financial Interests of Richfield’s Directors and Executive Officers in the Merger (See page 58)
In considering the recommendation of the Richfield board of directors to approve the merger agreement,
Richfield stockholders should be aware that certain Richfield directors and executive officers have interests
in the merger that are different from, or in addition to, those of Richfield stockholders generally. These
interests, which may create actual or potential conflicts of interest, are, to the extent material, described in the
section entitled “The Merger—Financial Interests of Richfield’s Executive Officers and Directors in the
Merger.” The Richfield board of directors was aware of these potential conflicts of interest and considered
them, among other matters, in evaluating and negotiating the merger agreement, in reaching its decision to
adopt and approve the merger agreement, and in recommending to Richfield stockholders that the merger
agreement be approved. These interests include the following:
●
One of the conditions to the completion of the merger is that Richfield’s current Chief Executive Officer enter into a
consulting agreement with Stratex and resign as a director and officer of Richfield.  The consulting agreement is
expected to provide for consulting services with respect to the surviving corporation’s Utah properties and to have a
three year term, monthly payments of $25,000; up to $2,000 per month for medical insurance reimbursement and a
monthly production bonus based upon the production of the surviving corporation’s Utah properties (ranging from
$5,000 if an average of 300 barrels of oil equivalent per day are produced in a month to $120,000 if an average or
5,000 or more barrels of oil equivalent per day are produced in a month).
●
Directors and officers of Richfield own shares of Richfield common stock, which will be treated like all other shares
of Richfield common stock in the merger.  See “SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS
AND MANAGEMENT – Richfield” beginning on page 83.
●
The directors and officers of Richfield are entitled to continued directors and officers liability insurance coverage
after the completion of the merger. See “The Merger Agreement – Directors and Officers Insurance” on page 78.
Stratex’s Reasons for the Merger (See page 54)
After careful consideration, on May 5, 2014 the Stratex board of directors adopted and approved the merger
agreement. On July 17, 2014, the Stratex board of directors adopted and approved the amendment to the
merger agreement by a unanimous written consent of the directors. For the factors considered by the Stratex
board of directors in reaching its decision to approve the merger agreement and the amendment, see the
section entitled “The Merger—Stratex’s Reasons for the Merger” beginning on page 54.
Directors and Management After the Merger (See page 86)
Upon completion of the merger, the board of directors is expected to be made up of the following individuals:
Alan D. Gaines, who is expected to be the chairman of the board of directors, Stephen P. Funk, Ric
Saalwachter, Mike Thurz, Joseph P. Tate, John J. McFadden; and one additional person. Upon completion of
the merger, the executive officers are expected to be: Stephen P. Funk as the chief executive officer and
Glenn G. MacNeil as the interim chief financial officer; and Jeffrey B. Robinson as the director of field
operations. For information on these individuals see the section entitled “DIRECTORS AND EXECUTIVE
OFFICERS OF SURVIVING STRATEX” beginning on page 86.
Effective Time and Completion of the Merger
We expect to complete the merger in the fourth quarter of 2014, subject to receipt of required stockholder
approval and to the satisfaction or waiver of the other closing conditions summarized below.
Conditions to Complete the Merger (See page 69)
As more fully described in this proxy statement/prospectus and in the merger agreement, the completion of
the merger depends on a number of conditions being satisfied or, where legally permissible, waived. These
conditions include, but are not limited to:
●
the declaration of the effectiveness of the registration statement on Form S-4 (of which this proxy
statement/prospectus forms a part) under the Securities Act, and the absence of any stop order or proceeding
seeking a stop order affecting such registration statement;
● receipt of the requisite approval of Richfield stockholders;
●
the absence of any injunction by any court or other tribunal of competent jurisdiction or any law that prohibits the
consummation of the merger;
●
the exchange of all outstanding shares of Stratex’s Series A preferred stock for 7,000,000 shares of Stratex
common stock;
●
Stratex having advanced all of the funds under the loan agreement which Richfield has become entitled to receive.
(For more information on the loan agreement, see “THE Loan Agreement” beginning on page 82).
9
Table of Contents
●
the representations and warranties of each party to the merger agreement remaining true and correct at signing and
the effective time, subject, in certain instances, to materiality qualifiers described in further detail in this proxy
statement/prospectus;
● Stratex having $2,000,000 of cash on hand;
Richfield’s liabilities (excluding liabilities under the loan agreement, capital leases, deferred rent obligations, any
accrued liability for employee severance compensation approved in writing by Stratex, and plugging and
abandonment liabilities) not exceeding $6,650,000 immediately prior to the closing (which $6,650,000 limit may be
●
increased by up to an aggregate amount of $500,000 in field-related payables so long as there are corresponding
field-related receivables and/or deposits);
●
Richfield either extending the maturity/payment dates for a period of one year beyond the effective time of the
merger (two years in the case of one note holder), or reached an accommodation with the holders of Richfield’s
outstanding promissory notes in a manner acceptable to Stratex;
●
Richfield’s chief executive officer resigning from his position at Richfield and entering into a consulting agreement
with Stratex, which is satisfactory to Stratex;
●
the performance or compliance by each party to the merger agreement in all material respects with its obligations
and covenants under the merger agreement;
●
the absence of any continuing material adverse effect concerning the business, financial condition or results of
operation of Richfield since the date of the merger agreement; and
●
The holders of no more than 10% of Richfield’s outstanding shares of common stock shall have taken steps
required by Nevada law to obtain payment for the fair value of their shares.
We cannot be certain when, or if, the conditions to the merger will be satisfied or waived, or that the merger
will be completed.
Termination of the Merger Agreement (See page 79)
Stratex and Richfield may mutually agree to terminate the merger agreement before completing the merger,
even after the approval of the merger agreement by the Richfield stockholders.
In addition, either Stratex or Richfield may decide to terminate the merger agreement if:
●
the merger is not consummated by December 1, 2014, or by January 30, 2015 to the extent that the end date has
been extended pursuant to the terms of the merger agreement;
●
A final, non-appealable injunction is entered permanently restraining, enjoining or otherwise prohibiting the
consummation of the transactions contemplated in the merger agreement;
● Richfield stockholders fail to approve the merger agreement; or
the other party breaches the merger agreement in a way that would entitle the party seeking to terminate the
● agreement not to consummate the merger, and the breaching party is unable, or there is insufficient time, to cure
the breach.
Stratex may also terminate the merger agreement if, prior to obtaining the approval of the merger by the
Richfield stockholders, the board of directors of Richfield approves or recommends any alternative takeover
proposal with a third party or in the event Richfield willfully breaches its obligation not to solicit alternative
takeover proposals.
Richfield may also terminate the merger agreement if, prior to obtaining the approval of the merger by the
Richfield stockholders, the board of directors determines to accept an alternative takeover proposal (such
termination would become effective upon the signing of a binding agreement to complete the alternative
takeover) or if Richfield fulfills its conditions to closing and Stratex and Merger Sub fail to consummate the
merger within 10 business days after the date the closing is required to take place pursuant to the merger
agreement.
10
Table of Contents
Termination Fees and Costs and Expenses (See page 80)
Generally, all fees and expenses incurred in connection with the merger and the transactions contemplated
by the merger agreement will be paid by the party incurring those expenses. The merger agreement further
provides that, upon termination of the merger agreement under certain circumstances, Richfield may be
obligated to pay Stratex a termination fee of $3,000,000, and upon termination of the merger agreement under
certain other circumstances, Stratex may be obligated to pay Richfield a termination fee of $1,000,000. See the
section entitled “The Merger Agreement—Termination Fees and Expenses” beginning on page 80 for a
discussion of the circumstances under which Richfield will be required to pay a termination fee and the
circumstances under which Stratex will be required to pay a termination fee.
Accounting Treatment (See page 57)
Stratex prepares its financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or
GAAP. The merger will be accounted for by applying the acquisition method using the accounting guidance
for business combinations (referred to as Accounting Standards Codification 805, or ASC 805) which
requires the determination of the acquirer, the acquisition date, the fair value of assets and liabilities of the
acquiree and the measurement of goodwill. Based on the guidance of ASC 805, Stratex will be the acquirer of
Richfield for accounting purposes. This means that Stratex will allocate the purchase price to the fair value of
Richfield’s assets and liabilities at the acquisition date, with any excess purchase price being recorded as
goodwill.
The Loan Agreement (See page 82)
Concurrently with the execution of the merger agreement, Stratex, Richfield, and certain of Richfield’s
subsidiaries entered into a Note and Security Agreement providing for advances of up to $3,000,000 by
Stratex to Richfield and its subsidiaries. We call this agreement the loan agreement. On July 17, 2014, the loan
agreement was amended to increase the amount that may be advanced thereunder to $4,000,000 and to make
the other changes described in “THE Loan Agreement” beginning on page 82. Of the total amount that may
be advanced under the loan agreement, as amended, up to $2,800,000 is available to fund those costs of
Richfield’s Kansas work program which are approved by Stratex, $400,000 must be used to pay certain
liabilities of Richfield and its subsidiaries, up to $100,000 may be used to acquire additional oil and gas leases
in Utah, and the remainder may be used for general corporate purposes.
Advances made under the loan agreement bear interest at an annual rate of 6% and must be repaid upon the
earlier of (1) January 30, 2015, (2) ten business days after the consummation of the merger, or (3) Richfield’s
entry into a superior proposal (for a description of a superior proposal, see “The Merger Agreement – No
Solicitation by Richfield” beginning on page 77).
As of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, Stratex has advanced approximately $2,057,860 to
Richfield and its subsidiaries under the loan agreement.
The Voting Agreements (See page 82)
Concurrently with the execution of the merger agreement, Stratex also entered into voting agreements with
each member of Richfield’s board of directors, certain stockholders (including its largest creditor), and each
of its executive officers, owning an aggregate of approximately 46% of Richfield’s outstanding common
stock. Each Richfield stockholder who is a party to a voting agreement agreed to vote, among other things, in
favor of the merger, the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement. Each
voting agreement will terminate upon the earliest to occur of: (i) completion of the merger and (ii) the
termination of the merger agreement in accordance with its terms.
The Richfield Special Meeting (See page 48)
The special meeting of Richfield stockholders is scheduled to be held at [___] a.m. local time, on
[_______________], 2014 at [_________________________]. At the Richfield special meeting, stockholders of
Richfield will be asked to:
● approve the merger agreement; and
●
approve an adjournment of the Richfield special meeting, if necessary or appropriate in the view of the Richfield
board of directors, to solicit additional proxies in favor of the proposal to approve the merger agreement if there are
not sufficient votes at the time of such adjournment to approve the merger agreement.
11
Table of Contents
You may vote at the Richfield special meeting if you owned common stock of Richfield at the close of
business on the record date, [_____________], 2014. On that date there were [_________] shares of common
stock of Richfield outstanding and entitled to vote.
You may cast one vote for each share of common stock of Richfield that you owned on the record date.
The affirmative vote of record holders of a majority of the outstanding shares of Richfield common stock
entitled to vote on the proposal is required in order to approve the merger proposal. The affirmative vote of
holders of a majority of the shares of Richfield common stock entitled to vote on the proposal present or
represented by proxy at the Richfield special meeting is required in order to approve the adjournment
proposal.
Each member of Richfield’s board of directors, certain of its stockholders (including its largest creditor), and
each of its executive officers, owning an aggregate of approximately 46% of Richfield’s outstanding common
stock, have entered into voting agreements with Stratex in which each agreed to vote their Richfield stock in
favor of the merger. The voting agreements are described in “THE VOTING AGREEMENTS” beginning on
page 82.
Risk Factors
Before voting at the Richfield special meeting, you should carefully consider all of the information contained
in or incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus, including the specific factors under the
section entitled “Risk Factors” beginning on page 14.
12
Table of Contents
COMPARATIVE STOCK PRICES
Shares of Stratex common stock are quoted on the OTCQB under the symbol “STTX.” Shares of Richfield
common stock are quoted on the OTCQX under the symbol “ROIL.”
The following table presents the closing sales prices per share of shares of Stratex common stock, as
reported by the OTCQB, and Richfield common stock, as reported by OTCQX, on May 6, 2014, the last trading
day before Stratex and Richfield announced the merger. The table also includes the value of Richfield
common stock on an equivalent price per share basis, as determined by reference to the value of merger
consideration to be received in respect of each share of Richfield common stock in the merger. These
equivalent prices per share reflect the fluctuating value of the Stratex common stock that Richfield
stockholders would receive in exchange for each share of Richfield common stock if the merger was
completed on either of these dates, applying the current exchange ratio of one share of Stratex common
stock for each share of Richfield common stock.
Stratex
  
Common
Stock
Richfield
  
Common
Stock
May 6, 2014
  $ 0.34
August 21, 2014  $ 0.25
$ 0.21
  $ 0.23
Richfield 
Common Stock
  
Equivalent
Per 
Share(1)
  $ 0.34
  $ 0.25
(1)
Richfield common stock equivalent per share data was calculated by multiplying the closing market price per share
of Stratex common stock on each of the dates noted above by an exchange ratio of one share of Stratex common
stock for each share of Richfield Common Stock. This exchange ratio may change as described in “THE
MERGER- Effects of the Merger” beginning on page 51.
Stratex and Richfield encourage you to obtain current market quotations prior to making any decision with
respect to the merger. The market prices of Stratex common stock and Richfield common stock will fluctuate
between the date of this proxy statement/prospectus and the completion of the merger. Stratex and Richfield
can give no assurance concerning the market price of Stratex common stock or Richfield common stock
before or after the effective time of the merger. In addition, the current exchange ratio may change as
described in “THE MERGER- Effects of the Merger” beginning on page 51.
13
Table of Contents
RISK FACTORS
In addition to the other information included in this proxy statement/prospectus, including the matters
addressed in the section entitled “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” you
should carefully consider the matters described below relating to the proposed merger. Although Stratex and
Richfield believe that the matters described below cover the material risks related to the merger that are
currently known or reasonably foreseeable, they may not contain all of the information that is important to
you in evaluating the merger. Accordingly, you are urged to read this entire proxy statement/prospectus,
including all appendices. Please also refer to the additional risk factors identified in the periodic reports and
other documents of Stratex and Richfield; see “Where You Can Find More Information” beginning on page
106.
Risks Relating to the Merger
The price of Stratex common stock might decline, which would decrease the value of the merger
consideration to be received by Richfield stockholders in the Merger.
Upon completion of the merger, each outstanding share of Richfield common stock (other than those shares
held by stockholders exercising their dissenters’ rights) will be converted into the right to receive shares of
Stratex common stock in an amount determined by the exchange ratio. The market price of Stratex common
stock may vary significantly from the price on the date of the merger agreement or from the price on the date
on which Richfield stockholders receive shares of Stratex’s stock. The exchange ratio will not be adjusted for
changes in the stock prices of either company before the merger is completed. As a result, any changes in
the market price of Stratex common stock will have a corresponding effect on the market value of the merger
consideration. Neither party, however, has a right to terminate the merger agreement based on changes in the
market price of Stratex or Richfield common stock.
Stock price changes may result from a variety of factors that are beyond the control of Stratex and Richfield,
including, but not limited to:
●market reaction to the announcement of the merger and market assessment of the likelihood of the merger being
consummated;
●changes in the respective businesses, operations or prospects of Stratex or Richfield;
●governmental or litigation developments or regulatory considerations that may affect Stratex or Richfield or the oil
and gas industry;
●general business, market, industry or economic conditions;
●the worldwide supply/demand balance for oil and gas and the prevailing commodity price environment; and
●other factors beyond the control of Stratex and Richfield, including those described elsewhere in this “Risk Factors”
section.
Richfield stockholders may receive less than one share of Stratex common stock in the merger for each
share of Richfield common stock they hold.
The number of shares of Stratex common stock that a Richfield stockholder will receive in the merger for
each share of Richfield common stock will decrease in the event more than 3,000,000 shares of Richfield
common stock are issued to holders of Richfield warrants who exercise the warrants for cash or in the event
that holders of Richfield warrants exercise their warrants on a cashless exercise basis. The number of shares
of Stratex common stock that a Richfield stockholder will receive in the merger will also decrease in the event
more than 2,000,000 shares of Richfield common stock are issued to the holders of Richfield convertible
notes who exercise their right to convert prior to closing (including 1,423,072 shares already issued to such
holders prior to the date hereof). These adjustments, if any, will result from investment decisions made by the
holders of Richfield’s warrants and convertible notes and are outside the control of Stratex and Richfield.
14
Table of Contents
Richfield stockholders may receive a lower return on their investment after the merger.
Although Stratex and Richfield believe that the merger will create multiple financial, operational and strategic
benefits for the combined company and its stockholders, these benefits may not be achieved. The
combination of Stratex’s and Richfield’s business, even if conducted in an efficient, effective and timely
manner, may not result in combined financial performance that is better than what Richfield would have
achieved independently if the merger had not occurred.
The rights of Richfield stockholders will change as a result of the merger.
Following completion of the merger, Richfield stockholders will become stockholders of Stratex, a Colorado
corporation. There are differences between your rights as a stockholder of Richfield, on the one hand, and
the rights you will have as a stockholder of Stratex, on the other hand. For a more detailed discussion of the
differences between the rights of stockholders of Richfield and Stratex, see “Comparison of Stockholder
Rights” beginning on page 97.
Certain executive officers of Richfield may have interests in the merger that may differ from, or be in addition
to, the interests of Richfield stockholders generally.
Executive officers of Richfield negotiated the terms of the merger agreement with their counterparts at
Stratex, and the Richfield board of directors determined that entering into the merger agreement was in the
best interests of Richfield and its stockholders, declared the merger agreement advisable and recommended
that Richfield stockholders approve the merger agreement. In considering these facts and the other
information contained in this proxy statement/prospectus, you should be aware that Richfield’s executive
officers and directors may have financial interests in the merger that may be different from, or in addition to,
the interests of Richfield stockholders generally. For a detailed discussion of the interests that Richfield’s
directors and executive officers may have in the merger, see “The Merger—Financial Interests of Richfield’s
Directors and Executive Officers in the Merger” beginning on page 58.
The merger agreement and voting agreements contain provisions that may discourage other companies from
trying to acquire Richfield for greater consideration than what Stratex has agreed to pay.
The merger agreement and voting agreements contain provisions that may discourage a third party from
submitting a business combination proposal to Richfield that might result in greater value to Richfield
stockholders than the proposed merger. Under the terms of the merger agreement these provisions include a
general prohibition on Richfield from soliciting any acquisition proposal or offers for competing transactions.
Additionally, if Richfield receives a proposal for an alternative transaction or if another person or entity seeks
to discuss or negotiate an alternative transaction with Richfield, Richfield must promptly notify Stratex of
such activities and keep Stratex informed on a reasonably prompt basis of any material developments.
Richfield is also required to pay a termination fee of $3,000,000 if the merger agreement is terminated in
specified circumstances. See “The Merger Agreement – Termination Fees and Expenses” on page 80.
In addition, under the terms of the voting agreements, directors and executive officers of Richfield and certain
of its stockholders (including its largest creditor), owning and having the right to consent for an aggregate of
approximately 46% of Richfield’s common stock, have agreed with Stratex to vote in favor of the merger and
have also agreed to vote their shares against alternative transaction proposals. In addition, the certain of
these directors, officers, and stockholders, representing 34% of Richfield’s common stock have agreed not to
sell their shares for a period of six months after the merger.
These provisions could discourage a third party that might have an interest in acquiring all or a significant
part of Richfield from considering or proposing an acquisition, even if that party were prepared to pay
consideration with a higher per share value than the current proposed merger consideration. Furthermore,
the termination fee may result in a potential competing acquirer proposing to pay a lower per share price to
acquire Richfield than it might otherwise have proposed to pay.
15
Table of Contents
Although Stratex will obtain a tax opinion from legal counsel regarding the tax consequences to Richfield’s
stockholders of the merger and the distribution of the merger consideration to Richfield’s stockholders,
neither Stratex nor Richfield obtained a ruling from the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) and the opinion of
tax counsel does not preclude the IRS from adopting a position contrary to those expressed in the opinion.
Assuming the merger is completed according to the terms of the merger agreement as described in this
proxy statement/prospectus, and based upon customary assumptions and certain representations as to
factual matters by Richfield and Stratex, and subject to the qualifications contained herein and in the
Buchanan Ingersoll & Rooney PC opinion letter which will be included as Exhibit 8.1 to the registration
statement of which this proxy statement/prospectus is a part, it expected that the opinion of Buchanan
Ingersoll & Rooney PC will be that the merger will be treated for U.S. federal income tax purposes as a
reorganization within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code. No ruling has been or will be sought from the
IRS as to the U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger, and the opinion of Buchanan Ingersoll &
Rooney PC is not binding on the IRS or any court of law nor will it preclude the IRS from adopting positions
contrary to those expressed in the opinion.
The merger may result in an ownership change for Richfield under Section 382 under the Code, potentially
limiting Richfield’s use of net operating loss carryforwards, tax credits and other tax attributes to offset future
taxable income or tax liabilities.
Under Sections 382 and 383 of the Code, if a corporation undergoes an “ownership change,” the
corporation’s ability to use its pre-ownership change net operating loss carryforwards (“NOLs”), tax credits
and other tax attributes for U.S. federal income tax purposes may be limited. Richfield has substantial NOLs,
tax credits and other tax attributes for U.S. federal and state income tax purposes and the consummation of
the merger may result in an “ownership change” for Richfield under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue
Code. Accordingly, the combined company’s ability to utilize Richfield’s NOLs, tax credits and other tax
attributes may be limited. These limitations could result in increased future tax liability, which could have an
adverse effect on the business, financial condition or results of operations of the combined company.
Stratex and Richfield may waive one or more of the conditions of the merger agreement without resoliciting
stockholder approval for the merger and may terminate the merger agreement even after it has been
approved by Richfield’s stockholders.
Each of the conditions to Stratex’s and Richfield’s obligations to complete the merger may be waived, in
whole or in part, to the extent permitted by applicable law, by agreement of Stratex and Richfield if the
condition is a condition to both Stratex’s and Richfield’s obligation to complete the merger, or by the party for
which such condition is a condition of its obligation to complete the merger. The boards of directors of
Stratex and Richfield may evaluate the materiality of any such waiver to determine whether amendment of this
proxy statement/prospectus and resolicitation of stockholder approval is necessary. If Stratex and Richfield
determine that a waiver is not significant enough to require resolicitation of stockholder approval, Richfield
will have the discretion to complete the merger without seeking further stockholder approval. In addition,
Stratex and Richfield can agree at any time to terminate the merger agreement, even if Richfield stockholders
have already approved the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby.
If the conditions to the merger are not met, the merger may not occur.
Specified conditions set forth in the merger agreement must be satisfied or waived to complete the merger.
For a more complete discussion of the conditions to the merger, please see the section entitled “The Merger
Agreement – Conditions to Completion of the Merger” beginning on page 69. The following conditions, in
addition to other customary closing conditions, must be satisfied or waived before either Stratex or Richfield,
as applicable, is obligated to complete the merger:
●
the declaration of the effectiveness of the registration statement on Form S-4 (of which this proxy
statement/prospectus forms a part) under the Securities Act, and the absence of any stop order or proceeding
seeking a stop order affecting such registration statement;
● receipt of the requisite approval of Richfield stockholders;
●
the exchange of all outstanding shares of Stratex’s Series A preferred stock for 7,000,000 shares of Stratex
common stock;
16
Table of Contents
●
Stratex having advanced all of the funds under the loan agreement which Richfield has become entitled to receive.
(For more information on the loan agreement, see “THE Loan Agreement” beginning on page 82);
● Stratex having $2,000,000 of cash on hand;
●
Richfield’s liabilities (excluding liabilities under the loan agreement, capital leases, deferred rent obligations, any
accrued liability for employee severance compensation approved in writing by Stratex, and plugging and
abandonment liabilities) not exceeding $6,650,000 immediately prior to the closing (which $6,650,000 limit may be
increased by up to an aggregate amount of $500,000 in field-related payables so long as there are corresponding
field-related receivables and/or deposits);
Richfield either extending the maturity/payment dates for a period of one year beyond the effective time of the
merger (two years in the case of one note holder), or reached an accommodation with the holders of Richfield’s
●
outstanding promissory notes in a manner acceptable to Stratex;
●
Richfield’s chief executive officer resigning from his position at Richfield and entering into a consulting agreement
with Stratex, which is satisfactory to Stratex;
Failure to complete the merger could have adverse consequences.
If the merger is not completed:
●The amounts advanced by Stratex to Richfield under the loan agreement would become due and payable and
Richfield would be unable to repay such amounts when due.
●
Richfield could be required to pay Stratex a termination fee of $3,000,000, depending upon the circumstances giving
rise to the termination, all as described in the merger agreement and summarized in this proxy statement/prospectus
(see “THE MERGER AGREEMENT – Termination Fees and Expenses” beginning on page 80).
●
Stratex could be required to pay Richfield a termination fee of $1,000,000, depending upon the circumstances giving
rise to the termination, as described in the merger agreement and summarized in this proxy statement/prospectus
(see “THE MERGER AGREEMENT – Termination Fees and Expenses” beginning on page 80).
●The time and resources devoted by Stratex and Richfield to completing the merger would have been wasted and
will have distracted management and employees from other endeavors that might have been more productive.
Stratex and Richfield could also be subject to litigation related to any failure to complete the merger or related
to any enforcement proceeding commenced against Stratex or Richfield to perform their respective
obligations under the merger agreement. If the merger is not completed, these risks may materialize and may
adversely affect Stratex’s and Richfield’s business, financial results and stock price.
The integration process could adversely impact Stratex’s and Richfield’s ongoing operations.
Stratex and Richfield have operated independently and until completion of the merger will continue to operate
independently. It is possible that the integration process could result in the loss of employees, the disruption
of Richfield’s ongoing business or inconsistencies in standards, controls, procedures or policies that
adversely affect the combined company’s ability to achieve the anticipated benefits of the merger. Integration
efforts between the two companies will also divert management attention and resources. The integration may
take longer than anticipated and may have adverse results.
17
Table of Contents
Risks Relating to Stratex’s Business and the Oil and Gas Industry
Unless the context requires otherwise, references in this section of “Risk Factors” to the “Company,” “we,”
“our,” and “us,” refer to Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiaries.
We have a history of operating losses and expect to continue suffering losses for the foreseeable future.
We have incurred losses since our company was organized in August 2003. Moreover, in each of the fiscal
years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, we recorded net losses of $5,244,915 and $7,670,624, respectively.
We cannot anticipate when, if ever, our operations will become profitable.
Our limited operating history may not serve as an adequate basis to judge our future prospects and results of
operations.
We have a limited operating history in the oil and gas industry on which to base an evaluation of our business
and prospects. Prior to our recent acquisitions in Texas and Kansas, we have held only small, passive, non-
operated working interests in North Dakota, Montana, and Kansas. Our prospects must be considered in light
of the risks, expenses and difficulties frequently encountered by companies in their early stages of
development. We cannot assure you that we will be successful in addressing the risks we may encounter,
and our failure to do so could have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, financial condition
and results of operations. Our future operating results will depend on many factors, including:
our ability to assume the role of operator of our recently acquired properties and any future properties we acquire with
·
our limited management resources:
·our ability to generate adequate working capital;
·the successful development and exploration of our properties;
·market demand for natural gas and oil;
·the performance level of our competitors;
·our ability to attract and retain key employees; and
our ability to efficiently explore, develop and produce sufficient quantities of marketable natural gas or oil in a highly
·
competitive and speculative environment, while maintaining quality and controlling costs.
To achieve profitable operations in the future, we must, alone or with others, successfully manage the factors
stated above, as well as continue to develop ways to enhance our production efforts. Despite our best efforts,
we may not be successful in our efforts. There is a possibility that some of our wells may never produce oil or
natural gas.
We have significant debt obligations, including $18,002,210 principal amount of our convertible notes which
are due in 2016, which could also adversely affect our operating flexibility and put us at a competitive
disadvantage by preventing us from capitalizing on business opportunities.
As of August 20, 2014 we have total debt of $19,650,000, including $18,002,210 principal amount of our
convertible notes, $9,987,650 of which is due on February 11, 2016 and $8,014,560 principal amount of which
is due on June 6, 2016. Our obligation to repay the indebtedness under our convertible notes is secured by a
security interest in all of our assets.
Our debt obligations could adversely affect our ability to operate or expand our business, including the
following:
limiting our ability to obtain additional financing to fund future working capital, capital expenditures, strategic
·
acquisitions or other general corporate requirements;
·requiring a substantial portion of our cash flows to be dedicated to debt service payments instead of other purposes;
18
Table of Contents
·increasing our vulnerability to general adverse economic and industry conditions;
·limiting our financial flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in the industry in which we compete;
·placing us at a disadvantage compared to other, less leveraged competitors;
having a material adverse effect on us if we fail to comply with the covenants in the instruments governing our
·
debt; and
·increasing our cost of borrowing.
We may not be able to generate a sufficient amount of cash flow to meet our debt service obligations.
Our ability to make scheduled payments or to refinance our obligations with respect to our outstanding
convertible notes and our other debt will depend on our financial and operating performance, which, in turn,
will depend upon our ability to generate revenues and cash flow from our oil and gas properties. Our financial
and operating performance are also subject to prevailing economic conditions and to certain financial,
competitive, business and other factors, including the availability of financing in the banking and capital
markets as well as the other risks described herein, which are beyond our control.  If our cash flow and capital
resources are insufficient to fund our debt service obligations, we could face substantial liquidity problems
and may be forced to reduce or delay scheduled expansions and capital expenditures, sell material assets or
operations, obtain additional capital or restructure our debt.  In addition, we cannot assure you that our
operating performance, cash flow and capital resources will be sufficient for payment of our debt in the
future.  If we are unable to meet our debt obligations or to fund our other liquidity needs, we will need to
restructure or refinance all or a portion of our debt, including the convertible notes, which could cause us to
default on our debt obligations and impair our liquidity.  Any refinancing of our indebtedness could be at
higher interest rates and may require us to comply with more onerous covenants which could further restrict
our business operations.  In the event that we are required to dispose of material assets or operations or
restructure our debt to meet our debt service and other obligations, we cannot provide assurance that we
could effect any of these actions on a timely basis, on commercially reasonable terms or at all, or that these
actions would be sufficient to meet our capital requirements.   If we cannot make scheduled payments on our
debt, we will be in default and, as a result:
our debt holders could declare all outstanding principal and interest to be due and payable and exercise their
·
security interest in our assets; and
·we could be forced into bankruptcy or liquidation.
We may be unable to obtain additional capital required to implement our business plan, which could restrict
our ability to grow.
Future acquisitions and future drilling/development activity may require additional capital that exceeds our
operating cash flow. In addition, our administrative costs (such as salaries, insurance expenses and general
overhead expenses, as well as legal compliance costs and accounting expenses) will require cash resources.
We may pursue sources of additional capital through various financing transactions or arrangements,
including joint venturing of projects, debt financing, equity financing or other means. We may not be
successful in identifying suitable financing transactions in the time period required or at all, and we may not
obtain the required capital by other means.
Any additional capital raised through the sale of equity will dilute the ownership percentage of our
stockholders. Raising any such capital could also result in a decrease in the nominal fair market value of our
equity securities. The terms of securities we issue in future capital transactions may be more favorable to new
investors, and may include preferences, superior voting rights and the issuance of other derivative securities,
and issuances of incentive awards under equity employee incentive plans, all of which may have a dilutive
effect to existing investors.
19
Table of Contents
Our ability to obtain financing, if and when necessary, may be impaired by such factors as the capital markets
(both generally and in the oil and gas industry in particular), our limited operating history, the location of our
oil and natural gas properties, prices of oil and natural gas on the commodities markets (which will impact the
amount of asset-based financing available to us) and the departure of key employees. Further, if oil or natural
gas prices decline, our revenues will likely decrease and such decreased revenues may increase our need for
additional capital. If the amount of capital we are able to raise from financing activities, together with revenues
from our operations, is not sufficient to satisfy our capital needs (even if we reduce our operations), we may
be required to cease operations, divest our assets at unattractive prices or obtain financing on unattractive
terms.
Our future success is dependent on our acquisition and development of producing and reserve rich
properties.
We are in the early stages of the acquisition of our portfolio of leaseholds and other natural resource
holdings. We plan to continue to supplement our current portfolio with additional sites and leaseholds and
through the acquisition or, or combination with, other companies in the oil and gas industry. Our ability to
meet our growth and operational objectives will depend on the success of our acquisitions, and there is no
assurance that the integration of future assets, leaseholds, or companies will be successful.
In addition to acquiring producing properties, we may also grow our business through the acquisition and
development of exploratory oil and gas prospects, which is the riskiest method of establishing oil and gas
reserves.
In addition to acquiring producing properties, we may acquire, drill and develop exploratory oil and gas
prospects that are profitable to produce. Developing exploratory oil and gas properties requires significant
capital expenditures and involves a high degree of financial risk. The budgeted costs of drilling, completing,
and operating exploratory wells are often exceeded and can increase significantly when drilling costs rise.
Drilling may be unsuccessful for many reasons, including title problems, weather, cost overruns, equipment
shortages, and mechanical difficulties. Moreover, the successful drilling or completion of an exploratory oil or
gas well does not ensure a profit on an investment. Exploratory wells bear a much greater risk of loss than
development wells. We cannot assure you that our exploration, exploitation and development activities will
result in profitable operations. If we are unable to successfully acquire and develop exploratory oil and gas
prospects, our results of operations, financial condition and stock price will be materially adversely affected.
Exploratory drilling involves many risks that are outside our control and which may result in a material
adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations.
The business of exploring for and producing oil and gas involves a substantial risk of investment loss.
Drilling oil and gas wells involves the risk that the wells may be unproductive or that, although productive, the
wells may not produce oil or gas in economic quantities. Other hazards, such as unusual or unexpected
geological formations, pressures, fires, blowouts, power outages, sour gas leakage, loss of circulation of
drilling fluids or other conditions may substantially delay or prevent completion of any well. Adverse weather
conditions can also hinder drilling operations. A productive well may become uneconomic if water or other
deleterious substances are encountered that impair or prevent the production of oil or gas from the well. In
addition, production from any well may be unmarketable if it is impregnated with water or other deleterious
substances. There can be no assurance that oil and gas will be produced from the properties in which we
have interests.
Crude oil and natural gas development, re-completion of wells from one reservoir to another reservoir,
restoring wells to production and drilling and completing new wells are speculative activities and involve
numerous risks and substantial and uncertain costs.
Our growth will be materially dependent upon the success of our future development program. Drilling for
crude oil and natural gas and reworking existing wells involves numerous risks, including the risk that no
commercially productive crude oil or natural gas reservoirs will be encountered. The cost of drilling,
completing and operating wells is substantial and uncertain, and drilling operations may be curtailed, delayed
or cancelled as a result of a variety of factors beyond our control, including: unexpected drilling conditions;
pressure or irregularities in formations; equipment failures or accidents; inability to obtain leases on
economic terms, where applicable; adverse weather conditions and natural disasters; compliance with
governmental requirements; and shortages or delays in the availability of drilling rigs or crews and the
delivery of equipment.
20
Table of Contents
Drilling or reworking is a highly speculative activity. Even when fully and correctly utilized, modern well
completion techniques such as hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling do not guarantee that we will find
crude oil and/or natural gas in our wells. Hydraulic fracturing involves pumping a fluid with or without
particulates into a formation at high pressure, thereby creating fractures in the rock and leaving the
particulates in the fractures to ensure that the fractures remain open, thereby potentially increasing the ability
of the reservoir to produce oil or gas. Horizontal drilling involves drilling horizontally out from an existing
vertical well bore, thereby potentially increasing the area and reach of the well bore that is in contact with the
reservoir. Our future drilling activities may not be successful and, if unsuccessful, such failure would have an
adverse effect on our future results of operations and financial condition. We cannot assure you that our
overall drilling success rate or our drilling success rate for activities within a particular geographic area will
not decline. We may identify and develop prospects through a number of methods, some of which do not
include lateral drilling or hydraulic fracturing, and some of which may be unproven. The drilling and results
for these prospects may be particularly uncertain. Our drilling schedule may vary from our capital budget. The
final determination with respect to the drilling of any scheduled or budgeted prospects will be dependent on a
number of factors, including, but not limited to: the results of previous development efforts and the
acquisition, review and analysis of data; the availability of sufficient capital resources to us and the other
participants, if any, for the drilling of the prospects; the approval of the prospects by other participants, if any,
after additional data has been compiled; economic and industry conditions at the time of drilling, including
prevailing and anticipated prices for crude oil and natural gas and the availability of drilling rigs and crews;
our financial resources and results; the availability of leases and permits on reasonable terms for the
prospects; and the success of our drilling technology.
Title deficiencies could render our leases worthless, which could have adverse effects on our financial
condition or results of operations.
The existence of a material title deficiency can render our lease worthless and can result in a large expense to
our business. It is our practice in acquiring oil and gas leases or undivided interests in oil and gas leases to
forgo the expense of retaining lawyers to examine the title to the oil or gas interest to be placed under lease or
already placed under lease. Instead, we rely upon the judgment of oil and gas landmen who perform the field
work in examining records in the appropriate governmental office before attempting to place under lease a
specific oil or gas interest. We do not anticipate that we, or the person or company acting as operator of the
wells located on the properties that we lease or may lease in the future, will obtain counsel to examine title to
the lease until the well is about to be drilled. As a result, we may be unaware of deficiencies in the
marketability of the title to the lease. Such deficiencies may render a lease worthless. Additionally, we rely on
the owners of the leases that are subject to any farm-in agreement in which we participate to assign us title to
the leases that are subject to the agreement at the appropriate time based on the terms of the agreement. The
failure by these owners to provide us with an assignment of such leases in a timely matter could negatively
affect the value of these leases, or our rights to use them, which could potentially have an adverse effect on
our financial condition or results of operations.
We may not be able to develop oil and gas reserves on an economically viable basis and our reserves and
production may decline as a result.
If we succeed in discovering additional oil and/or natural gas reserves, we cannot assure that these reserves
will be capable of production levels that are commercially viable. On a long-term basis, our viability depends
on our ability to find or acquire, develop and commercially produce additional oil and natural gas reserves.
Without the addition of reserves through acquisition, exploration or development activities, our reserves and
production will decline over time as reserves are produced. Our future reserves will depend not only on our
ability to develop then-existing properties, but also on our ability to identify and acquire additional suitable
producing properties or prospects, to find markets for the oil and natural gas we develop and to effectively
distribute our production into our markets.
Future oil and gas exploration may involve unsuccessful efforts, not only from dry holes, but from wells that
are marginally productive but do not produce sufficient net revenues to return a profit after drilling, operating
and other costs. Completion of a well does not assure a profit on the investment or recovery of drilling,
completion and operating costs. In addition, drilling hazards or environmental damage could greatly increase
the cost of operations, and various field operating conditions may adversely affect the production from
successful wells. These conditions include delays in obtaining governmental approvals or consents, shut-
downs of connected wells resulting from extreme weather conditions, problems in storage and distribution
and adverse geological and mechanical conditions. While we will endeavor to effectively manage these
conditions, they cannot be totally eliminated and could diminish our revenue and cash flow levels and result
in the impairment of our oil and natural gas interests.
21
Table of Contents
Future investment in exploration projects would increase the risks inherent in our oil and gas activities and
our drilling operations may not be successful.
We intend to develop a portfolio consisting of a mix of existing production and developmental drilling
opportunities. Should we choose at a later date to invest in projects that are more exploratory in nature, those
projects would come with greater risks than in acquisitions and developmental drilling. Any particular
success in exploration does not assure that we will discover meaningful levels of reserves. There can be no
assurance that future exploration activities would be successful. We cannot be sure that an overall drilling
success rate or production operations within a particular area will ever come to fruition and, in any event,
production rates inevitably decline over time. We may not recover all or any portion of the capital investment
in our wells or the underlying leaseholds.
Unsuccessful drilling activities would have a material adverse effect upon our results of operations and
financial condition.
Drilling for and producing oil and natural gas are high risk activities with many uncertainties that could impact
the economic viability of our leasehold interests and properties.
Our future success will depend on the success of our exploration, development, and production activities.
Our oil and natural gas exploration and production activities are subject to numerous risks beyond our
control; including the risk that drilling will not result in commercially viable oil or natural gas production. Our
decision to purchase, explore, develop or otherwise exploit prospects or properties will depend in part on the
evaluation of data obtained through geophysical and geological analyses, production data and engineering
studies, the results of which are often inconclusive or subject to varying interpretations. Our cost of drilling,
completing and operating wells is often uncertain before drilling commences. Overruns in budgeted
expenditures are common risks that can make a particular project uneconomical. Further, many factors may
curtail, delay or cancel drilling, including the following:
·delays imposed by or resulting from compliance with regulatory requirements;
·pressure or irregularities in geological formations;
·shortages of or delays in obtaining qualified personnel or equipment, including drilling rigs and CO2;
·equipment failures or accidents; and
·adverse weather conditions, such as freezing temperatures and storms.
The presence of one or a combination of these factors at our properties could adversely affect our business,
financial condition and/or results of operations.
Our financial condition and results of operations could be negatively impacted as a result of our lack of
geographic diversification of our oil and gas interests.
Our business focus is on the oil and gas industry in a limited number of geographic areas, currently in parts
of Texas, Montana and Kansas. Larger companies have the ability to manage their risk by geographic
diversification. It is our intent to pursue opportunities in other geographic areas as those opportunities
present themselves. However, we will continue to have a lack of diversification for the near future. As a result,
we could be impacted more acutely by factors affecting our industry in the regions in which we operate than
we would if our business were more geographically diversified. If we do not diversify our operations, our
financial condition and results of operations could be negatively impacted.
22
Table of Contents
Investment in developmental drilling and/or recompletion of existing wells includes significant risk.
There are significant uncertainties as to the future costs and timing of drilling and completing new wells
and/or recompleting existing wells. Our drilling operations may be curtailed, delayed, or canceled as a result
of a variety of factors, including:
·unexpected drilling conditions;
·equipment failures or accidents;
·adverse weather conditions;
·compliance with governmental requirements; and
·shortages or delays in the availability of drilling rigs and the delivery of equipment or materials.
We currently have certain drilling and minimum royalty commitments that must be satisfied on our property
located in Zavala County, Texas in order to maintain certain of our leasehold interests.
Under the terms of our Zavala County Lease covering 2,629 acres in Zavala County, Texas, we are required to
(i) drill at least two new wells a year and (ii) during the first five years of the lease, deliver a minimum royalty
payment of $850,000 to the lessors per year, in order to continue the lease in full force and effect. Should we
elect not to drill such new wells or in the event we do not make the required minimum annual royalty
payments, the lease will terminate except with respect to acreage surrounding our producing wells.
Strategic relationships upon which we may rely are subject to change, which may diminish our ability to
conduct our operations.
Our ability to successfully acquire additional properties, to increase our oil and natural gas reserves, to
participate in drilling opportunities and to identify and enter into commercial arrangements with customers
will depend on developing and maintaining close working relationships with our strategic partners and
industry participants and our ability to select and evaluate suitable properties and to consummate
transactions in a highly competitive environment. These realities are also subject to change and our inability
to maintain close working relationships with our strategic partners and other industry participants or continue
to acquire suitable properties may impair our ability to execute our business plan. To continue to develop our
business, we will endeavor to use the business relationships of members of our management to enter into
strategic relationships, which may take the form of joint ventures with other private parties and contractual
arrangements with other oil and gas companies, including those that supply equipment and other resources
which we may use in our business. We may not be able to establish these strategic relationships, or if
established, we may not be able to adequately maintain them. In addition, the dynamics of our relationships
with strategic partners may require us to incur expenses or undertake activities we would not otherwise be
inclined to in order to fulfill our obligations to these partners or maintain relationships. If our strategic
relationships are not established or maintained, our business prospects may be limited, which could diminish
our ability to conduct our operations.
Because we do not operate all of our properties, we could have limited influence over their development.
Our wells located in Montana and North Dakota are currently operated and maintained by a third party. Our
lack of control could result in the following:
·the operator may initiate exploration or development on a faster or slower pace than we prefer; and
the operator may propose to drill more wells or build more facilities on a project than we have budgeted for or that we
·
deem appropriate, which may mean that we are unable to participate in the project or share in the revenues
generated by the project even though we paid our share of the initial exploration costs.
Either of these events could materially reduce the value of our properties.
23
Table of Contents
We must reach agreements with third parties to supply us with expertise, services and infrastructure
necessary to operate our business and the loss of access to this expertise, these services and/or
infrastructure could cause our business to suffer by reducing our revenues and increasing our costs.
We have certain existing and contemplated strategic vendor relationships that will be critical to our strategy.
We cannot assure that these relationships can be maintained or obtained on terms favorable to us. Our
success depends on substantially obtaining relationships with strategic partners, such as banks, accounting
firms, legal firms and operational entities. If we are unable to obtain or maintain relationships with strategic
partners, our business, prospects, financial condition and results of operations may be materially adversely
affected.
We are dependent on certain key personnel.
We are dependent on the services of our Chairman, Alan Gaines and our Chief Executive Officer, Stephen
Funk. The loss of services of either Mr. Gaines or Mr. Funk could impair our ability to complete acquisitions of
producing assets and leaseholds, perform relevant managerial services and maintain key relationships with
third parties, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of
operations.
We have a very small management team and the loss of any member of our team may prevent us from
implementing our business plan in a timely manner.
We currently have three executive officers and a limited number of employees and consultants upon whom
our success largely depends. We do not maintain key-man life insurance policies on our executive officers or
consultants, the loss of which could seriously harm our business, financial condition and results of
operations. In such an event, we may not be able to recruit personnel to replace our executive officers or
consultants in a timely manner, or at all, on acceptable terms.
If we are unable to successfully recruit qualified managerial and field personnel having experience in oil and
gas exploration, we may not be able to continue our operations.
In order to successfully implement and manage our business plan, we will depend upon, among other things,
successfully recruiting qualified managerial and field personnel having experience in the oil and gas
exploration business. Competition for qualified individuals is intense. We may not be able to find, attract and
retain qualified personnel on acceptable terms. If we are unable to find, attract and retain qualified personnel
with technical expertise, our business operations could suffer.
Startups in the oil and gas industry are subject to substantial competition.
The oil and gas industry is highly competitive. Other oil and gas companies may seek to acquire oil and gas
leases and other properties and services that we require to operate its business in the planned areas. This
competition is increasingly intense as prices of oil and natural gas have risen in recent years. Additionally,
other companies engaged in our line of business may compete with us from time to time in obtaining capital
from investors. Competitors include larger companies who may have access to greater resources, may be
more successful in the recruitment and retention of qualified employees and may conduct their own refining
and petroleum marketing operations, which may give them a competitive advantage. If we are unable to
compete effectively or respond adequately to competitive pressures, our results of operation and financial
condition may be materially adversely affected.
We may not be able to determine reserve potential or identify liabilities associated with our current properties
or any future properties. We may also not be able to obtain protection from vendors against possible
liabilities, which could cause us to incur losses.
We have conducted a very limited review of our current properties, and that review might not necessarily
reveal all existing or potential reserves and/or problems. This may also be true for any future acquisitions
made by us. Inspections may not always be performed on every well, and environmental problems, such as
groundwater contamination, are not necessarily observable even when an inspection is undertaken. Even
when problems are identified, a vendor may be unwilling or unable to provide effective contractual protection
against all or part of those problems, and we may assume environmental and other risks and liabilities in
connection with the acquired properties.
24
Table of Contents
Drilling wells could subject us to liabilities which could endanger our interests in our prospective properties
and assets.
There are risks associated with the drilling of oil and natural gas wells, including encountering unexpected
formations or pressures, premature declines of reservoirs, blow-outs, sour gas releases, fires and spills. The
occurrence of any of these events could significantly reduce our future revenues or cause substantial losses,
impairing our future operating results. We may become subject to liability for pollution, blow-outs or other
hazards.
The payment of such liabilities could reduce the funds available to us or could, in an extreme case, result in a
total loss of our properties and assets. Moreover, we may not be able to maintain adequate insurance in the
future at rates that are considered reasonable. Oil and natural gas production operations are also subject to
all the risks typically associated with such operations, including premature decline of reservoirs and the
invasion of water into producing formations.
We currently maintain liability insurance but it may not be sufficient to cover liabilities we may incur.
Our involvement in the exploration for and development of oil and natural gas properties may result in our
becoming subject to liability for pollution, blow-outs, property damage, personal injury or other hazards. Such
risks may not, in all circumstances be insurable or, in certain circumstances, we may choose not to obtain
insurance to protect against specific risks due to the high premiums associated with such insurance or for
other reasons. We currently maintain general liability insurance coverage, but it may not be sufficient to cover
liabilities we may incur. The payment of such uninsured liabilities would reduce the funds available to us. If we
suffer a significant event or occurrence that is not fully insured we could be required to divert funds from
capital investment or other uses towards covering our liability for such events.
If our operators fail to maintain adequate insurance, our business could be materially and adversely affected.
Our operations are subject to risks inherent in the oil and gas industry, such as blowouts, cratering,
explosions, uncontrollable flows of oil, gas or well fluids, fires, pollution, earthquakes and other
environmental risks. These risks could result in substantial losses due to injury and loss of life, severe
damage to and destruction of property and equipment, pollution and other environmental damage, and
suspension of operations. We could be liable for environmental damages caused by us and/or previous
property owners. As a result, substantial liabilities to third parties or governmental entities may be incurred,
the payment of which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of
operations.
Our prospective drilling contractor or operator may be required to maintain insurance of various types to
cover our operations with policy limits and retention liability customary in the industry. The occurrence of a
significant adverse event on such prospects that is not fully covered by insurance could result in the loss of
all or part of our investment in a particular prospect which could have a material adverse effect on our
financial condition and results of operations.
Any change to government regulation/administrative practices may have a negative impact on our ability to
operate and our profitability.
The business of oil and gas exploration and development is subject to substantial regulation under federal,
state, local and foreign laws relating to the exploration for, and the development, upgrading, marketing,
pricing, taxation, and transportation of oil and gas and related products and other matters. Amendments to
current laws and regulations governing operations and activities of oil and gas exploration and development
operations could have a material adverse impact on our business. In addition, there can be no assurance that
income tax laws, royalty regulations and government incentive programs related to our oil and gas properties
and the oil and gas industry generally, will not be changed in a manner which may adversely affect our
progress and cause delays, inability to explore and develop or abandonment of these interests.
Permits, leases, licenses and approvals are required from a variety of regulatory authorities at various stages
of exploration and development. There can be no assurance that the various government permits, leases,
licenses and approvals sought will be granted in respect of our activities or, if granted, will not be cancelled or
will be renewed upon expiry. There is no assurance that such permits, leases, licenses and approvals will not
contain terms and provisions which may adversely affect our exploration and development activities.
25
Table of Contents
Shortages of rigs, equipment, supplies and personnel could delay or otherwise adversely affect our cost of
operations or our ability to operate according to our business plans.
If drilling activity increases in Texas, Kansas and/or in other locations in which we operate, a shortage of
drilling and completion rigs, field equipment and qualified personnel could develop. These costs have
recently increased sharply and could continue to do so. The demand for, and wage rates of, qualified drilling
rig crews generally rise in response to the increasing number of active rigs in service and could increase
sharply in the event of a shortage. Shortages of drilling and completion rigs, field equipment or qualified
personnel could delay, restrict or curtail our exploration and development operations, which could in turn
harm our operating results.
If we establish reserves, we will be required to replace, maintain or expand our reserves in order to prevent
our reserves and production from declining, which would adversely affect cash flows and income.
In general, production from oil and gas properties declines over time as reserves are depleted, with the rate of
decline depending on reservoir characteristics. If we establish reserves, of which there is no assurance, and
we are not successful in our subsequent exploration and development activities or in subsequently acquiring
properties containing proved reserves, our proved reserves will decline as the oil and gas contained in the
reserves are produced. Our future oil and gas production is highly dependent upon our ability to
economically find, develop or acquire reserves in commercial quantities.
To the extent cash flow from operations is reduced, either by a decrease in prevailing prices for oil and gas or
an increase in finding and development costs, and external sources of capital become limited or unavailable,
our ability to make the necessary capital investment to maintain or expand our asset base of oil and gas
reserves would be impaired. Even with sufficient available capital, our future exploration and development
activities may not result in additional proved reserves, and we might not be able to drill productive wells at
acceptable costs.
The oil and gas exploration and production industry is historically a cyclical industry and market fluctuations
in the prices of oil and gas could adversely affect our business.
Prices for oil and gas tend to fluctuate significantly in response to factors beyond our control. These factors
include:
·weather conditions in the United States and wherever our property interests are located;
·economic conditions, including demand for petroleum-based products, in the United States and the rest of the world;
·actions by OPEC, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries;
·political instability in the Middle East and other major oil and gas producing regions;
·governmental regulations, both domestic and foreign;
·domestic and foreign tax policy;
·the pace adopted by foreign governments for the exploration, development, and production of their national reserves;
·the price of foreign imports of oil and gas;
·the cost of exploring for, producing and delivering oil and gas;
·the discovery rate of new oil and gas reserves;
·the rate of decline of existing and new oil and gas reserves;
·available pipeline and other oil and gas transportation capacity;
·the ability of oil and gas companies to raise capital;
·the overall supply and demand for oil and gas; and
·the availability of alternate fuel sources.
26
Table of Contents
Changes in commodity prices may significantly affect our capital resources, liquidity and expected operating
results. Price changes will directly affect revenues and can indirectly impact expected production by
changing the amount of funds available to reinvest in exploration and development activities. Reductions in
oil and gas prices not only reduce revenues and profits, but could also reduce the quantities of reserves that
are commercially recoverable. Significant declines in prices could result in non-cash charges to earnings due
to impairment.
Changes in commodity prices may also significantly affect our ability to estimate the value of producing
properties for acquisition and divestiture and often cause disruption in the market for oil and gas producing
properties, as buyers and sellers have difficulty agreeing on the value of the properties. Price volatility also
makes it difficult to budget for and project the return on acquisitions and the development and exploitation of
projects. We expect that commodity prices will continue to fluctuate significantly in the future.
Estimates of oil and natural gas reserves that we or our consultants make may be inaccurate and our actual
revenues may be lower than our financial projections.
We make estimates of oil and natural gas reserves using various assumptions, including assumptions as to
oil and natural gas prices, drilling and operating expenses, other capital expenditures, taxes and availability
of funds. Some of these assumptions are inherently subjective, and the accuracy of our reserve estimates
relies in part on the ability of our management team, engineers and other advisors to make accurate
assumptions. We depend to a significant degree on third party engineering firms to evaluate our properties.
In addition, economic factors beyond our control such as interest rates and commodity prices will also impact
the value of our reserves. The process of estimating oil and natural gas reserves is complex and requires us
to use a number of assumptions in the evaluation of available geological, geophysical, engineering and
economic data for each property. Actual future production, oil and natural gas prices, revenues, taxes,
development expenditures, operating expenses and quantities of recoverable oil and natural gas reserves
may vary substantially from those we estimate. If actual production results vary substantially from our reserve
estimates, this could materially reduce our revenues and result in the impairment of our oil and natural gas
interests.
Competitive industry conditions may negatively affect our ability to conduct operations.
We operate in the highly competitive areas of oil and gas exploration, development, and production. We
compete with other oil and gas companies for the purchase of leases, most of which have materially greater
economic resources than we do. These leases include exploration prospects as well as properties with
proved reserves. Factors that affect our ability to compete in the marketplace include:
·the pace adopted by foreign governments for the exploration, development, and production of their national reserves;
·the price of foreign imports of oil and gas;
·the cost of exploring for, producing and delivering oil and gas;
·the discovery rate of new oil and gas reserves;
·the rate of decline of existing and new oil and gas reserves;
·available pipeline and other oil and gas transportation capacity;
·the ability of oil and gas companies to raise capital;
27
Table of Contents
·the overall supply and demand for oil and gas;
·the availability of alternate fuel sources;
·our access to the capital necessary to drill wells and acquire properties;
·our ability to acquire and analyze seismic, geological and other information relating to a property;
our ability to retain the personnel to properly evaluate seismic, geological and other information relating to a
 ·
property;
our ability to obtain pipe, drilling rigs and associated equipment and field personnel in a timely manner and at
 ·
competitive prices;
·the location of, and our access to, pipelines and other facilities used to produce and transport oil and gas production;
·the standards we establish for the minimum projected return on an investment or our capital; and
·the availability of alternative fuel sources.
Our competitors include major integrated oil companies, independent energy companies, and affiliates of
major interstate and intrastate pipelines, many of which possess greater financial, technological and other
resources than we do.
Our decision to drill a prospect, whether developmental or exploratory, is subject to a number of factors and
we may decide to alter our drilling schedule or not drill at all, which may adversely impact our reserves, if any,
and production capability.
We describe our current properties and our plans to explore these properties in this report; whether we
ultimately drill or continue to drill a prospect may depend on multiple factors, including, but not limited to, the
following:
·acquisition and utilization of various evaluation technologies;
·material changes in oil or gas prices;
·the costs and availability of drilling rigs and equipment;
·the success or failure of wells drilled in comparable formations or which would use the same production facilities;
·availability and cost of capital;
if warranted, our ability to attract other industry partners to acquire a portion of the working interest to reduce
 ·
exposure to costs and drilling risks; and
·decisions of our joint working interest owners, if any.
We are constantly gathering data about our prospects, and it is possible that additional information may
cause us to alter our drilling schedule or determine that a prospect should not be pursued at all. You should
understand that our plans regarding our prospects are subject to change.
28
Table of Contents
Weather, unexpected subsurface conditions, and other unforeseen hazards may adversely impact our ability
to conduct business.
There are many operating hazards in exploring for and producing oil and gas, including:
our drilling operations may encounter unexpected formations, pressures, lost circulation and/or other unforeseen
 ·
conditions which could cause damage to equipment, personal injury or equipment failure;
we may experience power outages, evacuation due to adverse weather conditions, labor disruptions, fire and/or
 ·
equipment failures which could curtail or stop drilling or production; and
·we could experience blowouts, sour gas leakages or other damages to the productive formations that may require a
well to be re-drilled or other corrective action to be taken.
In addition, any of the foregoing may result in environmental damages for which we could be liable. We
cannot ensure that we will be able to maintain adequate insurance at rates we consider reasonable to cover
our possible losses from operating hazards. The occurrence of a significant event not fully insured or
indemnified against could materially and adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Our inability to obtain necessary facilities and equipment could hamper our operations.
Oil and natural gas exploration and development activities are dependent on the availability and cost of
drilling and related equipment, transportation, power and technical support in the particular areas where
these activities will be conducted. To the extent that we conduct our activities in remote areas or “in the
water” environments, needed facilities may not be proximate to these areas which will increase our expenses.
Demand for limited equipment and facilities or access restrictions may affect the availability of such
equipment to us and may delay exploration and development activities. The quality and reliability of
necessary facilities may also be unpredictable and we may be required to make efforts to standardize our
facilities, which may entail unanticipated costs and delays. Shortages and/or the unavailability of necessary
equipment or other facilities will impair our activities, either by delaying our activities, increasing our costs or
both.
Prices and markets for oil and natural gas are unpredictable and tend to fluctuate significantly, which could
reduce profitability, growth and the value of our business.
Oil and natural gas are commodities whose prices are determined based on world demand, supply and other
factors, all of which are beyond our control. World prices for oil and natural gas have fluctuated widely in
recent years. We expect that prices will continue to fluctuate in the future. Price fluctuations will have a
significant impact upon our revenue, the return from our reserves and on our financial condition generally.
Price fluctuations for oil and natural gas commodities may also impact the investment market for companies
engaged in the oil and gas industry.
Factors beyond our control affect our ability to market production and our financial results.
The ability to market oil and gas produced from our wells depends upon numerous factors beyond our
control. These factors include:
·the extent of domestic production and imports of oil and gas;
·the proximity of the gas production to gas pipelines;
·the availability of pipeline capacity;
·economic conditions experienced by commodity buyers;
·the demand for oil and gas by utilities and other end users;
·pipeline curtailments and/or delays;
·the availability of alternative fuel sources;
·the effects of inclement weather;
29
Table of Contents
·state and federal regulation of oil and gas marketing; and
·federal regulation of gas sold or transported in interstate commerce.
Additionally, world prices and markets for oil and gas are unpredictable, highly volatile, potentially subject to
governmental fixing, pegging, controls, or any combination of these and other factors, and respond to
changes in domestic, international, political, social, and economic environments. Also, due to worldwide
economic uncertainty, the availability and cost of funds for production and other expenses have become
increasingly difficult, if not impossible, to project. These changes and events may materially adversely affect
our financial performance. Accordingly, we may be unable to market all of the oil or gas that we might
produce. In addition, we may be unable to obtain favorable prices of the oil and gas that we might produce.
The possibility of a global financial crisis may significantly impact our business and financial condition for the
foreseeable future.
The credit crisis and related turmoil in the global financial system may adversely impact our business and
financial condition, and we may face challenges if conditions in the financial markets remain challenging. Our
ability to access the capital markets may be restricted at a time when we would prefer or be required to raise
financing. Such constraints could have a material negative impact on our flexibility to react to changing
economic and business conditions. The economic situation could also have a material negative impact on
the contractors upon whom we are dependent for drilling our wells, causing them to fail to meet their
obligations to us. Additionally, market conditions could have a material negative impact on any crude oil
hedging arrangements we may employ in the future if our counterparties are unable to perform their
obligations or seek bankruptcy protection.
Risks Relating to Richfield’s Business and the Oil and Gas Industry
The following risk factors all apply in the event the merger is not consummated and Richfield is required to
continue as a standalone company. In addition, some of these risk factors would likely apply to the merged
entity, although in some cases somewhat mitigated by the additional resources and financing available to the
post-merger entity. Unless the context requires otherwise, references in this section of “Risk Factors” to the
“Company,” “we,” “our,” and “us,” refer to Richfield Oil & Gas Company, and its subsidiaries.
Our independent auditors question our ability to continue as a going concern.
Our independent registered public accounting firm’s report on our financial statements for the years ended
December 31, 2013 and 2012 states that there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going
concern due to substantial losses from operations, negative working capital, negative cash flow, and the lack
of sufficient capital, as of the date the report was issued, to support our planned capital expenditures to
continue our drilling programs.
We can provide no assurance that we will be able to obtain sufficient additional financing that we need to
develop our properties and alleviate doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. If we are able to
obtain sufficient additional financing proceeds, we cannot be certain that this additional financing will be
available on acceptable terms, if at all. To the extent we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our
stockholders may experience significant dilution. Any debt financing, if available, may involve restrictive
covenants that impact our ability to conduct business. Inclusion of a “going concern qualification” in the
report of our independent auditors or any future report may have a negative impact on our ability to obtain
financing and may adversely impact our stock price.
30
Table of Contents
We have a limited operating history, and we expect that operating losses will continue for the foreseeable
future.
Our losses from continuing operations were $6,799,584 in 2013 and $7,993,196 in 2012. No assurance can be
given that we will achieve profitability or positive cash flows from our operations in the future. Our current
cash balance, together with cash anticipated to be provided by operations, will not be sufficient to satisfy our
anticipated cash requirements for normal operations and capital expenditures for the foreseeable future.
There can be no assurance that our business operations will prove to be successful in the long-term. Our
future operating results will depend on many factors, including:
·our ability to raise adequate working capital;
·success of our development and exploration;
·demand for and prices of oil and natural gas;
·our ability to obtain required regulatory approvals;
·the level of our competition;
·our ability to attract and maintain key management and employees; and
our ability to efficiently explore, develop and produce sufficient quantities of marketable oil or natural gas in a highly
 ·
competitive and speculative environment while maintaining quality and controlling costs.
We must successfully manage the factors stated above, many of which are beyond our control, as well as
continue to develop ways to enhance our production efforts to successfully execute our business plan and
achieve profitable operations in the future. If our properties do not attain sufficient revenues or do not achieve
profitable operations, our business may fail.
We require significant additional capital to continue operating as a going concern, which we may not obtain.
We currently have a substantial working capital deficit and require significant additional capital in the near
term to continue operations. We must secure additional funding to pay our current liabilities, continue as a
going concern and execute our business plan, which requires us to make large capital expenditures for the
exploration and development of our oil and natural gas properties. We will require significant additional
funding during the next twelve months to fund development costs, corporate overhead, payment of debt and
payment of all other of our contractual obligations. Since our inception, we have financed our cash flow
requirements through the issuance of common and preferred stock, short and long-term borrowings and
selling working interests in our oil and natural gas properties for cash and services. Our cash and cash
equivalents will continue for the foreseeable future to be depleted by our ongoing development efforts as well
as our general and administrative expenses. Until we are in a position to generate significant revenues, we will
continue to depend on cash provided by equity financings and debt financings or credit facilities, and sales
of working interests in our properties, in order to continue operating as a going concern. Furthermore, in the
event that our plans change or our assumptions change or prove inaccurate, we could be required to seek
additional financing in greater amounts than is currently anticipated.
There can be no assurance that financing will be available in amounts or terms that are acceptable to us, if at
all. If sufficient capital resources are not available, we might be forced to cease or significantly curtail drilling
and other activities, including our plans to acquire additional acreage positions and development activities, or
we might be forced to sell assets on an untimely or unfavorable basis.
Economic conditions continue to be weak and global financial markets continue to experience significant
volatility and liquidity challenges. These conditions may make it more difficult for us to obtain financing. Even
if we are successful in obtaining financing on acceptable terms, issuing additional equity securities to satisfy
our financial requirements could cause substantial dilution to our existing stockholders and may result in a
change of control. Raising additional debt financing could lead to:
·a substantial portion of operating cash flow being dedicated to the payment of principal and interest;
·increased vulnerability to competitive pressures and economic downturns; and
·restrictions on our operations.
31
Table of Contents
If we do not complete the merger with Stratex, we will have the obligation to repay the amounts due under the
loan agreement.
We are obligated to repay the amounts advanced to us under the loan agreement on the earlier to occur of
January 30, 2015 or ten days after the effective time of the merger. Our obligations under the loan agreement
are secured by a security interest in all of our assets. If the merger is not completed and we need to repay the
amounts due under the loan agreement, we will need to obtain capital from other sources for that repayment
because we will not otherwise have the funds needed for that repayment. There is no assurance that such
capital would be available to us for such purpose. In that event, Stratex would have the right to exercise its
security interest in our assets and we could be forced into bankruptcy or liquidation.
Competition in the oil and gas industry is intense, and many of our competitors have greater financial,
technological and other resources than we do, which may adversely affect our ability to compete.
Competition relating to all aspects of the oil and gas industry is intense. We will actively compete for capital,
skilled personnel, access to rigs and other equipment, access to processing facilities and pipeline and
refining capacity and in all other aspects of our operations with a substantial number of other organizations,
many of which will have greater technical and financial resources. Our competitors who possess greater
technical and financial resources than we do may be able to pay more for productive oil and gas properties
and exploratory prospects and to evaluate, bid for and purchase a greater number of properties and
prospects than our financial or personnel resources permit.
We may be unable to acquire or develop additional reserves, in which case our results of operations and
financial condition would be adversely affected.
In general, production from oil and gas properties declines over time as reserves are depleted, with the rate of
decline depending on reservoir characteristics. If we are not successful in our exploration and development
activities or in acquiring additional properties containing proved reserves, our proved reserves will decline as
reserves are produced. Our future oil and gas production is highly dependent upon our ability to
economically find, develop or acquire reserves in commercial quantities.
To the extent cash flow from operations is reduced, either due to a decrease in prevailing prices for oil and
gas or an increase in exploration and development costs, and external sources of capital become limited or
unavailable, our ability to make the necessary capital investment to maintain or expand our asset base of oil
and gas reserves would be impaired. Even with sufficient available capital, our future exploration and
development activities may not result in additional proved reserves, and we might not be able to drill
productive wells at acceptable costs.
Our oil and gas reserves, production, and cash flows to be derived therefrom are highly dependent on our
ability to successfully acquire or discover new reserves. Without the continual addition of new reserves, any
existing reserves we may have at any particular time and the production therefrom will decline over time as
such existing reserves are exploited. A future increase in our reserves will depend not only on our ability to
develop any properties we may have from time to time, but also on our ability to select and acquire suitable
producing properties or projects. There can be no assurance that our future exploration and development
efforts will result in the discovery and development of additional commercial accumulations of oil and gas.
Competition may also be presented by alternate fuel sources.
Our projects may be adversely affected by risks outside of our control including labor unrest, civil disorder,
war, subversive activities or sabotage, fires, floods, explosions or other catastrophes, epidemics or
quarantine restrictions.
Our inability to control the inherent risks of acquiring businesses and assets could adversely affect our
operations.
Acquisitions are a key element of our business strategy. We cannot assure you that we will be able to identify
and acquire acceptable properties or businesses on terms favorable to us in the future. We may be required
to incur substantial indebtedness to finance future acquisitions. Such additional debt service requirements
may impose a significant burden on our results of operations and financial condition. We cannot assure you
that we will be able to successfully consolidate the operations and assets we acquire with our existing
business. The integration of acquired operations and assets may require substantial management effort, time
and resources and may divert management’s focus from other strategic opportunities and operational
matters. Acquisitions may not perform as expected when the transaction was consummated and may be
dilutive to our overall operating results. In addition, our management may not be able to effectively manage
our increased size or operate a new line of business.
32
Table of Contents
Substantially all of our producing properties and operations are located in the west and mid-west of the
United States, making us vulnerable to risks associated with operating in two major geographic areas.
All of our proved reserves and all of our expected oil and gas production are located in Kansas, Utah and
Wyoming. As a result, we may be disproportionately exposed to the impact of delays or interruptions of
production from these wells caused by transportation capacity constraints, curtailment of production,
availability of equipment, facilities, personnel or services, significant governmental regulation, natural
disasters, adverse weather conditions, plant closures for scheduled maintenance or interruption of
transportation of oil or gas produced from the wells in these areas. In addition, the effect of fluctuations on
supply and demand may become more pronounced within specific geographic oil and gas producing areas
which may cause these conditions to occur with greater frequency or magnify the effect of these conditions
on us. Due to the concentrated nature of our portfolio of properties, a number of these properties could
experience many of the same conditions at the same time, resulting in a relatively greater impact on our
results of operations than they might have on other companies that have a more diversified portfolio of
properties. Such delays or interruptions could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and
results of operations.
If ultimate production associated with these properties is less than our estimated reserves, or changes in
pricing, cost or recovery assumptions in the area results in a downward revision of any estimated reserves in
these properties, our business, financial condition or results of operations could be adversely affected.
Seasonal weather conditions and other factors could adversely affect our ability to conduct drilling activities.
The level of activity in the oil and gas industry in the west and mid-west of the U.S. is influenced by seasonal
weather patterns. In some climates, drilling and oil and gas activities cannot be conducted as effectively
during the winter months. In other climates, a mild winter or wet spring may result in limited access and, as a
result, reduced operations or a cessation of operations. Municipalities and state transportation departments
enforce road bans that restrict the movement of drilling rigs and other heavy equipment during periods of wet
weather, thereby reducing activity levels. Seasonal factors and unexpected weather patterns may lead to
declines in exploration and production activity and corresponding declines in the demand for our oil and gas.
Severe weather conditions limit and may temporarily halt the ability to operate during such conditions. These
constraints and the resulting shortages or high costs could delay or temporarily halt our oil and gas
operations and materially increase our operating and capital costs, which could have a material adverse
effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Federal and state legislative and regulatory initiatives relating to hydraulic fracturing could result in increased
costs and additional operating restrictions or delays.
We expect to develop certain of our properties in Kansas and Wyoming utilizing horizontal drilling and
hydraulic fracturing. The U.S. Congress is considering legislation that would amend the federal Safe Drinking
Water Act by repealing an exemption for the underground injection of hydraulic fracturing fluids near drinking
water sources. Hydraulic fracturing is an important and commonly used process for the completion of crude
oil and natural gas wells in shale formations, and involves the pressurized injection of water, sand and
chemicals into rock formations to stimulate production. Sponsors of the legislation have asserted that
chemicals used in the fracturing process could adversely affect drinking water supplies. If enacted, the
legislation could result in additional regulatory burdens such as permitting, construction, financial assurance,
monitoring, recordkeeping, and plugging and abandonment requirements. The legislation also proposes
requiring the disclosure of chemical constituents used in the fracturing process to state or federal regulatory
authorities, who would then make such information publicly available. The availability of this information
could make it easier for third parties opposing the hydraulic fracturing process to initiate legal proceedings
based on allegations that specific chemicals used in the fracturing process could adversely affect
groundwater. In addition, various state and local governments are considering increased regulatory oversight
of hydraulic fracturing through additional permit requirements, operational restrictions, and temporary or
permanent bans on hydraulic fracturing in certain environmentally sensitive areas such as watersheds. The
adoption of any federal or state legislation or implementation of regulations imposing reporting obligations
on, or otherwise limiting, the hydraulic fracturing process could lead to operational delays or increased
operating costs and could result in additional regulatory burdens that could make it more difficult to perform
hydraulic fracturing and increase our costs of compliance and doing business.
33
Table of Contents
Acreage must be drilled before lease expiration, generally within two to five years, in order to hold the acreage
by production. In the highly competitive market for acreage, failure to drill sufficient wells in order to hold
acreage will result in a substantial lease renewal cost or if renewal is not feasible, loss of our lease and
prospective drilling opportunities.
Our mineral leases are subject to expiration if we do not commence development operations that result in
production within a proscribed term. Each of the leases relating to undeveloped acreage summarized below
will expire at the end of its term unless we renew the lease, initiate development operations or establish
production from the acreage. While we expect to establish production from most of our properties or exercise
our option to extend prior to expiration of the applicable lease term, there can be no guarantee we can do so.
If we are unable to establish production on our leased acreage, the cost to renew leases may increase
significantly and we may not be able to renew such leases on commercially reasonable terms or at all. As of
December 31, 2013 the leases set to expire during the years ending December 31, 2014, 2015 and 2016 are set
forth below:
Acreage Expirations
Years Ending December 31,  Gross
  5,820
2014
2015
  2,903
  80
2016
    Total
  8,803
Net
  5,192
  2,354
  72
  7,618
We depend on drilling partners for the successful development and exploitation of certain oil and gas
properties in which we hold an interest.
We do not operate all oil and gas properties in which we hold an interest. As a result, we have limited
influence and control over the operation of properties we do not operate. The success and timing of drilling,
development and exploitation activities on properties operated by others depend on a number of factors that
are beyond our control, including the operator’s expertise and financial resources, approval of other
participants for drilling wells and utilization of appropriate technology. If our drilling partners are unable or
unwilling to perform, our financial condition and results of operation could be adversely affected.
The loss of our directors or key management and technical personnel or our inability to attract and retain
experienced technical personnel could adversely affect our ability to operate our business.
We depend, to a large extent, on the efforts and continued employment of our senior management team. At
this time, the loss of certain key individuals could adversely affect our business operations. Successful
exploration, development and commercialization of oil and gas interests rely on a number of factors,
including the technical skill of the personnel involved. Our success will depend, in part, on the performance of
our key managers and consultants. Failure to attract and retain managers, consultants and other key
personnel with the necessary skills and experience could have a materially adverse effect on our growth and
profitability.
We may not be insured against all of the operating hazards to which our business is exposed.
The ownership and operation of oil and gas wells, pipelines and facilities involve a number of operating and
natural hazards which may result in blowouts, environmental damage and other unexpected or dangerous
conditions resulting in damage to our properties and potential liability to third parties for property damage,
environmental damage or personal injury. We intend to employ prudent risk-management practices and
maintain suitable liability insurance, where available. We may become liable for damages arising from such
events against which we cannot insure or against which we may elect not to insure because of high premium
costs or other reasons. Costs incurred to repair such damage or pay such liabilities could have a material
adverse effect on us, our operations and financial condition.
34
Table of Contents
Our properties may be subject to title claims in the future.
Title to oil and gas interests is often not capable of conclusive determination without incurring substantial
expense. While it is our practice to make appropriate inquiries into the title of properties and other
development rights we acquire, title defects may exist. In addition, we may be unable to obtain adequate
insurance for title defects, on a commercially reasonable basis or at all. If title defects do exist, it is possible
that we may lose all or a portion of our right, title and interests in and to the properties to which the title
defects relate. If our property rights are reduced, our ability to conduct our exploration, development and
production activities may be impaired.
We may be exposed to third-party credit risk and defaults by third parties could adversely affect us.
We are or may be exposed to third-party credit risk through our contractual arrangements with our current or
future customers, joint venture partners, marketers of our petroleum production and other parties. In the
event such entities fail to meet their contractual obligations to us, such failures could have a material adverse
effect on us and our funds from operations.
A substantial or extended decline in oil and natural gas prices may adversely affect our business, financial
condition or results of operations and our ability to meet our capital expenditure obligations and financial
commitments.
The prices we receive for our oil and natural gas production heavily influence our revenue, profitability,
access to capital and future rate of growth. Oil and natural gas are commodities and, therefore, their prices are
subject to wide fluctuations in response to relatively minor changes in supply and demand. Historically, the
markets for oil and natural gas have been volatile. These markets will likely continue to be volatile in the
future. The prices we receive for our production, and the levels of our production, depend on numerous
factors beyond our control. These factors include, but are not limited to, the following:
·changes in regional, national and/or global supply and demand for oil and natural gas;
·the actions of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries;
·the price and quantity of imports of foreign oil and natural gas;
political and economic conditions, including embargoes, in crude oil-producing countries or affecting other crude oil-
 ·
producing activity;
·the level of regional, national and/or global oil and natural gas exploration and production activity;
·the level of regional, national and/or global oil and natural gas inventories;
·weather conditions;
·technological advances affecting energy consumption;
·domestic and foreign governmental regulations and tax laws;
·proximity and capacity of oil and natural gas pipelines and other transportation facilities;
·the price and availability of competitors’ supplies of oil and natural gas in captive market areas; and
·the price and availability of alternative fuels.
Lower oil and natural gas prices may not only decrease our revenues on a per unit basis but also may reduce
the amount of oil and natural gas that we can produce economically. Our reserve base is heavily weighted
towards oil producing properties which are utilizing or will utilize secondary recovery methods characterized
by higher operating costs than many other types of fields, such as oil fields in their primary recovery stage or
natural gas fields. The higher operating costs associated with many of our oil fields will make our profitability
more sensitive to oil price declines. Lower prices will also negatively impact the value and quantity of our
proved and unproved reserves. A substantial or extended decline in oil or natural gas prices may materially
and adversely affect our future business, financial condition, results of operations, liquidity or ability to
finance planned capital expenditures.
35
Table of Contents
Drilling for and producing oil and natural gas are high-risk activities with many uncertainties that could
adversely affect our business, financial condition or results of operations.
Oil operations involve many risks, many of which are beyond our control. Our long-term commercial success
depends on our ability to find, acquire, develop and commercially produce oil and natural gas reserves.
Without the continual addition of new reserves, our existing reserves and the production therefrom will
decline over time as such reserves are exploited. A future increase in our reserves will depend not only on
our ability to explore and develop our existing properties, but also on our ability to select and acquire suitable
producing properties or projects. We can give no assurance that we will continue to locate satisfactory
properties for acquisition or participation. Moreover, if we identify suitable properties for acquisition or
participation, we may determine that current markets, terms of acquisition and participation or pricing
conditions make such acquisitions or participations uneconomic. We have no assurance that we will discover
or acquire further commercial quantities of oil and natural gas.
Future oil and natural gas exploration may involve unprofitable efforts, not only from dry wells, but from wells
that are productive but do not produce sufficient net revenues to return a profit after drilling, operating and
other costs. Completion of a well does not assure a profit on the investment or recovery of drilling,
completion and operating costs. In addition, drilling hazards or environmental damage could greatly increase
the cost of operations, and various field operating conditions may adversely affect the production from
successful wells. These conditions include:
·delays imposed by or resulting from compliance with regulatory requirements;
·pressure or irregularities in geological formations;
·shortages of or delays in obtaining equipment and qualified personnel;
·equipment failures or accidents;
·adverse weather conditions;
·reductions in oil and natural gas prices;
·oil and natural gas property title problems; and
·market limitations for oil and natural gas.
While diligent well supervision and effective maintenance operations can contribute to maximizing production
rates over time, production delays and declines from normal field operating conditions cannot be eliminated
and can be expected to adversely affect revenue and cash flow levels to varying degrees.
Our oil exploration, development and production activities are subject to all the risks and hazards typically
associated with such activities, including hazards such as fire, explosion, blowouts, cratering, sour natural
gas releases and spills. Each of these hazards could result in personal injury or death, or substantial damage
to oil and natural gas wells, production facilities, other property and the environment. In accordance with
industry practice, we are not fully insured against all of these risks, nor are all such risks insurable. Although
we maintain liability insurance in an amount that is considered consistent with industry practice, the nature of
these risks is such that liabilities could exceed policy limits, in which event we could incur significant costs
that could have a material adverse effect upon our financial condition. Our oil and natural gas production
activities are also subject to all the risks typically associated with such activities, including encountering
unexpected formations or pressures, premature decline of reservoirs and the invasion of water into
producing formations. Losses resulting from the occurrence of any of these risks could have a material
adverse effect on our future results of operations, liquidity and financial condition.
36
Table of Contents
Upon a commercial discovery, market conditions or operational impediments may hinder our access to oil
and natural gas markets or delay its production.
Upon a commercial discovery, the marketability of our production depends in part upon the availability,
proximity and capacity of pipelines, trucks, railways, storage, gathering systems and processing facilities.
This dependence is heightened where this infrastructure is less developed. Therefore, if drilling results are
positive in certain areas, we would need to build production facilities to handle the potential volume of oil and
natural gas produced. We might be required to shut in wells, at least temporarily, due to the inadequacy or
unavailability of transportation facilities. If that were to occur, we would be unable to realize revenue from
those wells until we could make arrangements to deliver production to market.
Our ability to produce and market oil and natural gas is affected and also may be harmed by:
·the lack of transportation, storage, pipeline transmission facilities or carrying capacity;
·government regulation of oil and natural gas production;
·government transportation, tax and energy policies;
·changes in supply and demand; and
·general economic conditions.
Shortages of rigs, equipment, supplies and personnel could delay or otherwise adversely affect our cost of
operations or our ability to operate according to our business plan.
Oil and natural gas exploration and development activities are dependent on the availability of drilling and
related equipment and qualified personnel in the particular areas where such activities will be conducted. Due
to drilling activity increases, a general shortage of drilling rigs, equipment, supplies and personnel has
developed. As a result, the costs and delivery times to oil and natural gas operators have sharply increased
and could do so again. The demand for and wage rates of qualified drilling rig crews generally rise in
response to the increasing number of active rigs in service and could increase sharply in the event of a
shortage. Shortages of drilling rigs, equipment, supplies or personnel could delay or adversely affect our
development operations, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and
results of operations.
Reserve estimates are based on many assumptions that may turn out to be inaccurate. Any significant
inaccuracies in these reserve estimates or underlying assumptions may materially affect the quantities and
present value of our reserves.
The information concerning reserves and associated cash flow represents estimates only. The process of
estimating oil and natural gas reserves is complex. It requires interpretations of available geological,
geophysical, production and engineering data and many assumptions, including assumptions relating to
economic factors and other factors beyond our control. The extent, quality and reliability of this technical data
can vary. Any significant inaccuracies in these interpretations or assumptions could materially affect the
estimated quantities and present value of reserves. In general, estimates of economically recoverable oil
reserves and the future net cash flows therefrom are based upon a number of variable factors and
assumptions, including the following, all of which may vary from actual results:
·historical production from the properties,
·production rates,
·ultimate reserve recovery,
·timing and amount of capital expenditures,
·marketability of oil and natural gas,
·royalty rates, and
·the assumed effects of regulation by governmental agencies and future operating costs.
37
Table of Contents
For those reasons, estimates of the economically recoverable oil and natural gas reserves attributable to any
particular group of properties, classification of such reserves based on risk of recovery and estimates of
future net revenues expected therefrom prepared by different engineers, or by the same engineers at different
times, may vary. Our actual production, revenues, taxes and development and operating expenditures with
respect to our reserves will vary from estimates thereof and such variations could be material. Further,
evaluations are based, in part, on the assumed success of the exploitation activities intended to be
undertaken in future years. The reserves and estimated cash flows to be derived therefrom contained in such
evaluations will be reduced to the extent that such exploitation activities do not achieve the level of success
assumed in the evaluation.
Estimates of proved reserves that may be developed and produced in the future are often based upon
volumetric calculations and upon analogy to similar types of reserves rather than actual production history.
Estimates based on these methods are generally less reliable than those based on actual production history.
Subsequent evaluation of the same reserves based upon production history and production practices will
result in variations in the estimated reserves and such variations could be material. Many of our producing
wells have a limited production history and thus there is less historical production on which to base the
reserves estimates. In addition, a significant portion of our reserves may be attributable to a limited number of
wells and, therefore, a variation in production results or reservoir characteristics in respect to such wells may
have a significant impact upon our reserves.
In accordance with applicable disclosure regulations of the SEC, our independent petroleum engineers,
Pinnacle Energy Services L.L.C. , located in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma (“Pinnacle”), has used forecast price
and cost estimates in calculating reserve quantities. Actual future net cash flows will be affected by other
factors such as actual production levels and timing, actual prices we receive for oil and natural gas, actual
cost of development and production expenditures, supply and demand for oil and natural gas, curtailments
or increases in consumption by oil and natural gas purchasers, changes in governmental regulation or
taxation and the impact of inflation on costs. Actual production and cash flows derived therefrom will vary
from the estimates contained in the 2013 Pinnacle Reserve Report, and such variations could be material. The
2013 Pinnacle Reserve Report is based in part on the assumed success of activities we intend to undertake in
future years. The reserves and estimated cash flows to be derived therefrom contained in the 2013 Pinnacle
Reserve Report will be reduced to the extent that such activities do not achieve the level of success assumed
in the 2013 Pinnacle Reserve Report.
The 2013 Pinnacle Reserve Report sets forth estimates of our reserves as of December 31, 2013 and has not
been updated and thus does not reflect changes in our resources since that date.
If our costs of production continue to exceed the estimated costs contained in the 2013 Pinnacle Reserve
Report, our affected properties’ reserves will be removed.
We have experienced high costs of production in the initial operation of our wells. If this high cost continues
above the estimated costs contained in the 2013 Pinnacle Reserve Report, extraction of hydrocarbons from
our affected properties may not be economically viable, in which case the affected reserves would be
removed from our reserve report.
Prospects that we decide to drill may not yield oil or natural gas in commercially viable quantities.
Our prospects are in various stages of evaluation. There is no way to predict with certainty in advance of
drilling and testing whether any particular prospect will yield oil or natural gas in sufficient quantities to
recover drilling or completion costs or to be economically viable. The use of seismic data and other
technologies, and the study of producing fields in the same area, will not enable us to know conclusively
before drilling whether oil or natural gas will be present or, if present, whether oil or natural gas will be present
in commercially viable quantities. Moreover, the analogies we draw from available data from other wells, more
fully explored prospects or producing fields may not be applicable to our drilling prospects.
We are subject to complex laws and regulations, including environmental regulations, that can have a
material adverse effect on the cost, manner and feasibility of doing business.
Oil and natural gas operations (exploration, production, pricing, marketing and transportation) are subject to
extensive controls and regulations imposed by various levels of government and may be amended from time
to time. Our operations may require licenses from various governmental authorities. There can be no
assurance that we will be able to obtain all necessary licenses and permits that may be required to carry out
exploration and development at our projects.
38
Table of Contents
The oil and gas industry is subject to regulation, enforcement and intervention by governments in such
matters as:
·awarding and licensing of exploration and production interests;
imposition of specific drilling obligations, and requirements (including drilling bonds and permits for drilling, water
·
discharge and disposal, air quality and noise levels);
·imposition of pollution controls and environmental protection;
·regulation of health and safety effects and offshore activity and operations;
·control over the development, decommissioning and abandonment of fields (including restrictions on production);
·imposition of reporting obligations;
·regulation of prices, taxes, royalties and exploration for oil and natural gas;
·cancellation of contract rights; and
·imposition of rights-of-way and easements.
Under these laws, we could be subject to claims for personal injury or property damages, including natural
resource damages, which may result from the impacts of our operations. Failure to comply with these laws
also may result in the suspension or termination of our operations and subject us to administrative, civil and
criminal penalties. Additionally, such regulation may be changed from time to time in response to economic
or political conditions. The implementation of new legislation or regulations or the modification of existing
legislation or regulations affecting the oil and gas industry could reduce demand for crude oil, increase costs
and may have a material adverse impact on us. Export sales are subject to the authorization of government
agencies and the corresponding governmental policies of foreign countries.
Our operations expose us to substantial costs and liabilities with respect to environmental matters.
The oil and gas industry is subject to environmental regulations pursuant to local, state and federal
legislation. These laws and regulations may require the acquisition of a permit before drilling commences,
restrict the types, quantities and concentration of substances that can be released into the environment in
connection with our drilling and production activities, limit or prohibit drilling activities within certain lands
lying within wilderness and other protected areas, and impose substantial liabilities for pollution that may
result from our operations. Under existing environmental laws and regulations, we could be held strictly liable
for the removal or remediation of previously released materials or property contamination regardless of
whether the release resulted from our operations, or our operations were in compliance with all applicable
laws at the time they were performed. Should we be unable to fully fund the cost of remedying an
environmental liability, we might be required to suspend operations or enter into interim compliance
measures pending completion of the required remedy. Environmental legislation is evolving in a manner
expected to result in stricter standards and enforcement, larger fines and liability and potentially increased
capital expenditures and operating costs. The discharge of oil, natural gas or other pollutants into the air, soil
or water may give rise to liabilities to governments and third parties and may require us to incur costs to
remedy such discharge. Although we believe that we are in material compliance with current applicable
environmental regulations, we can give no assurance that environmental laws will not result in a curtailment
of production or a material increase in the costs of production, development or exploration activities or
otherwise adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations or prospects.
39
Table of Contents
Our current development plans include drilling several horizontal wells and utilizing hydraulic fracturing,
which is subject to a range of applicable federal, state and local laws. Hydraulic fracturing operations are
designed and operated to minimize the risk, if any, of subsurface migration of hydraulic fracturing fluids and
spillage or mishandling of hydraulic fracturing fluids. However, a proven case of subsurface migration of
hydraulic fracturing fluids or a case of spillage or mishandling of hydraulic fracturing fluids during these
activities could potentially subject us to civil and/or criminal liability and the possibility of substantial costs,
including environmental remediation, depending on the circumstances of the underground migration,
spillage, or mishandling, the nature and scope of the underground migration, spillage, or mishandling, and
the applicable laws and regulations. In addition, the practice of hydraulically fracturing formations to stimulate
the production of natural gas and oil has come under increased scrutiny from federal and state governmental
authorities. New regulations concerning hydraulic fracturing could be passed that would materially adversely
affect our affect our ability to economically explore and develop our oil and natural gas properties.
Possible regulation related to climate change and global warming could have a negative impact on our
business.
Federal and state governments are considering enacting new legislation and promulgating new regulations
governing or restricting the emission of greenhouse gases from certain stationary sources common in our
industry. The EPA has made findings and issued proposed regulations that could lead to the imposition of
restrictions on greenhouse gas emissions from certain stationary sources and that could require us to
establish and report an inventory of greenhouse gas emissions. In addition, the U.S. Congress is in the
process of considering various bills that would establish an economy-wide cap-and-trade program to reduce
U.S. emissions of greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide and methane. Such a program, if enacted,
could require phased reductions in greenhouse gas emissions over a number of years and could result in the
issuance of a declining number of tradable allowances to sources that emit greenhouse gases into the
atmosphere. Legislation and regulatory proposals for restricting greenhouse gas emissions or otherwise
addressing climate change could require us to incur additional operating costs and could adversely affect
demand for our oil and natural gas. Potential increases in operating costs could include new or increased
costs to obtain permits, operate and maintain equipment and facilities, install new emission controls on
equipment and facilities, acquire allowances to authorize greenhouse gas emissions, pay taxes related to
greenhouse gas emissions and administer and manage a greenhouse gas emissions program. Moreover,
incentives to conserve energy or use alternative energy sources could reduce demand for oil and natural
gas.
In addition to the usual delays in payments by purchasers of oil and natural gas to us or to the operators, and
the delays by operators in remitting payment to us, payments between these parties may be delayed due to
restrictions imposed by lenders, accounting delays, delays in the sale or delivery of products, delays in the
connection of wells to a gathering system, adjustment for prior periods, or recovery by the operator of
expenses incurred in the operation of the properties. Any of these delays could reduce the amount of cash
flow available for our business in a given period and expose us to additional third-party credit risks.
Alternatives to and changing demand for petroleum products.
Fuel conservation measures, alternative fuel requirements, increasing consumer demand for alternatives to
oil and natural gas and technological advances in fuel economy and energy generation devices could reduce
the demand for crude oil and other liquid hydrocarbons. We cannot predict the impact of changing demand
for oil and natural gas products, and any major changes may have a material adverse effect on our business,
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Proposals to increase U.S. federal income taxation of independent producers may negatively affect our
results.
Recently, U.S. federal budget proposals would potentially increase and accelerate the payment of federal
income taxes of independent producers of oil and natural gas. Proposals that would significantly affect us
would repeal the expensing of intangible drilling costs, repeal the percentage depletion allowance and
increase the amortization period of geological and geophysical expenses. These changes, if enacted, will
make it more costly to explore for and develop oil and natural gas resources. We are unable to predict
whether any changes, or other proposals to such laws, ultimately will be enacted. Any such changes could
negatively impact our cash flows and future operating results.
40
Table of Contents
Risks Relating to Stratex’s Common Stock
Unless the context requires otherwise, references in this section of “Risk Factors” to the “Company,” “we,”
“our,” and “us,” refer to Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc., and references to stock or shares are to Stratex’s
common stock.
The value and transferability of shares may be adversely impacted by the limited trading market for our stock
on the OTCQB, which is a quotation system, not an issuer listing service, market or exchange. Because
buying and selling stock on the OTCQB is not as efficient as buying and selling stock through an exchange, it
may be difficult for you to sell your shares or you may not be able to sell your shares for an optimum trading
price.
The OTCQB is a regulated quotation service that displays real-time quotes, last sale prices and volume
limitations in over-the-counter securities. When fewer shares of a security are being traded on the OTCQB,
volatility of prices may increase and price movement may outpace the ability to deliver accurate quote
information. Lower trading volumes in a security may result in a lower likelihood of an individual’s orders
being executed, and current prices may differ significantly from the price quoted by the OTCQB at the time of
order entry. The dealer’s spread (the difference between the bid and ask prices) may be large and may result
in substantial losses to the seller of securities on the OTCQB if the common stock or other security must be
sold immediately.
The trading price of our common stock historically has been volatile and may not reflect its value.
The trading price of our common stock has, from time to time, fluctuated widely and in the future may be
subject to similar fluctuations. The trading price may be affected by a number of factors including the risk
factors set forth herein, as well as our operating results, financial condition, general economic conditions,
market demand for our common stock, and various other events or factors both in and out of our control. In
recent years, broad stock market indices, in general, and smaller capitalization companies, in particular, have
experienced substantial price fluctuations. In a volatile market, we may experience wide fluctuations in the
market price of our common stock. These fluctuations may have a negative effect on the market price of our
common stock.
If securities analysts do not initiate coverage, discontinue any such coverage of our common stock, or
publish unfavorable research or reports about our business, this may have a negative impact on the market
price of our common stock.
The trading market for our common stock may be affected by, among other things, the research and reports
that securities analysts publish about our business and our company. We do not have any control over these
analysts. There is no guarantee that securities analysts will cover our common stock. If securities analysts do
not cover our common stock, the lack of research coverage may adversely affect its market price. If we are
covered by securities analysts, and our stock is the subject of an unfavorable report, our stock price and
trading volume would likely decline. If one or more of these analysts ceases to cover our company or fails to
publish regular reports on us, we could lose visibility in the financial markets, which could cause our stock
price or trading volume to decline.
Certain of our stockholders could own in excess of 10% of our issued and outstanding shares of common
stock; this ownership interest may preclude other stockholders from influencing significant corporate
decisions.
Following the merger, certain of our stockholders could own in excess of 10% of our issued and outstanding
shares of common stock; as a result, these stockholders may be able to exercise a controlling influence over
matters requiring stockholder approval, including the election of directors and approval of significant
corporate transactions, and may have significant control over our management and policies. These
stockholders’ interests may at times be different from yours. For example, they may support proposals and
actions which you disagree with or which are not in your interests. The concentration of ownership could
delay or prevent a change in control of our company or otherwise discourage a potential acquirer from
attempting to obtain control of our company, which in turn could reduce the price of our common stock. In
addition, these stockholders could use their voting influence to maintain our existing management and
directors in office, delay or prevent changes of control of our company, or support or reject other
management and board of director proposals that are subject to stockholder approval, such as amendments
to our employee stock plans and approvals of significant financing transactions. For detailed information
regarding share ownership see “SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND
MANAGEMENT— Stratex” beginning on page 84.
41
Table of Contents
Our directors and executive officers control a significant portion of our stock and, if they choose to vote
together, could have sufficient voting power to control the vote on substantially all corporate matters.
After giving effect to the merger, our directors and executive officers will beneficially own a significant
percentage of our outstanding common stock. Our directors and executive officers, in their capacities as
stockholders, may have significant influence over our policies and affairs, including the election of future
directors. Should they act as a group, they would have the power to elect all of our directors and to control
the vote on substantially all other corporate matters without the approval of other stockholders. Furthermore,
such concentration of voting power could enable those stockholders to delay or prevent another party from
taking control of our company even where such change of control transaction might be desirable to other
stockholders.
We may compete for the time and efforts of our officers and directors.
Certain of the persons who will be officers and/or directors of Stratex after the merger are also directors
and/or employees of other companies. Except for Messrs. Funk and Gaines none of our directors anticipates
devoting the majority of their time to our matters. Except for Messrs. Gaines, Funk amd Cohen, we currently
have no consulting or employment agreements with any of our directors or officers imposing any specific
condition regarding their continued employment by us.
We have a large number of restricted shares outstanding, a portion of which may be sold under Rule 144
which may reduce the market price of our shares.
A significant portion of the shares of our common stock that will be issued and outstanding after giving effect
to the merger (assuming no exercises of options or warrants of either Stratex or Richfield subsequent to the
date of this proxy statement/prospectus),will be deemed “restricted securities,” within the meaning of Rule
144 of the Securities Act (“Rule 144”). Absent registration under the Securities Act, the sale of such shares is
subject to Rule 144, as promulgated under the Securities Act.
Rule 144 under the Securities Act, which permits the resale, subject to various terms and conditions, of
limited amounts of restricted securities after they have been held for a minimum holding period will not
immediately apply to our common stock because we were at one time designated as a “shell company.”
Pursuant to Rule 144(i), securities issued by a current or former “shell company” that otherwise meet the
holding period and other requirements of Rule 144 nevertheless cannot be sold in reliance on Rule 144 until
one year after the date on which the issuer filed current “Form 10 Information” (as defined in Rule 144(i)) with
the SEC reflecting that it ceased being a shell company, and provided that at the time of a proposed sale
pursuant to Rule 144, the issuer has satisfied certain reporting requirements under the Exchange Act. We
believe this requirement to file “Form 10 Information” has been satisfied by the filing by Stratex of a Current
Report on Form 8-K/A on February 27, 2013. Because, as a former “shell company,” the reporting
requirements of Rule 144(i) will apply regardless of holding period, the restrictive legends on certificates
cannot be removed except in connection with an actual sale that is subject to an effective registration
statement under, or an applicable exemption (including under Rule 144) from the registration requirements of,
the Securities Act.
The possibility that substantial amounts of our common stock may be sold under Rule 144 into the public
market may adversely affect prevailing market prices for the common stock and could impair our ability to
raise capital in the future through the sale of equity securities.
There are options to purchase shares of our common stock currently outstanding.
After giving effect to the merger, we will have options outstanding to purchase an aggregate of approximately
15,850,000 shares of our common stock to various persons. The exercise prices of these options will range
from $0.08 to $0.50, of which 14,350,000 have vested as of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus. If
issued, the shares underlying these options would increase the number of shares of our common stock
currently outstanding and will dilute the holdings and voting rights of our then-existing stockholders.
42
Table of Contents
There are warrants to purchase shares of our common stock issued which, if exercised, may obligate us to
issue a significant number of shares of our common stock at prices below the market price for our common
stock, which may cause significant dilution to our existing stockholders.
After giving effect to the merger, there are warrants issued and outstanding which, if exercised, would
obligate us to issue additional shares of our common stock to the holders of those warrants. The exercise
price of the warrants may be substantially lower than the quoted price for our common stock at the time of
exercise. To the extent that we do issue any shares of common stock upon the exercise of any of the
warrants, such issuance may cause significant dilution to our stockholders.
There are convertible promissory notes outstanding.
After giving effect to the merger, there are up to 60,007,367 shares of our common stock that may be acquired
upon the conversion of outstanding convertible promissory notes. The conversion price of the convertible
notes may be substantially lower than the quoted price for our common stock at the time of conversion. To
the extent that we do issue any shares of common stock upon the conversion of any of the convertible notes,
such issuance may cause significant dilution to our stockholders.
We have the ability to issue additional shares of our common stock without asking for stockholder approval,
which could cause your investment to be diluted.
Our Articles of Incorporation authorize our Board of Directors to issue up to 750,000,000 shares of common
stock and up to 400 shares of preferred stock. The power of our Board of Directors to issue shares of
common stock or warrants or options to purchase shares of common stock is generally not subject to
stockholder approval.
Accordingly, any time our Board of Directors determines that it is in the best interests of the corporation to
issue shares of its preferred stock common stock, your investment will be diluted.
We may issue preferred stock which may have greater rights than our common stock.
Our Articles of Incorporation authorize our Board to issue up to 400 shares of preferred stock. Currently there
are no shares of preferred stock that are issued and outstanding. We may issue shares of our preferred stock
in one or more series in the future and can set the terms of the preferred stock without seeking any further
approval from our common stockholders. Any preferred stock that we issue may rank ahead of our common
stock in terms of dividend priority or liquidation premiums and may have greater voting rights than our
common stock. In addition, such preferred stock may contain provisions allowing them to be converted into
shares of common stock, which could dilute the value of common stock to current stockholders and could
adversely affect the market price, if any, of our common stock.
Our compliance with changing laws and rules regarding corporate governance and public disclosure may
result in additional expenses to us which, in turn, may adversely affect our ability to continue our operations.
Keeping abreast of, and in compliance with, changing laws, regulations and standards relating to corporate
governance and public disclosure, including the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, new SEC regulations and, in
the event we are ever listed on a stock exchange, stock exchange rules, will require an increased amount of
management attention and external resources. Following the merger, we intend to continue to invest all
reasonably necessary resources to comply with evolving standards, which may result in increased general
and administrative expenses and a diversion of management time and attention from revenue-generating
activities to compliance activities. This could have an adverse impact on our ongoing operations.
Our common stock is a “penny stock,” and because “penny stock” rules will apply, you may find it difficult to
sell the shares of our common stock.
Our common stock is a “penny stock” as that term is defined under Rule 3a51-1 of the Exchange Act.
Generally, a “penny stock” is a common stock that is not listed on a securities exchange and trades for less
than $5.00 a share. Prices often are not available to buyers and sellers and the market may be very limited.
Penny stocks are among the riskiest equity investments. Broker-dealers who sell penny stocks must provide
purchasers of these stocks with a standardized risk-disclosure document prepared by the Securities and
Exchange Commission. The document provides information about penny stocks and the nature and level of
risks involved in investing in the penny stock market. A broker must also give a purchaser, orally or in writing,
bid and offer quotations and information regarding broker and salesperson compensation, make a written
determination that the penny stock is a suitable investment for the purchaser, and obtain the purchaser’s
written agreement to the purchase. Many brokers choose not to participate in penny stock transactions.
Because of the penny stock rules, there is less trading activity in penny stocks and you are likely to have
difficulty selling your shares.
43
Table of Contents
FINRA sales practice requirements may also limit a stockholder’s ability to buy and sell our stock.
In addition to the “penny stock” rules described above, the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (“FINRA”)
has adopted rules that require that in recommending an investment to a customer, a broker/dealer must have
reasonable grounds for believing that the investment is suitable for that customer. Prior to recommending
speculative low priced securities to their non-institutional customers, broker-dealers must make reasonable
efforts to obtain information about the customer’s financial status, tax status, investment objectives and other
information. Under interpretations of these rules, FINRA believes that there is a high probability that
speculative low priced securities will not be suitable for at least some customers. FINRA requirements make it
more difficult for broker-dealers to recommend that their customers buy our common stock, which may limit
your ability to buy and sell our stock and have an adverse effect on the market for our shares.
We do not intend to pay dividends for the foreseeable future.
We have never paid cash dividends on our common stock. We currently intend to retain future earnings, if
any, to support the development and expansion of our business and do not anticipate paying cash dividends
in the foreseeable future. Our payment of any future dividends will be at the discretion of our Board after
taking into account various factors, including but not limited to our financial condition, operating results,
cash needs, growth plans and the terms of any credit agreements that we may be a party to at the time.
Accordingly, investors must rely on sales of their common stock after price appreciation, which may never
occur, as the only way to realize their investment.
Investor relations activities, nominal “float” and supply and demand factors may affect the price of our stock.
We expect to utilize various techniques such as non-deal road shows and investor relations campaigns in
order to create investor awareness of us. These campaigns may include personal, video and telephone
conferences with investors and prospective investors in which our business practices are described. We may
provide compensation to investor relations firms and pay for newsletters, websites, mailings and email
campaigns that are produced by third parties based upon publicly-available information concerning us. We
will not be responsible for the content of analyst reports and other writings and communications by investor
relations firms, or from other publicly available information, not authorized by us. We do not intend to review
or approve the content of such analysts’ reports or other materials based upon analysts’ own research or
methods. Investor relations firms should generally disclose when they are compensated for their efforts, but
whether such disclosure is made or complete is not under our control. In addition, our investors may be
willing, from time to time, to encourage investor awareness through similar activities. Investor awareness
activities may also be suspended or discontinued which may impact the trading market our common stock.
The SEC and FINRA enforce various statutes and regulations intended to prevent manipulative or deceptive
devices in connection with the purchase or sale of any security and carefully scrutinize trading patterns and
company news and other communications for false or misleading information, particularly in cases where the
hallmarks of “pump and dump” activities may exist, such as rapid share price increases or decreases. We
and our stockholders may be subjected to enhanced regulatory scrutiny and the limited trading markets in
which our shares may be offered or sold which have often been associated with improper activities
concerning penny-stocks, such as the OTC Bulletin Board, the OTCQB or OTC Pink. Securities regulators
have often cited thinly-traded markets, small numbers of holders, and awareness campaigns as components
of their claims of price manipulation and other violations of law when combined with manipulative trading,
such as wash sales, matched orders or other manipulative trading timed to coincide with false or touting
press releases. There can be no assurance that our or third parties’ activities, or the small number of potential
sellers or small percentage of stock in the “float,” or determinations by purchasers or holders as to when or
under what circumstances or at what prices they may be willing to buy or sell stock will not artificially impact
(or would be claimed by regulators to have affected) the normal supply and demand factors that determine
the price of the stock.
44
Table of Contents
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This proxy statement/prospectus contains forward-looking statements that involve substantial risks and
uncertainties. All statements other than statements of historical facts contained in this proxy
statement/prospectus, including statements regarding Stratex’s or Richfield’s future financial position,
business strategy and plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking
statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “will,”
“could,” “would,” “projected,” “believe,” “may,” “estimate,” “continue,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “should,”
“plan,” “expect,” “predict,” “potential,” or the negative of these terms or other similar expressions. Forward-
looking statements include, without limitation, Richfield’s or Stratex’s expectations concerning the outlook for
their respective businesses, productivity, plans and goals for future operational improvements and capital
investments, operational performance, future market conditions or economic performance and developments
in the capital and credit markets and expected future financial performance, as well as any information
concerning possible or assumed future results of operations of Stratex and Richfield as set forth in the
sections of this proxy statement/prospectus titled “The Merger—Richfield’s Reasons for the Merger and
Recommendation of Richfield’s Board of Directors.” Forward-looking statements also include statements
regarding the expected benefits of the merger. These statements involve risks, uncertainties, assumptions
and other factors that are difficult to predict and that could cause actual results to differ materially from those
expressed in them or indicated by them. In particular, you should consider the numerous risks and
uncertainties described under “Risk Factors.”
These risks and uncertainties are not exhaustive. Other sections of this document describe additional factors
that could adversely affect Stratex’s, Richfield’s and the combined companies’ business and financial
performance. Moreover, Stratex and Richfield do, and the combined companies will continue to, operate in a
very competitive and rapidly changing environment. New risks and uncertainties emerge from time to time,
and it is not possible to predict all risks and uncertainties, nor can Stratex or Richfield assess the impact of all
factors on their business or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, may cause actual
results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
Although Stratex and Richfield believe the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, they cannot guarantee future results, level of activity, performance or achievements. Moreover,
neither Stratex, Richfield, nor any other person assumes responsibility for the accuracy or completeness of
any of these forward-looking statements. You should not rely upon forward-looking statements as
predictions of future events. Stratex and Richfield are under no duty to update any of these forward-looking
statements after the date of this document to conform their prior statements to actual results or revised
expectations and they do not intend to do so.
These forward-looking statements appear in a number of places and include statements with respect to,
among other things:
● estimates of oil and natural gas reserves;
● expected future financial condition, results of operations, and liquidity;
● future revenues, cash flows, and expenses;
● access to capital and anticipated liquidity;
● future business strategy and other plans and objectives for future operations;
● competitive position;
● outlook on oil and natural gas prices;
45
Table of Contents
● the amount, nature, and timing of  future capital expenditures, including future development costs;
● the ability to access the capital markets to fund capital and other expenditures;
● the risks associated with potential acquisitions or alliances;
● the recruitment and retention of officers and employees;
● expected levels of compensation;
● the likelihood of success of and impact of litigation;
● the assessment of their counterparty risk and the ability of counterparties to perform their future obligations;
● the impact of federal, state, and local political, regulatory, and environmental developments;
● the ability to consummate the merger;
● the timing of the consummation of the merger; and
●
the ability of to integrate Stratex’s and Richfield’s  operations and to achieve or realize any anticipated benefits,
savings, or growth of the merger
Stratex and Richfield expressly qualify in their entirety all forward-looking statements attributable to them or
to any person acting on their behalf by the cautionary statements contained or referred to in this section.
46
Table of Contents
THE COMPANIES
Richfield
Richfield was incorporated in Nevada on April 8, 2011 and is an independent oil and gas exploration and
production company. The focus of its business is acquiring, retrofitting and operating or selling oil and gas
assets and related production with projects in Kansas, Utah and Wyoming. The projects are referred to as the
Mid-Continent Project, the Utah-Wyoming Overthrust Project and the Central Utah Overthrust Project.
Richfield’s predecessor company, Hewitt Petroleum, Inc., a Delaware corporation, was incorporated on May
18, 2008. On January 1, 2009, Hewitt Petroleum entered into a Purchase and Sale Agreement with Hewitt
Energy Group, LLC for the acquisition of certain subsidiaries, other assets and liabilities including Hewitt
Energy Group, Inc., a Texas corporation, and its subsidiary Hewitt Operating, Inc., a Utah corporation, certain
oil and natural gas leases, well equipment, and certain liabilities. At the time of the acquisition, Hewitt Energy
Group, LLC was owned and controlled by Douglas C. Hewitt, Sr., Richfield’s Executive Chairman, President
and Chief Executive Officer.
On March 4, 2011, Hewitt Petroleum entered into a Stock Exchange Agreement effective March 31, 2011 with
Freedom Oil & Gas, Inc., a Nevada corporation, which called for the exchange of stock in Hewitt Petroleum for
all of the outstanding stock of Freedom. As a result of the transaction, Freedom became a wholly owned
subsidiary of Hewitt Petroleum. This acquisition allowed for the consolidation of working interests held by
Hewitt Petroleum and Freedom in several Utah exploration projects, as well as the acquisition by Hewitt
Petroleum of the remaining assets and liabilities of Freedom.
Contemporaneously with Richfield’s incorporation, it merged with its predecessor company, Hewitt
Petroleum. In connection with that merger, Hewitt Petroleum was merged out of existence and Richfield
assumed all of the assets and liabilities of Hewitt Petroleum. On June 20, 2011, Freedom was merged with and
into Richfield and Richfield assumed all of the assets and liabilities of Freedom.
Richfield’s principal executive offices are located at 175 South Main Street, Suite 900, Salt Lake City, Utah
84111, and its telephone number is (801) 519-8500. Richfield currently has 8 full-time equivalent employees
and 2 consultants providing services.
Stratex
Stratex is an independent oil and gas company focused on the acquisition and subsequent exploitation and
development of predominantly crude oil in Texas and Kansas as well as varied non-operated working
interests in North Dakota, Montana and Utah.  In Texas, we have an interest in a property located in Zavala
County. Our Zavala County acreage lies within the established oil rim of the prolific Eagle Ford Shale play,
one of the most actively drilled formations in the United States. Stratex intends to target multiple stacked pay
zones present on its Zavala County acreage, specifically the San Miguel, Austin Chalk and Buda formations,
which all produce locally. Stratex’s management presently views its Zavala County property as an integral
component of its current development program.
Stratex was originally incorporated as Poway Muffler and Brake Inc. in California on August 15, 2003 to enter
the muffler and brakes business.  On December 15, 2008, a merger was effected with Ross Investments Inc., a
Colorado shell corporation.    Ross Investments was the acquirer and the surviving corporation.  Ross
Investments Inc. then changed its name to Poway Brake and Muffler Inc. On May 25, 2012, Stratex filed an
Amendment to its Certificate of Incorporation by which the company changed its name from Poway Muffler
and Brake, Inc., a Colorado corporation, to Stratex Oil and Gas Holdings, Inc.
On July 6, 2012, Stratex Acquisition Corp., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
merged with and into Stratex Oil & Gas, Inc., a Delaware corporation, which we refer to as SOG. SOG was the
surviving corporation of that merger transaction. As a result of that merger, Stratex acquired the business of
SOG, and continue the business operations of SOG as a wholly-owned subsidiary.
Stratex’s principal executive offices are located at 30 Echo Lake Road, Watertown, Connecticut 06795, and its
telephone number is (713) 353-4786. Stratex currently has 4 employees.
47
Table of Contents
Merger Sub
Merger Sub, a wholly owned subsidiary of Stratex, is a Nevada corporation formed on April 30, 2014 for the
purpose of effecting the merger.
Merger Sub has not conducted any activities other than those incidental to its formation and the matters
contemplated by the merger agreement. The address for Merger Sub is 30 Echo Lake Road, Watertown,
Connecticut 06795, and its phone number is (860) 417-2465.
THE RICHFIELD SPECIAL MEETING
Date, Time and Place
The special meeting of Richfield stockholders is scheduled to be held at [______] a.m. local time, on
[__________________], 2014 at [____________________________].
Purpose of the Richfield Special Meeting
The Richfield special meeting is being held to:
●approve the merger agreement; and
●
approve an adjournment of the Richfield special meeting, if necessary or appropriate in the view of the Richfield
board of directors, to solicit additional proxies in favor of the proposal to approve the merger agreement if there are
not sufficient votes at the time of such adjournment to approve the merger agreement.
Recommendations of the Board of Directors of Richfield
The board of directors of Richfield has determined that entering into the merger agreement is in the best
interests of Richfield and its stockholders and declared the merger agreement advisable.
The Richfield board of directors recommends that you vote “FOR” the merger proposal and “FOR” the
adjournment proposal].
Record Date; Stock Entitled to Vote
Only holders of record of shares of Richfield common stock at the close of business on [_______________],
2014 are entitled to notice of, and to vote at, the Richfield special meeting and at any adjournment of the
meeting. We refer to this date as the record date for the meeting. A complete list of stockholders of record of
Richfield entitled to vote at the Richfield special meeting will be available beginning two business days after
notice of the special meeting is given continuing through the meeting at Richfield’s executive offices and
principal place of business at 175 South Main Street, Suite 900, Salt Lake City, UT 84111, for inspection by
stockholders of Richfield during ordinary business hours for any purpose germane to the Richfield special
meeting. The list will also be available at the Richfield special meeting for examination by any stockholder of
Richfield of record present at the special meeting.
Each member of Richfield’s board of directors, certain of its stockholders (including its largest creditor), and
each of its executive officers, owning an aggregate of approximately 46% of Richfield’s outstanding common
stock, have entered into voting agreements with Stratex in which each agreed to vote their Richfield stock in
favor of the merger. The voting agreements are described in “THE VOTING AGREEMENTS” beginning on
page 82.
Quorum
A quorum is necessary to hold a valid special meeting of Richfield stockholders. A quorum will be present at
the Richfield special meeting if the holders of a majority of the outstanding shares of Richfield common stock
entitled to vote are present, in person or by proxy. If a quorum is not present at the Richfield special meeting,
Richfield expects the presiding officer to adjourn the special meeting in order to solicit additional proxies.
Abstentions will be counted as present for purposes of determining whether a quorum is present.
48
Table of Contents
Required Vote
The approval of the merger agreement requires the affirmative vote of holders of a majority of the outstanding
shares of Richfield common stock entitled to vote on the proposal. The adjournment proposal requires the
affirmative vote of holders of a majority of the shares of Richfield common stock entitled to vote on the
proposal present or represented by proxy at the Richfield special meeting.
Abstentions, Failures to Vote and Broker Non-Votes
Your failure to vote will have the same effect as a vote against the merger proposal, but will have no effect on
the adjournment proposal. Your abstention from voting will have the same effect as a vote against the
proposal to approve the merger agreement and the adjournment proposal. A broker non-vote will have the
same effect as a vote against the merger proposal, but will have no effect on the adjournment proposal.
Voting at the Special Meeting
Whether or not you plan to attend the Richfield special meeting, please promptly submit your voting
instructions to vote your shares of Richfield common stock by proxy to ensure your shares are represented
at the special meeting. You may also vote in person at the Richfield special meeting.
Voting in Person
If you plan to attend the Richfield special meeting and wish to vote in person, you will be given a ballot at the
special meeting. Please note, however, that if your shares of Richfield common stock are held in “street
name,” which means your shares of Richfield common stock are held of record by a broker, bank or other
nominee, and you wish to vote at the Richfield special meeting, you must bring to the Richfield special
meeting a proxy from the record holder (your broker, bank or nominee) of the shares of Richfield common
stock authorizing you to vote at the Richfield special meeting.
Voting by Proxy
You should submit your voting instructions to vote your shares of Richfield common stock by proxy even if
you plan to attend the Richfield special meeting. You can always change your vote at the Richfield special
meeting.
Your enclosed proxy card includes specific instructions for submitting your voting instructions for your
shares of Richfield common stock. Richfield’s electronic voting procedures are designed to authenticate your
identity and to ensure that your voting instructions are accurately recorded. When the accompanying proxy
is returned properly executed, the shares of Richfield common stock represented by it will be voted at the
Richfield special meeting or any adjournment thereof in accordance with the instructions contained in the
proxy.
If you return your signed proxy card without indicating how you want your shares of Richfield common stock
to be voted with regard to a particular proposal, your shares of Richfield common stock will be voted in favor
of each such proposal. Proxy cards that are returned without a signature will not be counted as present at the
Richfield special meeting and cannot be voted.
If your shares of Richfield common stock are held in an account with a broker, bank or other nominee, you
have received a separate voting instruction card in lieu of a proxy card and you must follow those
instructions in order to submit your voting instructions.
Revocation of Proxies or Voting Instructions
You have the power to revoke your proxy at any time before your proxy is voted at the Richfield special
meeting. You can revoke your proxy or voting instructions in one of four ways:
● you can grant a new, valid proxy bearing a later date;
     
 ● you can send a signed notice of revocation;
●
if you are a holder of record of Richfield common stock on the record date for the Richfield special meeting, you can
attend the Richfield special meeting and vote in person, which will automatically cancel any proxy previously
given, or you can revoke your proxy in person, but your attendance alone will not revoke any proxy that you have
previously given; or
49
Table of Contents
●
if your shares of Richfield common stock are held in an account with a broker, bank or other nominee, you must
follow the instructions on the voting instruction card you received in order to change or revoke your instructions.
If you choose either of the first two methods, your notice of revocation or your new proxy must be received by
Richfield’s Corporate Secretary at 175 South Main Street, Suite 900, Salt Lake City, UT 84111 no later than the
beginning of the Richfield special meeting.
Solicitation of Proxies
The cost of proxy solicitation for the Richfield special meeting will be borne by Richfield. In addition to the use
of the mail, proxies may be solicited by officers and directors and regular employees of Richfield, without
additional remuneration, by personal interview, telephone, facsimile or otherwise. Richfield will also request
brokers, banks and nominees to forward proxy materials to the beneficial owners of shares of Richfield
common stock held of record on the record date and will provide customary reimbursement to such firms for
the cost of forwarding these materials.
PROPOSALS TO BE CONSIDERED AT THE RICHFIELD SPECIAL MEETING
The Merger Proposal
(Item 1 on the Proxy Card)
Richfield is asking its stockholders to consider and vote on a proposal to approve the merger agreement and
thereby approve, among other things, the merger. Holders of Richfield common stock should read this proxy
statement/prospectus carefully in its entirety, including the annexes, for more detailed information
concerning the merger agreement. In particular, holders of Richfield common stock are directed to the merger
agreement, a copy of which is attached as Annex A hereto and incorporated herein by reference.
The affirmative vote of holders of a majority of the outstanding shares of Richfield common stock entitled to
vote on the proposal is required to approve the merger proposal.
The Richfield board of directors unanimously recommends a vote “FOR” the merger proposal. See the
section entitled “The Merger—Richfield’s Reasons for the Merger and Recommendation of Richfield’s Board
of Directors,” beginning on page 52. For a discussion of interests of Richfield’s directors and executive
officers in the merger that may be different from, or in addition to, the interests of Richfield stockholders
generally, see the section entitled “The Merger—Financial Interests of Richfield’s Directors and Executive
Officers in the Merger,” beginning on page 58.
The Adjournment Proposal
(Item 2 on the Proxy Card)
The Richfield special meeting may be adjourned to another time or place to permit, among other things,
further solicitation of proxies if necessary to obtain additional votes in favor of the merger proposal.
If, at the Richfield special meeting, the number of shares of Richfield common stock present or represented
and voting (or anticipated to vote) in favor of the merger proposal is insufficient to approve the merger
proposal, the presiding officer may direct that a vote be taken on the adjournment proposal in order to enable
the Richfield to solicit additional proxies for approval of the merger proposal. If the merger proposal is
approved at the special meeting, then no vote will be held on the adjournment proposal. The presiding officer
may also direct that a vote be taken on the adjournment proposal immediately without any vote being taken
on the merger proposal.
In the adjournment proposal, Richfield is asking its stockholders to vote in favor of adjourning the Richfield
special meeting if necessary or appropriate in the view of the Richfield board of directors, to solicit additional
proxies in favor of the merger proposal if there are not sufficient votes at the time of such adjournment to
approve the merger proposal. If the presiding officer directs that the adjournment proposal be voted on and
the Richfield stockholders approve the adjournment proposal, Richfield would adjourn the special meeting
and use the additional time to solicit additional proxies, including the solicitation of proxies from Richfield
stockholders who have previously voted.
If the adjournment proposal is approved, Richfield will send to its stockholders notice of the time and place at
which the adjourned meeting will be held. If the Richfield board of directors fixes a new record date for the
adjourned meeting, the notice of the adjourned meeting will also set forth the new record date.
50
Table of Contents
The affirmative vote of holders of a majority of the shares of Richfield common stock entitled to vote on the
proposal present or represented by proxy at the Richfield special meeting is required to approve the
adjournment proposal.
The Richfield board of directors recommends unanimously a vote “FOR” the adjournment proposal. For a
discussion of interests of Richfield’s directors and executive officers in the merger that may be different from,
or in addition to, the interests of Richfield stockholders generally, see the section entitled “The Merger—
Financial Interests of Richfield’s Directors and Executive Officers in the Merger,” beginning on page 58.
THE MERGER
Effects of the Merger
Upon completion of the merger, Merger Sub, a wholly owned subsidiary of Stratex formed for the purpose of
effecting the merger, will merge with and into Richfield. Richfield will be the surviving corporation in the
merger and will become a wholly owned subsidiary of Stratex.
In the merger, each outstanding share of Richfield common stock (other than shares held by those Richfield
stockholders properly exercising dissenters’ rights) will be converted into the right to receive shares of
Stratex common stock in an amount to be determined by the application of a formula set forth in the merger
agreement. Based on the number shares of Richfield common stock outstanding on August 18, 2014, each
outstanding share of Richfield common stock (other than shares held by those Richfield stockholders
properly exercising dissenters’ rights) would be converted into one share of Stratex common stock. However,
the number of shares of Stratex common stock that may actually be issued with respect to a share of
Richfield common stock is subject to decrease based on the formula set forth in the merger agreement in the
event additional shares of Richfield common stock are issued prior to the consummation of the merger,
including, subject to certain limited exceptions, shares of Richfield common stock issued upon exercise of
Richfield’s outstanding warrants or upon conversion of Richfield’s outstanding convertible notes. No
fractional shares of Stratex common stock will be issued in the merger and Richfield’s stockholders will
receive cash in lieu of fractional shares.
See the section entitled “Comparison of Stockholder Rights” beginning on page 97 for a summary of the
material differences between the rights of holders of Stratex common stock and the rights of holders of
Richfield common stock.
Background of the Merger
Richfield’s board of directors from time to time reviews and assesses with Richfield’s management potential
funding alternatives to finance the acquisition and development of Richfield’s oil and gas properties.
Beginning in 2012, Richfield’s management team, including Douglas C. Hewitt Sr., president and chief
executive officer, and Glenn G. MacNeil, chief financial officer, met with a number of investment and
commercial bankers to discuss strategic options, including various financing alternatives, farm-ins, property
acquisitions/sales, and other potential partnering and merger opportunities. The results of these meetings
were all shared with Richfield’s board of directors on a regular basis.
The discussions with investment and commercial bankers did not lead to the consummation of an acceptable
transaction for a variety of reasons, including gaps in relative valuation expectations, Richfield’s then current
debt levels, certain then pending litigation against Richfield, prospective excessive dilution to common
stockholders, financing complexities and the lack of synergies.
In April 2013, in order to enhance Richfield’s capital formation and restructuring expertise, and in an effort to
attempt to settle outstanding litigation and other liabilities, the Richfield board of directors, after discussion,
appointed Alan D. Gaines as a director and chairman of Richfield’s board of directors. Mr. Gaines is an energy
investment and merchant banker with more than 30 years of experience and, in the past, had been
instrumental regarding the introduction of Richfield’s management team to several potential investors,
strategic partners and potential acquisitions. During the latter part of 2013, Richfield was able to obtain interim
financing of approximately $3,000,000 through sales of working interests in its properties and loans from a
Richfield stockholder.
51
Table of Contents
In February 2014, Mr. Gaines introduced Richfield’s management to Stephen P. Funk, then chairman and chief
executive officer of Stratex. Since October of 2013, Mr. Gaines had served as a consultant to Stratex. The
introduction led to several conversations between Stephen P. Funk, the Chief Executive Officer of Stratex,
and Richfield’s senior management. On February 14, 2014, Stratex delivered a proposed letter of intent to
Richfield, setting forth the material terms regarding a potential merger of the two companies. On February 21,
2014 after reviewing the proposed letter of intent, Stratex’s filings with the Securities and Exchange
Commission, and Stratex’s oil and gas properties, Richfield’s board of directors held a meeting to discuss the
potential merger as described in the proposed letter of intent. During this meeting, Richfield’s board
determined that, to avoid a potential conflict of interest, that all future discussions and negotiations on the
proposed merger be conducted by Glenn G. MacNeil and Michael A. Cederstrom, general counsel for
Richfield.
Between February 21, 2014 and March 14, 2014, the terms of the letter of intent were negotiated. During this
time frame, both parties determined that it would be in the best interests of both companies for Stratex to
provide interim capital to Richfield to (i) develop specific oil properties in Kansas and (ii) satisfy certain
pending obligations and liabilities. On March 14, 2014, the Richfield board of directors authorized Mr. Hewitt to
sign the letter of intent on behalf of Richfield.
Following the execution of the letter of intent, Richfield and Stratex each conducted further due diligence and
there were several conversations between Mr. Funk and the management and board of Richfield. In April
2014, Mr. Funk and Jeffrey Robinson, director of field operations of Stratex, met with members of Richfield’s
operating management to review in detail, the technical, geological and engineering of both companies’ oil
and gas properties, including a specific future development work plan to be implemented from the proceeds
of the interim financing to be provided by Stratex.
During April 2014, Messrs. MacNeil and Funk met, along with counsel to Stratex and Richfield, to discuss and
negotiate definitive terms of the merger agreement, as well as the terms of the interim financing from Stratex.
On May 1, 2014, the Richfield board of directors held a special meeting during which time management made
various presentations regarding the merger including: (1) an overview of the possible strategic business
combination, including deal structure and interim funding, (2) apprising the board of the status of Richfield’s
due diligence efforts to date, (3) a preliminary net asset value comparison, (4) discussion of a possible
timeline for a transaction, (5) the need for directors and officers and others to enter into a voting agreement to
support the merger, as contemplated by the letter of intent, (6) the need for the directors and officers and
others to lock up their shares during the pendency of the merger and for an additional six months after the
closing of the merger, as contemplated by the letter of intent and (7) a discussion of the fiduciary
responsibilities of directors and officers in transactions such as this. At the May 1, 2014 meeting, Richfield’s
board voted unanimously (with Mr. Gaines abstaining) to adopt and approve the merger, authorized
management to enter into the merger agreement and the loan agreement, and directed that the merger
agreement be submitted to Richfield’s stockholders for their approval.
On May 6, 2014, Richfield and Stratex executed the merger agreement, the loan agreement and the ancillary
agreements. On May 7, 2014, Richfield and Stratex each issued press releases announcing the merger and
filed Form 8-K’s with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
In July 2014, Richfield and Stratex determined that it would be in each party’s best interest to extend the end
dates in the merger agreement to provide more time for the completion of the merger and to make certain
other changes to the merger agreement, as well as to increase the amount of the funding made available
under the loan agreement from $3 million to $4 million. On July 17, 2017, the parties entered into an
amendment to the merger agreement and an amendment to the loan agreement.
Richfield’s Reasons for the Merger and Recommendation of Richfield’s Board of Directors
In approving and adopting the merger agreement and in recommending that Richfield’s stockholders
approve the merger, the Richfield board of directors consulted with members of Richfield’s management, as
well as with Richfield’s legal advisors and Richfield’s largest secured lender. The Richfield board of directors
also considered a number of factors it viewed as bearing on its decision.
52
Table of Contents
The principal factors that the Richfield board of directors viewed as supporting its decision were:
that Stratex had significant cash on hand with access to additional funding for the development of Richfield’s oil and
·
gas properties;
that Richfield had been unsuccessful in raising of sufficient development capital to monetize its oil and gas properties
·
prior to this decision;
·that Stratex and Richfield’s oil and gas properties were complimentary;
the opportunity to integrate the well-respected knowledge base, potential transaction flow and execution capabilities
·
of the combined management teams;
that Stratex had experienced field personnel located in the mid-west on a full time basis near Richfield’s Kansas
·
properties;
that Richfield’s staff and existing internal systems, including its proprietary geological data base, would allow the
·
combined company to quickly and efficiently handle the combined asset base and operational burdens;
that the merger would be accretive to the combined company by allowing the development of the currently owned
·
properties and creating cash flow and increased reserves per share;
that the prior net operating losses of Richfield, in excess of $30 million, could be utilized by the combined companies
·
in future years, subject to limitations contained in Section 382 of the Code;
that the combined company would be significantly larger than Richfield is now and as a result would have greater
·
exploration and production strengths, greater liquidity in the market for its securities and better ability to consider
future strategic opportunities that might not otherwise be possible;
the expectation that the combined company would be able to accelerate development of additional exploration and
·
development opportunities and achieve exploration and production drilling efficiencies;
that the merger would preserve significant strategic continuity for both Stratex and Richfield and employee retention
·
for Richfield;
the funding provided by the loan agreement would allow the immediate development of Richfield’s oil and gas
·
properties prior to the closing of the merger, thereby increasing Richfield’s daily production of oil and cash flow; and
that the merger agreement does not preclude a third party from making an unsolicited proposal or Richfield from
·
considering a competing transaction.
The Richfield board of directors weighed the foregoing against potentially negative factors, including:
the restrictions on the conduct of Richfield’s business during the period between the execution of the merger
·
agreement and the completion of the merger as set forth in the merger agreement;
the challenges in absorbing the effect of the failure to complete the merger, including potential termination fees,
·
obligation to repay the amounts advanced under the loan agreement, and stockholder and market reactions;
·the potential future earnings dilution to Richfield stockholders following the merger;
53
Table of Contents
the risk of not being able to realize all of the anticipated cost savings and operational synergies between Richfield
·
and Stratex and the risk that other anticipated benefits might not be realized;
the possible limitation on the ability to use Richfield’s substantial NOLs (in excess of $30 million) after the completion
·
of the merger; and
the risks of the type and nature described under “Risk Factors” beginning on page 14 and the matters described
·
under “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” beginning on page 45.
This discussion of the information and factors considered by Richfield’s board of directors in reaching its
conclusions and recommendation includes the principal factors considered by the board, but is not intended
to be exhaustive and may not include all of the factors considered by the Richfield board of directors. In view
of the wide variety of factors considered in connection with its evaluation of the merger and the other
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, and the complexity of these matters, the Richfield board
of directors did not find it useful and did not attempt to quantify, rank or assign any relative or specific
weights to the various factors that it considered in reaching its determination to approve the merger and the
other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, and to make its recommendation to Richfield
stockholders. Rather, the Richfield board of directors viewed its decisions as being based on the totality of
the information presented to it and the factors it considered, including its discussions with, and questioning
of, members of Richfield’s management and legal advisors. In addition, individual members of the Richfield
board of directors may have assigned different weights to different factors.
Certain of Richfield’s directors and executive officers may have financial interests in the merger that are
different from, or in addition to, those of Richfield’s stockholders generally. The Richfield board of directors
was aware of and considered these potential interests, among other matters, in evaluating the merger and in
making its recommendation to Richfield stockholders. For a discussion of these interests, see “THE
MERGER — Financial Interests of Richfield Directors and Executive Officers in the Merger” beginning on
page 58.
The Richfield board of directors adopted and approved the merger and the merger agreement and
determined that the merger and the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the
exchange of shares of Richfield common stock for shares of Stratex common stock in connection with the
merger, are in the best interests of Richfield and its stockholders. Accordingly, the Richfield board of
directors unanimously recommends that the Richfield stockholders vote “FOR” the merger proposal.
Stratex’s Reasons for the Merger
In evaluating the merger, Stratex’s board of directors and management consulted with its legal counsel and
considered the financial performance and condition, business operations and prospects of each of Stratex,
Richfield and the combined company, the terms and conditions of the merger agreement and the results of
the due diligence investigation conducted by Stratex’s board of directors and legal counsel.
In reaching the determination to enter into the merger agreement, the board of directors of Stratex considered
the following:
Richfield has historically lacked the capital to develop its numerous, scalable, low risk, high rate of return
·
recompletion, rework and new drilling opportunities in Kansas. By providing capital within existing fields, Stratex
believes significant enhancements in production can be achieved relatively quickly and inexpensively.
Kansas is a highly fragmented area dominated by local operators, which are generally under-capitalized, and/or not
willing to move additional fluids via the drilling of salt water disposal wells and/or installing submersible pumps in
·
order to increase production and improve oil field economics. Stratex believes that the combined company can lease
substantial additional acreage based on sellers’ current economics and add value by providing the enhancements
listed above.
54
Table of Contents
Stratex intends to utilize Richfield’s proprietary EARS system to locate, acquire, exploit and high-grade additional
·
such acreage in Kansas.
Richfield has historically engaged contract operators in Kansas and Stratex’s field personnel have directed
operations and overseen recent rework and recompletion activity (input by Stratex’s field personnel has resulted in
·
meaningful increases in both current production and cash flow for Richfield since the merger agreement was signed,
and has set the stage for an expanded development program going forward).
Stratex intends to suspend the use of contract operators in Kansas, thus allowing the post- merger company to have
·
more direct control with respect to operations, drilling budget and timing.
Richfield’s highly proprietary Utah acreage represents an unusual opportunity to control and participate in what
Stratex’s management believes could be a world class exploration project, as well as an outstanding emerging shale
development play. There exists the potential for the post-merger company to leverage its upside via the
·
establishment of joint venture drilling relationships to balance future capital expenditures with meaningful upside.
Through Stratex’s industry relationships, Stratex management believes that the post-merger company will be
positioned to quickly commence drilling activities with respect to its significant acreage position/prospect inventory in
Utah.
The merger would provide the combined company with a significantly enhanced balance sheet, which would further
·
enable the combined ompany to finance accretive acquisitions and bolt-on acreage opportunities. Stratex’s
management has significant experience in capital formation as well as access to negotiated deal flow.
Richfield’s independent engineering report provides a strong foundation and indication of current and future reserve
value in Kansas. No reserves have been attributed to Utah, which Stratex’s management believes could be quite
·
substantial. Moreover, Stratex’s management believes that “probable” and “possible” reserves attributable to Kansas
could be significantly understated as a consequence of Richfield’s historic lack of development capital and direct
operational control.
·The merger provides Stratex with an opportunity to diversify and broaden its asset base beyond Texas.
Directors and Management After the Merger
The expected directors and executive officers of Stratex after the consummation of the merger and related
information is set forth in “Directors and Executive Officers of Surviving Stratex” beginning on page 86.
Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Merger
It is contemplated that it will be the opinion of Buchanan Ingersoll & Rooney PC, tax counsel to Stratex that
the following are the material U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger to U.S. Holders (as defined
below) of Richfield common stock. This discussion is based on the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended (which we refer to as the “Code”), applicable Treasury regulations, administrative interpretations
and court decisions as in effect as of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, all of which may change,
possibly with retroactive effect. Any material change in the authoritative interpretation of the Code made after
the date of this letter could result in a change of the conclusions of Buchanan Ingersoll & Rooney PC. For
purposes of this discussion, a “U.S. Holder” is a beneficial owner of Richfield common stock that is for U.S.
federal income tax purposes:
·a citizen or resident of the United States;
a corporation, or other entity taxable as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes, created or organized in or
 ·
under the laws of the United States or of any political subdivision thereof; or
·an estate or trust the income of which is subject to U.S. federal income taxation regardless of its source.
55
Table of Contents
This discussion addresses only the consequences of the exchange of shares of Richfield common stock
held as capital assets by such U.S. Holder. It does not address all aspects of U.S. federal income taxation that
may be important to a U.S. Holder in light of that stockholder’s particular circumstances or to a U.S. Holder
subject to special rules, such as:
·a financial institution or insurance company;
·a tax-exempt organization;
·a dealer or broker in securities, commodities or foreign currencies;
a stockholder that holds Richfield common stock as part of a hedge, appreciated financial position, straddle,
 ·
conversion, or other risk reduction transaction; or
a stockholder that acquired Richfield common stock pursuant to the exercise of options or similar derivative
 ·
securities or otherwise as compensation.
If a partnership, or any entity treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes, holds Richfield
common stock, the tax treatment of a partner in such partnership generally will depend on the status of the
partners and the activities of the partnership. A partner in a partnership holding Richfield common stock
should consult its tax advisor.
This discussion of material U.S. federal income tax consequences is not a complete analysis or description of
all potential U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger. This discussion does not address tax
consequences that may vary with, or are contingent on, individual circumstances. In addition, it does not
address any U.S. federal, estate, gift or other non-income tax or any foreign, state or local tax consequences
of the merger. Accordingly, we urge each holder of Richfield common stock to consult their tax advisor to
determine the particular U.S. federal, state or local or foreign income or other tax consequences to them of
the merger
Tax Opinion
Based on certain representations, covenants and assumptions described below, all of which must continue
to be true and accurate in all material respects as of the completion of the merger, it is contemplated that it will
be the opinion of tax counsel that the merger will be treated for U.S. federal income tax purposes as a
reorganization within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code and that Stratex, Merger Sub and Richfield
will each be a “party to that reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368(b) of the Code, which opinion is
referred to in this proxy statement/prospectus as a reorganization opinion.
In rendering the reorganization opinion, tax counsel will examine and rely on (i) customary representations
and covenants made by Richfield and Stratex, including those contained in certificates of officers of Richfield
and Stratex, and (ii) specified assumptions, including an assumption regarding the completion of the merger
in the manner contemplated by the merger agreement. In addition, tax counsel has assumed in rendering the
reorganization opinion the absence of changes in existing facts or in law between the date of this proxy
statement/prospectus and the closing date of the merger. If any of those representations, covenants or
assumptions is inaccurate, tax counsel may not be able to provide the reorganization opinion or the tax
consequences of the merger could differ from those described below. An opinion of tax counsel neither
binds the Internal Revenue Service, which is referred to in this proxy statement/prospectus as the IRS, nor
precludes the IRS or the courts from adopting a contrary position. Neither Richfield nor Stratex intends to
obtain a ruling from the IRS on the tax consequences of the merger.
As discussed in detail herein, certain issues that this opinion letter considers concern questions for which
there is a paucity of pertinent and reliable authority. In those areas, tax counsel’s conclusions constitute a
reasonable interpretation of the applicable provisions of the Code and regulations without assurance that
such interpretations have been or will be accepted by the Internal Revenue Service or the courts.
Based on such opinion, the material U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger are as follows:
U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences to Stratex, Merger Sub and Richfield
None of Stratex, Merger Sub and Richfield will recognize any gain or loss for U.S. federal income tax
purposes as a result of the merger. Richfield should retain its present basis in and holding period of its
assets.
56
Table of Contents
U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences to U.S. Holders
A U.S. Holder will not recognize any gain or loss as a result of the receipt of shares of Stratex common stock
in the merger except for any gain or loss recognized with respect to cash received in lieu of a fractional share
of Stratex common stock. U.S. Holders will recognize gain or loss on any cash received in lieu of a fractional
share of Stratex common stock equal to the difference between the amount of cash received in lieu of the
fractional share and the portion of the U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis of the shares of Richfield common
stock surrendered that is allocable to the fractional share of Stratex common stock. Such gain or loss
generally will constitute long-term capital gain or loss if the holding period of Richfield’s common stock is
more than one year as of the closing date of the merger. Such U.S. Holder will have an adjusted tax basis in
the shares of Stratex common stock received in the merger, including any fractional share for which cash is
received, equal to the adjusted tax basis of the Richfield common stock surrendered by that holder in the
merger. The holding period for shares of Stratex common stock received in the merger will include the
holding period for the Richfield common stock surrendered therefor.
Richfield stockholders who receive cash equal to the “fair value” of their Richfield shares by virtue of the
exercise of their appraisal rights under Nevada law will (assuming that such stockholders hold their shares as
capital assets), in general, recognize capital gain or loss equal to the difference between the amount of cash
received and the basis of their Richfield shares. Richfield stockholders with a holding period in their shares of
one year or less will receive short term capital gain or loss treatment on the deemed redemption or sale of
such shares due to the receipt of cash upon the exercise of statutory appraisal rights. Depending on the
stock ownership attribution rules of section 318(a) of the Code, however, it is conceivable that some such
stockholders could be treated as having received a distribution from Richfield taxable in full as a dividend to
the extent of Richfield’s earnings and profits, if any, or as a tax free return of capital to the extent that Richfield
has no such earnings and profits as of the end of its current taxable year.
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding
A U.S. Holder of Richfield common stock may be subject to information reporting and backup withholding in
respect of cash payments received in lieu of a fractional share of Stratex common stock unless such holder
provides proof of an applicable exemption or a correct taxpayer identification number and otherwise
complies with the applicable requirements of the backup withholding rules. The amounts withheld under the
backup withholding rules are not an additional tax and may be refunded or credited against the holder’s U.S.
federal income tax liability, provided the required information is properly furnished.
Reporting Requirements
A U.S. Holder will be required to retain records pertaining to the merger. In addition, each U.S. Holder that
owns at least five percent of Richfield common stock immediately before the effective time of the merger will
be required to file with its U.S. federal income tax return for the year in which the merger takes place a
statement setting forth facts relating to the merger, including:
the names and employer identification numbers of the parties to the reorganization (Stratex (EIN: 94-3364776),
 ·
Merger Sub (EIN: 47-1437566) and Richfield (EIN: 35-2407100));
·the closing date of the merger; and
the fair market value and tax basis of the Richfield common stock exchanged in the merger, in each case determined
 ·
immediately before the completion of the merger.
Tax counsel’s opinion will be issued solely to Stratex in connection with the transaction described above and
may not be used for any other purpose. Tax counsel’s opinion will be limited to the matters discussed above.
Tax counsel’s opinion will be as of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus and it does not undertake to
supplement its opinion with respect to factual matters or changes in the law that may hereafter occur.
Accounting Treatment
Stratex prepares its financial statements in accordance with GAAP. The merger will be accounted for by
applying the acquisition method using the accounting guidance for business combinations, ASC 805, which
requires the determination of the acquirer, the acquisition date, the fair value of assets and liabilities of the
acquiree and the measurement of goodwill. Based on the guidance of ASC 805, Stratex will be the acquirer of
Richfield for accounting purposes. This means that Stratex will allocate the purchase price to the fair value of
Richfield’s assets and liabilities at the acquisition date, with any excess purchase price being recorded as
goodwill. Stratex anticipates that the number of shares of Stratex common stock (based on such average
price) to be issued in consideration for each outstanding share of Richfield common stock at closing will
equal approximately 60,616,448 shares of Stratex common stock.
57
Table of Contents
Exchange of Shares in the Merger
Prior to the effective time of the merger, Stratex will appoint an exchange agent to handle the exchange of
shares of Richfield common stock for shares of Stratex common stock. Promptly after the effective time of the
merger, the exchange agent will send to each holder of record of Richfield common stock at the effective time
of the merger who holds shares of Richfield common stock in certificated form a letter of transmittal and
instructions for effecting the exchange of Richfield common stock certificates for the merger consideration
the holder is entitled to receive under the merger agreement. Upon surrender of stock certificates for
cancellation along with the executed letter of transmittal and other documents described in the instructions, a
Richfield stockholder will receive the per share merger consideration determined by the exchange ratio. After
the effective time of the merger, Richfield will not register any transfers of the shares of Richfield common
stock.
Rights of Dissenting Shareholders
Richfield stockholders are entitled to appraisal rights and payment for the fair value of their shares in
connection with the merger if they properly exercise their dissenters’ rights under the provisions of Sections
92A.300 — 92A.500 of the Nevada Revised Statutes, attached to this document as Annex B. If you want to
exercise these rights, you must deliver to Richfield written notice of your intent to demand payment for your
shares before the vote is taken on the merger and you must not vote any of your shares in favor of the
merger. You must also comply with the other requirements set forth in Annex B. Strict adherence to all of the
requirements set forth in Annex B must be followed by dissenting stockholders and the failure to do so will
result in forfeiture of their rights to payment, and cause such stockholders to be bound by the terms of the
merger, including receipt of the merger consideration. Please read the attached Annex B carefully if you are
considering dissenting.
Financial Interests of Richfield’s Directors and Executive Officers in the Merger
In considering the recommendation of the Richfield board of directors to approve the merger agreement,
Richfield stockholders should be aware that certain Richfield directors and executive officers have interests
in the merger that are different from, or in addition to, those of Richfield stockholders generally. These
interests, which may create actual or potential conflicts of interest. The Richfield board of directors was aware
of these potential conflicts of interest and considered them, among other matters, in evaluating and
negotiating the merger agreement, in reaching its decision to adopt and approve the merger agreement, and
in recommending to Richfield stockholders that the merger agreement be approved. These interests include
the following:
One of the conditions to the completion of the merger is that Richfield’s current Chief Executive Officer enter into a
consulting agreement with Stratex and resign as a director and officer of Richfield.  The consulting agreement is
expected to provide for consulting services with respect to the surviving corporation’s Utah properties and to have a
 ·
three year term, monthly payments of $25,000; up to $2,000 per month for medical insurance reimbursement, and a
monthly production bonus based upon the production of the surviving corporation’s Utah properties (ranging from
$5,000 if an average of 300 barrels of oil equivalent per day are produced in a month to $120,000 if an average of
5,000 or more barrels of oil equivalent per day are produced in a month).
   
Directors and officers of Richfield own shares of Richfield common stock, which will be treated like all other shares
of Richfield common stock in the merger.  See “SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS
 ·
AND MANAGEMENT – Richfield” beginning on page 83.
The directors and officers of Richfield are entitled to continued directors and officers liability insurance coverage after
 ·
the completion of the merger. See “The Merger Agreement – Directors and Officers Insurance” beginning on page
78.
58
Table of Contents
Director and Officer Indemnification
Richfield directors and officers are entitled to continued indemnification and insurance coverage under the
merger agreement for a period of six years after the merger is completed. For a more complete description,
please see the section entitled “The Merger Agreement – Directors and Officers Insurance” on page 78.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to directors, officers
or persons controlling the registrant pursuant to the foregoing provisions, the registrant has been informed
that in the opinion of the Securities and Exchange Commission such indemnification is against public policy
as expressed in the Securities Act and is therefore unenforceable.
Dividends
Neither Stratex nor Richfield has historically paid any dividends. Neither Stratex nor Richfield has a present
intention to pay any dividends prior to the completion of the merger.
Listing of Stratex Common Stock
Stratex’s common stock, par value $0.01, currently trade on the OTCQB under the stock symbol “STTX.”
No Stratex Shareholder Approval Required
Stratex common stockholders are not required to approve the merger agreement or the issuance of Stratex
common stock in connection with the merger.
Deregistration of Richfield Common Stock
Shares of Richfield common stock currently trade on the OTCQX under the stock symbol “ROIL.” When the
merger is completed, Richfield common stock will cease to be quoted on the OTCQX and will be deregistered
under the Exchange Act.
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED FINANCIAL INFORMATION
The following unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements present the pro forma
consolidated financial position and results of operations of the combined company based upon the historical
financial statements of Stratex and Richfield, after giving effect to the Richfield acquisition and adjustments
described in the following footnotes, and are intended to reflect the impact of this acquisition on Stratex.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined balance sheet reflects the acquisition of Richfield as if it had
been consummated on June 30, 2014 and includes pro forma adjustments for preliminary valuations of
certain tangible and intangible assets by Stratex management. These adjustments are subject to further
revisions due to the change in the valuation of the common stock and warrant consideration to be paid on the
date of closing as well as updated engineering valuation on Richfield’s oil and gas developed and
undeveloped properties as a result of additional development work that will be completed before the date of
closing and the goodwill that may be valued at that time. The valuation of the consideration paid will be known
on the date of the closing of the merger and the updated engineering valuation is expected to be completed in
the first quarter of 2015. The final allocation of the purchase price, including adjusting tangible assets and
liabilities to fair values and final recognition of intangibles, will be completed after the merger.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined statement of operations for the six months ended June 30,
2014 combines Stratex’s historical results for the six months ended June 30, 2014 with Richfield’s historical
results for the six months ended June 30, 2014, as if the acquisition has occurred on January 1, 2014.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined statement of operations for the year ended December 31,
2013 combines Stratex’s historical results for the year ended December 31, 2013 with Richfield’s historical
results for the year ended December 31, 2013, as if the acquisition has occurred on January 1, 2013.
The following unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements are presented for illustrative
purposes only and do not give effect to any potential operational efficiencies, asset dispositions, cost
savings or economies of scale that Stratex may achieve with respect to the combined operations.
Additionally, the pro forma statements of operations do not include non-recurring charges or credits and the
related tax effects which result directly from the transaction, nor do they provide for the exercise of any
dissenters’ rights. Further, certain reclassifications have been made to Stratex’s historical financial
statements for presentation purposes.
59
Table of Contents
Pro forma adjustments are necessary to reflect the estimated purchase price, amounts related to Richfield’s
net tangible assets at an amount equal to the preliminary estimate of their fair values, changes in depletion,
depreciation and amortization expense resulting from the estimated fair value adjustments to net tangible
assets and to reflect the income tax effect related to the pro forma adjustments. The historical consolidated
financial information has been adjusted to give effect to pro forma events that are (1) directly attributable to
the acquisition, (2) factually supportable, and (3) with respect to the statement of operations, expected to have
a continuing impact on the combined results.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements are based on the estimates and
assumptions set forth in the notes to such statements, which are preliminary and have been made solely for
the purposes of developing such pro forma information. The unaudited pro forma condensed combined
financial statements are not necessarily indicative of the operating results or financial position that would
have been achieved had the acquisitions been consummated as of the dates indicated, or that may be
achieved in the future. While some reclassifications of prior periods have been included in the unaudited pro
forma condensed combined financial statements, further reclassifications may be necessary.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements were prepared using the acquisition
method of accounting, with Stratex treated as the acquiring entity. Accordingly, consideration paid by Stratex
related to the acquisition of Richfield will be allocated to Richfield’s assets and liabilities, based on their
estimated values as of the date of completion of their acquisition. The allocation is dependent upon certain
valuations and other studies by Stratex management that have not been finalized. A final determination of the
fair value of Richfield’s respective assets and liabilities, which has not yet been completed, will be based on
the actual net tangible assets of Richfield that exist as of the date of completion of the acquisition.
Accordingly, the pro forma purchase price adjustments are preliminary and subject to further adjustment as
additional information becomes available upon completion of the determinations described above. Increases
or decreases in the fair value of relevant balance sheet amounts will result in adjustments to the balance
sheet and/or statements of operations. There can be no assurance that the final determination will not result
in material changes from these preliminary amounts.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements have been derived from and should be
read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and unaudited interim financial statements of
Stratex and Richfield and the accompanying notes contained therein included elsewhere in this proxy
statement/prospectus.
On May 6, 2014, Stratex and Richfield entered into the merger agreement, pursuant to which, subject to the
satisfaction or waiver of certain conditions, Richfield will merge into a wholly owned subsidiary of Stratex.
Upon the consummation of the merger, each outstanding share of Richfield common stock (other than
shares held by those Richfield stockholders properly exercising dissenters rights) will be converted into the
right to receive shares of Stratex common stock in an amount to be determined by the application of a
formula set forth in the merger agreement as more fully described in “THE MERGER AGREEMENT — Merger
Consideration” beginning on page 67. Based on the number of shares of Richfield common stock
outstanding of 60,616,448 on August 14, 2014, each outstanding share of Richfield common stock (other than
shares held by those Richfield stockholders properly exercising dissenter’s rights) is expected to be
converted into one share of Stratex common stock. These pro forma financials assume no Richfield
stockholders will exercise dissenter’s rights. Under the terms of the merger agreement, holders of up to 10%
of the Richfield’s outstanding shares of common stock may exercise dissenter’s rights and be paid the fair
value of their shares in cash. However, the number of shares of Stratex common stock that may actually be
issued with respect to a share of Richfield common stock is subject to decrease based on the formula set
forth in the merger agreement in the event additional shares of Richfield common stock are issued prior to the
consummation of the merger, including, subject to certain limited exceptions, shares of Richfield common
stock issued upon exercise of Richfield’s outstanding warrants or upon conversion of Richfield’s
outstanding convertible notes. See “THE MERGER AGREEMENT — Merger Consideration” beginning on
page 67. No fractional shares of Stratex common stock will be issued in the merger and Richfield’s
stockholders will receive cash in lieu of fractional shares.
Under the merger agreement, Richfield is required to take such action as may be necessary so that each
outstanding warrant to purchase shares of Richfield common stock will be converted into the right to
purchase shares of Stratex common stock, with an adjustment in the number of shares and exercise price per
share as described in “THE MERGER AGREEMENT — Treatment of Richfield Warrants” on page 69. Richfield
is also required by the merger agreement to take such action as may be necessary so that each outstanding
convertible note which is convertible into shares of Richfield common stock will instead become convertible
into shares of Stratex common stock, with an adjustment in the number of shares of Stratex common stock
issuable upon conversion of the convertible notes as described in “THE MERGER AGREEMENT —
Treatment of Richfield Convertible Notes” on page 69.
The obligation of the parties to consummate the merger is subject to certain customary closing conditions
and additional closing conditions as described in “THE MERGER AGREEMENT — Conditions to Completion
of the Merger” beginning on page 69.
In order for Richfield to comply with terms of the merger, including reduction of debt and allowing Stratex to
be in a first security position on Richfield’s oil and gas properties, Richfield sold to Stratex a 3% undivided
working interest in a well for cash proceeds of $500,000.
60
Table of Contents
‘
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Unaudited Proforma Condensed Combined Balance Sheet
June 30, 2014
Assets
 
Current Assets:
Cash
Accounts receivable
Other receivables
Prepaid expenses
Note receivable and accrued interest
  Total Current Assets
 
Deposits
Richfield
  Actual
Stratex
 Actual
  
  
  
    
 $6,421,908   $93,363
   138,300
    516,560
    -
   244,282
   42,035
    111,342
   1,400,009     -
   8,246,534     721,265
    
   35,025
-
Richfield
  
  Acquisition   
  Pro Forma   
  Adjustments  
  
   
  
   
   
  
     
  
  $(2,608,062 )(3)
    (91,218
)(5)
  
    -
    -
  
    (1,400,009 )(3),(5)
    (4,099,289 ) 
  
     
    -
Stratex
  
  Pro Forma   
  Combined   
  
   
  
   
   
  
    
 
 $3,907,209  
   563,642
 
 
   244,282
 
   153,377
   -
 
   4,868,510  
 
    
   35,025
1,751,071  
   1,751,071     -
    
 
   -
     
   4,545,803     7,100,949     6,662,903  (1), (3)     18,309,655
-
    -
1,641,826     13,876,990     272,456
(1), (3),
(4) 
    2,061,848     (1,234,307 )(1)
316,845
15,791,272
1,144,386
(751,081
)   (1,234,307 )   1,234,307  (1)
(751,081
)
-
    434,000
4,827
2,171,340     (1,391,938 )
784,229
49,540
    -
    -
451,217
    -
    27,564
204,627
)   (191,229
    -
)(1)
    (191,229
)   191,229
 (1)
    1,652,339  (1)
72,548
   (6,562
)
   1,652,339  
 $42,867,162  
 
    
 
    
    
 
    
 
 $2,488,985  
   1,528,162  
   751,000
 
 
   554,000
59,150
   (6,562
   -
 $15,838,611   $22,540,143   $4,488,408   
  
    
  
    
  
    
    
  
)(5)
 $1,428,548   $1,151,655     (91,218
)(1),(5)
    1,177,303     (49,397
   400,256
   751,000
    -
  
 (1)
    -
   120,000
(1),(3),
(5)
 
   500,757
 (1)
   -
 
   148,769
  
   148,769
   27,564
 
   -
  
 $6,783,466  
   2,853,400     4,979,079     (1,049,013 ) 
    
 
     
    
  
 
    
     
  
    
 
   48,000
    -
  
   48,000
   400,356
 
    -
   34,157
  
   1,167,283  
  
   1,167,283     -
    -
   13,475,568  
  
   10,280,596     3,194,972     -
    
 
  
    
     
   15,091,207  
   11,530,036     3,561,171     -
  
    
 
    
  
     
   21,874,673  
   14,383,436     8,540,250     (1,049,013 ) 
 
    
  
    
    
 
    
  
 
    
  
    
 
    
  
    
 
  
    
    
) (2), (4)     -
   1
 
   1,169,038  
 (2), (4)
   492,874
   (20,000
   (20,000
  
)
   20,265,577     56,819,911     (37,958,760 )(2), (4)
   39,126,728  
   (19,283,277)
   (19,283,277)   (42,880,634)   42,880,634  (2), (3)
   20,992,489  
   1,455,175     13,999,893     5,537,421  (2)
    
    
  
 
 $15,838,611   $22,540,143   $4,488,408   
 $42,867,162
(1
    615,548
    -
-
    60,616
)   -
-
    366,199
Debt issuance costs
Oil and gas property, plant and equipment:
Proven property
Unproven property
Well and related equipment
Accumulated depletion, depreciation and
amortization
Vehicles, furniture and equipment
Accumulated depreciation
Goodwill
Total Assets
 
Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity
Current Liabilities:
Accounts payable
Accrued expenses and other payables
Due to former officer - current
Demand notes payable
Current maturities of notes payable - net of debt
discount
Convertible notes payable, net of debt discount
Derivative liability - warrants
Capital lease obligation
  Total Current Liabilities
 
Long-term Liabilities:
Due to former officer
Asset retirement obligations
Notes payable - net of debt discount
Convertible notes payable, net of debt discount
 
Total Long-Term Liabilities
 
Total Liabilities
 
Commitments and Contingencies
 
Stockholders' Equity:
 
Preferred stock
Common stock
Treasury stock
Additional paid in capital
Accumulated deficit
  Total Stockholders' Equity
 
Total Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity
61
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Statements of Operations
For the Six Months Ended June 30, 2014
Revenue
 
Operating Expenses:
Production expenses
Exploration
Depletion, depreciation and amortization
General and administrative
Impairment of oil and gas assets
Loss on abandonment of oil and gas assets
Total Operating Expenses
 
Loss From Operations
 
Other Income and (Expense):
Interest income
Interest expense
Gain (loss) on settlement of liabilities
Warrant amendment expense
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Change in fair value - derivative liabilities
Loss on share issuance
Gain on sale of oil and gas properties
Other income
Total Other Income and (Expense)
 
   Loss before income taxes
 
  Income tax provision
 
   Net Loss
 
   Net Loss Per Common Share  - Basic and Diluted
 
   Weighted Average Number of Common Shares
Outstanding
      - Basic and Diluted
62
Table of Contents
118,313
    -
Richfield
  Historical
     
  $419,260
     
     
    503,019
    133,729
    210,847
Stratex
 Historical
    
 $419,050
    
    
   181,730
   -
   41,707
   3,666,396     2,947,996     -
    -
   -
   318,800
    -
   4,208,633     3,913,904     21,378
    
   (3,789,583 )   (3,494,644 )   (21,378
     
    
     
    
   8,071
     
   (2,087,675 )   (659,882 )   -
    421,975
    -
   83,600
)   -
   (14,755
    -
    (530,218 )   -
   -
)   -
   (72,094
    -
    (642,502 )   -
   -
   450,000
    29,875
    -
   39,257
    -
    -
   (1,593,596 )   (1,380,752 )   -
    
     
   (5,383,179 )   (4,875,396 )   (21,378
    
   -
    
 $(5,383,179 ) $(4,876,043 ) $(21,378
    
 $(0.11
Richfield
 
 
 Stratex
  Acquisition  
 Pro Forma
 
  Pro Forma  
 Combined  
  Adjustments 
 
    
 
     
 
 $838,310
 
  $-
 
    
 
     
    
 
     
 
 
   684,749
 
    -
 
 
    -
   133,729
 
(6)   273,932
    21,378
 
 
   6,614,392
   118,313
 
 
   318,800.00  
 
 
   8,143,915
 
    
 
 
   (7,305,605 )
)
 
    
 
 
    
 
   8,071
 
 
   (2,747,557 )
 
 
   505,575
 
 
   (14,755
)
)
   (530,218
 
)
   (72,094
 
)
   (642,502
 
 
   479,875
 
   39,257
 
 
   (2,974,348 )
 
 
    
 
   (10,279,953 )
)
 
    
 
)
   (647
 
 
    
 
 $(10,280,600 )
)
 
    
 
)
 $(0.09
) $(0.09
)   -
)
(647
47,953,674    52,438,114    15,178,334 (7)   115,570,122
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Statements of Operations
For the Year Ended December 31, 2013
Richfield
343,933
    -
Stratex
 Historical
    
    
 $847,257
    
    
   268,083
   -
   150,101
   4,406,937     4,571,642     -
    -
   753,865
   -
    -
   5,578,986     6,376,607     61,246
    
   (4,731,729 )   (5,330,271 )   (61,246
     
    
     
    
   25
    -
   (1,318,051 )   (1,257,143 )   -
    30,367
   -
    -
   -
    (1,103,702 )   -
    -
    756,776
   516,880
    -
    105,106
   275,000
   12,960
    -
    -
   (513,186 )   (1,467,746 )   -
    
     
   (5,244,915 )   (6,798,017 )   (61,246
    
   -
    
 $(5,244,915 ) $(6,799,584 ) $(61,246
Stratex
  Acquisition  
   
 Pro Forma
 
  Pro Forma  
  Richfield
 Combined  
  Adjustments 
  Historical
    
 
     
 
     
 
    
 
     
     
 
 $1,893,593
 
  $1,046,336   $-
 
    
 
     
     
    
 
     
     
 
 
   1,209,994
 
    -
    941,911
 
 
    -
    136,431
   136,431
 
(8)   594,037
    382,690
    61,246
 
 
   8,978,579
 
 
   1,097,798
   -
 
 
   12,016,839  
 
 
    
 
   (10,123,246 )
)
 
    
 
 
    
 
   875
 
 
   (2,575,194 )
 
   30,367
 
 
 
   (1,103,702 )
 
   1,273,656
 
 
   380,106
 
   12,960
 
 
 
   (1,980,932 )
    
 
 
   (12,104,178 )
)
 
    
 
)
   (1,567
 
    
 
 
 $(12,105,745 )
)
(1,567
850
)   -
$(0.12
) $(0.19
)
$(0.11
)
44,787,051    36,393,603    31,222,845 (9)   112,403,499
Revenue
 
Operating Expenses:
Production expenses
Exploration
Depletion, depreciation and amortization
General and administrative
Impairment of oil and gas assets
Loss on abandonment of oil and gas assets
Total Operating Expenses
 
Loss From Operations
 
Other Income and (Expense):
Interest income
Interest expense
Gain on settlement of liabilities
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Change in fair value - derivative liabilities
Gain on sale of oil and gas properties
Other income
Total Other Income and (Expense)
 
Loss before income taxes
 
Income tax provision
 
Net Loss
 
Net Loss Per Common Share  
- Basic and Diluted
 
Weighted Average Number of Common Shares
Outstanding
- Basic and Diluted
63
Table of Contents
NOTES TO THE UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
1.
These adjustments reflect the estimated value of consideration paid by Stratex for the Richfield acquisition and to
reflect the estimated fair values of assets and liabilities for the Richfield acquisition as of June 30, 2014, in
accordance with the acquisition method of accounting. The following table reflects the preliminary allocation of the
total purchase price of Richfield to the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed based on the preliminary
estimates of fair value:
Estimated Fair Value of Assets Acquired:
 $721,265
 
Total current assets
Proven oil and gas properties (i)
   14,591,393  
Unproven oil and gas properties (ii)
   14,149,446  
 
   13,398
Vehicles, furniture and equipment
Deferred taxes (iii)
   -
 
Goodwill (iv)
   1,652,339  
    
 
Estimated Fair Value of Liabilities Assumed:
Total liabilities (v)
   (11,590,526)
 $19,537,314  
Total
 
    
 
    
 
Purchase Price(vi):
   60,616,448  
Shares of Stratex common stock issued to Richfield’s stockholders
 $0.30
 
Stratex common stock price
    
 
 
Fair value of common stock issued (vii)
 $18,184,934  
Fair value of 8,559,061 Richfield warrants exchanged for Stratex warrants (viii)   1,352,380  
 $19,537,314  
Total purchase price
(i)
As of the effective time of the Richfield acquisition, proven oil and gas properties are required to be measured at fair
value. The estimated step-up is preliminary and could vary materially from the actual step-up calculated after
closing. For purposes of these unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements, the estimated fair
value of Richfield‘s proven oil and gas properties is based on the December 31, 2013 independent engineering
report of LaRoche Petroleum Consultants, Ltd. The engineering report valuations were further adjusted for actual
production during the first six months ended June 30, 2014,, forward looking pricing and Stratex’s risk valuation
factors.  The amount was then grossed up to reflect the plug and abandonment liability component. Both Stratex
and Richfield account for their oil and gas properties using the successful efforts method of accounting.
(ii)
As of the effective time of the Richfield acquisition, unproven oil and gas properties are required to be measured at
fair value. The estimated step-up is preliminary and could vary materially from the actual step-up calculated after
closing. For purposes of the unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements, the estimated fair
value of Richfield’s unproven oil and gas properties is based on the latest actual third party working interest
transaction pricing, when available.  This method accounted for 99% of the value of the Richfield’s unproven oil
and gas properties.   One unproven property was assigned no value as the lease will expire within the next 12
months and there is no anticipated development or lease renewal occurring before that time. The remaining
unproven properties were valued based on carrying value which approximates actual lease costs as there has
been no third party working interest transaction activity associated with these properties.
(iii)
As of the effective time of the Richfield acquisition, deferred income tax assets and liabilities are required to be
measured at fair value based upon differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of assets and
liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are
expected to reverse.  Accounting standards require the consideration of a valuation allowance for deferred tax
assets if it is “more likely than not” that some component or all of the benefits of deferred tax assets will not be
realized.  The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements, reflecta determination that, due to
the combined companies having generated operating losses, a full valuation allowance for the deferred tax asset
of the combined companies is required as the “more likely than not” threshold is not met. The benefit of the
deferred tax assets is not expected to be realized at closing.
64
Table of Contents
(iv)
Goodwill is calculated as the difference between the acquisition fair value of the consideration expected to be
paid and the values assigned to the tangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized
but tested for impairment on an annual basis or when indication for impairment exists.
(v)Components of Richfield total liabilities are as follows:
Total historical Richfield liabilities as of June 30, 2014
 $8,450,250  
Additional Stratex loans available  to Richfield per merger agreement   2,608,062  
 
Employment contract liability to former officer
   434,000
   98,214
Elimination of debt discounts and deferred rent on closing
 
Total liabilities
 $11,590,526
(vi)
As of the effective time of the merger, the consideration paid is required to be measured at fair value. Based on the
terms of the merger agreement, total consideration to be paid by Stratex at closing is estimated to be $19,537,314
and consists of $18,184,934 of common stock of Stratex and $1,352,380 of warrants to purchase common stock of
Stratex.
(vii)
Represents the 60,616,448 shares of Stratex common stock estimated to be exchanged for all outstanding
Richfield common stock. The number of shares of common stock actually issued upon the consummation of the
merger may be less than this amount See “THE MERGER AGREEMENT — Merger Consideration” beginning on
page 67. For purposes of the unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements, the purchase price
reflects a Stratex common share valuation of $0.30 per share which is approximates the trading value of the
shares of Stratex’s common stock at the time the unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements
were prepared and is also the valuation of the conversion value of most of Stratex’s third party convertible notes
and the strike price of all warrants issued in 2014.  The share valuation is preliminary and could vary based upon
the actual price of the stock used for the valuation on closing. Since the announcement of the merger agreement,
the closing price of Stratex’s common stock has fluctuated approximately 20% above and 30% below the
common share price of $0.30 per share used in the pro forma valuation.  Based on this stock volatility, the actual
valuation at closing could range from approximately $23,174,301 to $14,081,834.
(viii)
Represents the 8,559,061 warrants to purchase shares of Stratex common stock estimated to be exchanged for
all Richfield outstanding warrants to purchase Richfield common stock.  The consideration value of these
warrants was calculated using the Black-Scholes option valuation model to calculate the fair value of the
warrants to be exchanged as of June 30, 2014.  For purposes of the unaudited pro forma condensed combined
financial statements, the purchase price reflects a Stratex warrant valuation in the amount of $1,352,380.  The
warrant valuation is preliminary and could vary based upon the actual price of the stock and other assumptions
used for the valuation on closing.
2.Pro forma adjustments to certain components of stockholders’ equity are as follows:
Add par value ($0.01) for 60,616,448 shares of Stratex issued to Richfield shareholders
Add additional paid in capital ($0.29) shares of Stratex issued to Richfield shareholders
Add additional paid in capital for exchange of  8,559,061 Richfield warrants into Stratex warrants to
purchase common stock
Add par value ($0.01) for 7,000,000 shares of Stratex common stock issued for redemption of preferred
stock
Eliminate 60 shares of Stratex preferred stock issued upon redemption for common stock
$606,164
   17,578,770
1,352,380
70,000
(1
)
Adjust additional paid in capital for the exchange of 7,000,000 shares of Stratex common stock for the
60 shares of Stratex preferred stock
 
Eliminate historical par value of Richfield common stock
Eliminate historical additional paid in capital of Richfield common stock
Eliminate historical accumulated deficit of Richfield
 
Total pro forma adjustments to stockholders’ equity
(69,999
)
)
   (60,616
   (56,819,911)
   42,880,634  
    
 
 $5,537,421
65
Table of Contents
3.
To adjust Stratex’s financial statements for $1,391,938 of principal and accrued interest of $8,071 for a total of
$1,400,009 that was outstanding as of June 30, 2014 and to record the effect of the $2,608,062 balance of the
$4,000,000 Stratex loan available to Richfield before the completion of the merger. For purposes of the unaudited
pro forma condensed combined financial statements, the proceeds were adjusted as follows: 1) to reduce Stratex
cash by $2,608,062 for the balance of the loan proceeds; 2) to acquire Richfield unproven property leases in the
amount of $100,000 as allowed in the loan agreement; 3) to reflect $375,000 used for Richfield operating costs
during the transition period; and 3) to reflect $2,133,062 used to rework and develop Richfield’s oil and gas
properties.
4.
To adjust for the exchange of all outstanding shares of Stratex’s Series A Preferred Stock for 7,000,000 shares of
Stratex common stock pursuant to the merger agreement.
5.
To eliminate the intercompany balances as follows: 1) $4,000,000 loan from Stratex to Richfield; 2) accrued interest
of $8,071 on the $4,000,000 loan; and 3) intercompany payables and receivables in the amount of $91,218.
6.
To adjust depletion expense in the amount of $21,378 for the six months ended June 30, 2014 to reflect the
additional depletion on the increased step-up value of Richfield’s proved producing properties as a result of the
merger.
7.
To adjust the weighted average shares outstanding for the six months ended June 30, 2014 by 15,178,334 shares
of common stock to give effect for the combined 115,570,122 basic and diluted shares of Stratex common stock
comprised of 47,953,674 shares of Stratex common stock reported on June 30, 2014 plus 60,616,448 shares of
Stratex common stock expected to be exchanged for all outstanding Richfield common stock and 7,000,000 shares
of Stratex common stock that were exchanged for the outstanding 60 shares of Stratex preferred stock required per
the merger agreement as if the exchanges were effective on January 1, 2014.  As the combined companies have
incurred losses for the six months ended June 30, 2014, the potentially dilutive shares are anti-dilutive and are thus
not added into the loss per share calculations.
8.
To adjust depletion expense in the amount of $61,246 for the year ended December 31, 2013 to reflect the
additional depletion on the increased step-up value of Richfield’s proved producing properties as a result of the
merger.
To adjust the weighted average shares outstanding for the year ended December 31, 2013 by 31,222,845 shares of
common stock to give effect for the combined 112,403,499 basic and diluted shares of Stratex common stock
9.
comprised of 44,787,051 shares of common stock Stratex reported on December 31, 2013 plus 60,616,448 shares
of Stratex common stock expected to be exchanged for all outstanding Richfield common stock and 7,000,000
shares of Stratex common stock that were exchanged for the outstanding 60 shares of Stratex preferred stock
required per the Merger Agreement as if the exchanges were effective on January 1, 2013.  As the combined
companies have incurred losses for the year ended December 31, 2013, the potentially dilutive shares are anti-
dilutive and are thus not added into the loss per share calculations.
66
Table of Contents
The Merger Agreement
The following is a summary of the material terms and conditions of the merger agreement. This summary may
not contain all of the information about the merger agreement that is important to you. The summary in this
section and elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus is qualified in its entirety by reference to the merger
agreement attached as Annex A to, and incorporated by reference into, this proxy statement/prospectus. You
are encouraged to read the merger agreement in its entirety because it is the legal document that governs the
merger.
Structure of the Merger
The merger agreement provides for a transaction in which Merger Sub will merge with and into Richfield,
upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the merger agreement. Richfield will be the surviving
corporation in the merger and will, following completion of the merger, be a wholly owned subsidiary of
Stratex.
After completion of the merger, the certificate of incorporation and bylaws of Merger Sub in effect as of
completion of the merger will be the certificate of incorporation and bylaws of the surviving corporation.
After completion of the merger, the directors of Merger Sub and the officers of Richfield (other than Richfield’s
Chief Executive Officer) will be the directors and officers, respectively, of the surviving corporation until their
successors are duly elected or appointed and qualified in accordance with the surviving corporation’s
certificate of incorporation, bylaws and applicable law.
Following the completion of the merger, Richfield common stock will cease to be quoted for trading on the
OTCQX and will be deregistered under the Exchange Act.
Completion and Effectiveness of the Merger
The merger will be completed and become effective at such time as Articles of Merger are duly filed with the
Secretary of State of the State of Nevada (or at such later time as is agreed to by Stratex, Merger Sub, and
Richfield and specified in the Articles of Merger). Unless another date and time are agreed to by Stratex,
Merger Sub, and Richfield, completion of the merger will occur three business days following satisfaction or,
to the extent permitted by applicable law, waiver, of the conditions to completion of the merger (other than
those conditions that by their nature are to be satisfied at completion of the merger, but subject to the
satisfaction or waiver of such conditions at the time of completion of the merger) described under “—
Conditions to Completion of the Merger” beginning on page 69.
As of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, the merger is expected to be completed by December 1,
2014. However, completion of the merger is subject to the satisfaction or, to the extent permitted by applicable
law, waiver of the conditions to completion of the merger, which are summarized below. There can be no
assurances as to when, or if, the merger will occur. If the merger is not completed on or before the initial end
date of December 1, 2014, either Stratex or Richfield may terminate the merger agreement, unless all
conditions to the merger have been satisfied other than certain conditions relating to the receipt of Richfield
stockholder approval or the failure of the registration statement of which the proxy statement/prospectus is a
part to be declared effective by the SEC, in which case Stratex or Richfield can extend the initial end date to
January 30, 2015. If the initial end date is so extended, Stratex or Richfield can terminate the merger
agreement if the merger is not completed on or before January 30, 2014. The right to terminate the merger
agreement on the end date will not be available to Stratex or Richfield if that party’s breach of any provision of
the merger agreement resulted in the failure of the merger to be completed by that date. See “—Conditions to
Completion of the Merger” and “—Termination of the Merger Agreement” beginning on pages 69 and 79,
respectively.
Merger Consideration
At completion of the merger, each share of Richfield common stock outstanding immediately prior to
completion of the merger (except for shares held by Richfield stockholders who properly exercise their
dissenters’ rights) will be converted into the right to receive a number of shares, or a fraction of a share of
Stratex common stock determined by a fraction, the numerator of which currently is 60,616,448 and the
denominator of which is the number of shares of Richfield common stock which are outstanding at the close
of business on the day immediately preceding the effective time of the merger. We call this fraction the
exchange ratio. The numerator for the exchange ratio set forth in the agreement is the sum of 59,193,376 plus
the number of shares of common stock (but no more than 3,000,000) issued by Richfield after the date of the
merger agreement upon the cash exercise of warrants outstanding on the date of the merger agreement plus
the number of shares of common stock (but no more than 2,000,000) issued by Richfield after the date of the
merger agreement upon the conversion of its convertible notes outstanding on the date of the merger
agreement. As a result of Richfield’s issuance of shares of common stock since the date of the merger
agreement upon the cash exercise of warrants and the conversion of convertible notes, the denominator is
now 60,616,448 and the exchange ratio is now 1/1. Subject to the 3,000,000 and 2,000,000 limits set forth
above, the issuance of additional shares of Richfield common stock upon the cash exercise of warrants
outstanding on the date of the merger agreement or upon the conversion of convertible notes outstanding on
the date of the merger agreement will have no effect upon the exchange ratio, since the same number of
shares would be added to the numerator and denominator of the exchange ratio. However, if shares of
common stock are issued by Richfield in excess of the 3,000,000 and 2,000,000 limits or if shares of common
stock are issued by Richfield upon the exercise of warrants on a cashless basis, the number of shares of
Stratex common stock a Richfield stockholder would be entitled to receive upon completion of the merger
would decrease, because those shares would be added to the denominator of the exchange ratio, but would
not be added to the numerator of the exchange ratio.
67
Table of Contents
Each share of common stock of Merger Sub outstanding immediately prior to completion of the merger will be
converted into one share of common stock of the surviving corporation.
If, between the date of the merger agreement and completion of the merger, if the outstanding shares of
Stratex or Richfield common stock have changed into a different number of shares or a different class of
shares as a result of any stock dividend, subdivision, reorganization, reclassification, recapitalization, stock
split, reverse stock split, combination or exchange of shares, or any similar event (but excluding the issuance
of shares of Stratex common stock in exchange for Stratex Series A Preferred Stock, or pursuant to the
exercise of convertible notes, warrants, or options), the merger consideration and any other amounts payable
pursuant to the merger agreement will be appropriately adjusted to eliminate the effect of such event thereon.
Fractional Shares
No fractional shares of Stratex common stock will be issued to any holder of shares of Richfield common
stock upon completion of the merger. Instead, all fractional shares of Stratex common stock that a holder of
shares of Richfield common stock would otherwise be entitled to receive as a result of the merger will be
aggregated and, if a fractional share results from that aggregation, the holder will be entitled to receive cash in
an amount determined by multiplying that fraction by the volume average weighted closing price of Stratex
common stock for the 20 trading days preceding the effective time of the merger. No interest will be paid or
accrued on cash payable in lieu of fractional shares of Stratex common stock.
Procedures for Surrendering Richfield Stock Certificates
The conversion of Richfield common stock into the right to receive the merger consideration will occur
automatically at completion of the merger. Prior to completion of the merger, Stratex will appoint an exchange
agent reasonably acceptable to Richfield to handle the exchange of certificates or book-entry shares
representing shares of Richfield common stock for the merger consideration. At the effective time of the
merger, Stratex will deposit with the exchange agent (i) the shares of Stratex common stock and (ii) cash in
lieu of fractional shares, in each case comprising the merger consideration payable in respect of Richfield
common stock. As soon as reasonably practicable (but not later than five business days) after completion of
the merger, Stratex will cause the exchange agent to send a letter of transmittal to each person who is a
record holder of Richfield common stock at completion of the merger for use in the exchange and
instructions explaining how to surrender Richfield stock certificates or transfer uncertificated shares of
Richfield common stock to the exchange agent.
Richfield stockholders who submit a properly completed letter of transmittal, together with their share
certificates (in the case of certificated shares) or other evidence of transfer requested by the exchange agent
(in the case of book-entry shares), will receive the merger consideration into which the shares of Richfield
common stock were converted in the merger. After completion of the merger, each certificate that previously
represented shares of Richfield common stock and each uncertificated share of Richfield common stock that
previously was registered to a holder on Richfield’s stock transfer books, other than certificates or
uncertificated shares held by a Richfield stockholder who has properly exercised such stockholder’s
dissenters’ rights, will only represent the right to receive the merger consideration into which those shares of
Richfield common stock have been converted.
68
Table of Contents
Neither Stratex nor Richfield will be responsible for transfer or other similar taxes and fees incurred by
holders of Richfield common stock in connection with the merger. Those taxes and fees, if any, will be the
sole responsibility of such holders. In addition, if there is a transfer of ownership of Richfield common stock
that is not registered in the records of Richfield’s transfer agent, payment of the merger consideration as
described above will be made to a person other than the person in whose name the certificate or
uncertificated share so surrendered is registered only if the certificate is properly endorsed or otherwise is in
proper form for transfer or the uncertificated shares are properly transferred, and the person requesting such
payment must pay to the exchange agent any transfer or other taxes to be paid or satisfy the exchange agent
that any transfer or other taxes have been paid or that no payment of those taxes is necessary.
Treatment of Richfield Warrants
Richfield is required to take such action so that at the completion of the merger, each outstanding warrant to
purchase shares of Richfield common stock will be converted into a warrant to purchase the number of
shares of Stratex common stock equal to the product of (x) the number of shares of Richfield common stock
for which the warrant was exercisable immediately prior to the completion of the merger multiplied by (y) the
exchange ratio (with any fractional share rounded down to the next lower whole share of Stratex common
stock). The exercise price per share of Stratex common stock will be equal to the quotient of (i) the exercise
price of such warrant immediately prior to the completion of the merger divided by (ii) the Exchange Ratio
(rounded up to the nearest whole cent). Such converted warrants will be subject to the same terms and
conditions as were applicable immediately prior to completion of the merger.
Treatment of Richfield Convertible Notes
Richfield is required to take such action so that at the completion of the merger, each outstanding Richfield
note which is convertible into shares of Richfield common stock will be converted into a note which is
convertible into a number of shares of Stratex common stock equal to the aggregate number of shares of
Richfield Common Stock such Richfield note is convertible into multiplied by the exchange ratio, rounded
down to the nearest whole share.
Conditions to Completion of the Merger
Mutual Conditions to Completion
The obligation of each of Stratex, Richfield and Merger Sub to complete the merger is subject to the
satisfaction or waiver (to the extent permitted by law) of the following conditions:
·approval of the merger agreement by holders of a majority of the outstanding shares of Richfield common stock
entitled to vote;
the absence of any injunction and the absence of the adoption or effectiveness of any law which prohibits the
·
completion of the merger;
the SEC having declared effective the registration statement of which this proxy statement/prospectus is a part and
·
not having entered a stop order or initiating any proceedings for that purpose; and
all of the outstanding shares of Stratex’s Series A Preferred Stock shall have been converted into 7,000,000 shares
·
of Stratex common stock.
69
Table of Contents
Additional Conditions to Completion for the Benefit of Richfield
In addition, the obligation of Richfield to complete the merger is subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the
following conditions:
the accuracy (subject only to de minimis exceptions) as of the date of the merger agreement of certain
·
representations and warranties made in the merger agreement by Stratex regarding its capitalization;
the accuracy (in all material respects in the case of representations and warranties that are not qualified by material
adverse effect) as of the date of the merger agreement and as of completion of the merger (or, in the case of
·
representations and warranties that by their terms address matters only as of another particular date or period, as of
that date or period) of the representations and warranties made in the merger agreement by Stratex;
the performance in all material respects by Stratex of the obligations required to be performed by it under the merger
·
agreement at or prior to completion of the merger;
the absence of a material adverse effect with respect to Stratex and its subsidiaries, taken as a whole, since the date
·
of the merger agreement;
the absence of any proceeding in which an unfavorable outcome would prevent the completion of any of the
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement or cause any such transaction to be rescinded; provided that this
·
condition will not be available to Richfield if this resulted from a proceeding filed by Richfield or any of its
subsidiaries;
Stratex shall have provided Richfield with reasonably satisfactory evidence that it has not less than $2,000,000 cash
·
on hand;
Alan D. Gaines shall have resigned as a director and as the Executive Chairman of Richfield and shall have joined
·
Stratex’s board of directors;
Stratex shall have made all advances under the loan agreement which Richfield has been entitled to receive (See
·
“THE Loan Agreement” beginning on page 82); and
receipt of a certificate executed by an executive officer of Stratex as to the satisfaction of the conditions described in
·
the preceding eight bullets.
Additional Conditions to Completion for the Benefit of Stratex
In addition, the obligation of Stratex to complete the merger is subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the
following conditions:
the accuracy (subject only to de minimis exceptions) as of the date of the merger agreement of certain
·
representations and warranties made in the merger agreement by Richfield regarding its capitalization;
the accuracy (in all material respects in the case of representations and warranties that are not qualified by material
adverse effect) as of the date of the merger agreement and as of completion of the merger (or, in the case of
·
representations and warranties that by their terms address matters only as of another particular date or period, as of
that date or period) of the representations and warranties made in the merger agreement by Richfield;
the performance in all material respects by Richfield of the obligations required to be performed by it under the
·
merger agreement at or prior to completion of the merger;
the absence of a material adverse effect with respect to Richfield and its subsidiaries, taken as a whole, since the
·
date of the merger agreement;
the absence of any proceeding in which an unfavorable outcome would prevent the completion of any of the
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, cause any such transaction to be rescinded, adversely affect
·
Stratex’s right to own the capital stock of the surviving corporation and to control the surviving corporation, or
adversely affect the right of Richfield or its subsidiaries to own their assets or operate their assets; provided that this
condition will not be available to Stratex if this resulted from a proceeding filed by Stratex or any of its subsidiaries;
70Table of Contents
Richfield shall have provided satisfactory evidence that its liabilities (excluding liabilities under the loan agreement,
capital leases, deferred rent obligations, any accrued liability for employee severance compensation approved in
·
advance by Stratex, and plugging and abandonment liabilities) not exceeding $6,650,000 immediately prior to the
closing (which $6,650,000 limit may be increased by up to an aggregate amount of $500,000 in field-related
payables so long as there are corresponding field-related receivables and/or deposits);
Richfield shall have either extended the maturity/payment dates of its outstanding promissory notes for a period of
·
one year past the effective time of the merger (until June 30, 2016 in the case of one note holder) or reached another
accommodation with the holders of those notes acceptable to Stratex;
Richfield’s Chief Executive Officer shall have resigned as an officer and director of Richfield and entered into a
·
consulting agreement with Stratex satisfactory to Stratex;
·Richfield shall have fully paid and satisfied the judgment against it in favor of Nostra Terra Oil & Gas, Inc.;
the holders of not more than ten percent of the outstanding shares of Richfield common stock shall have taken steps
·
to exercise their dissenters’ rights; and
receipt of a certificate executed by an executive officer of Richfield as to the satisfaction of the conditions described in
·
the preceding ten bullets.
Representations and Warranties
The merger agreement contains a number of representations and warranties made by Richfield, on the one
hand, and each of Stratex and Merger Sub, on the other hand, made solely for the benefit of the other, and
that are subject in some cases to important exceptions and qualifications, including, among other things, as
to materiality and material adverse effect. Furthermore, the assertions embodied in those representations and
warranties are qualified by information in the confidential disclosure schedules that the parties have
exchanged in connection with signing the merger agreement. The confidential disclosure schedules contain
information that modifies, qualifies and creates exceptions to the representations and warranties set forth in
the agreement. See “—Definition of ‘Material Adverse Effect”’ beginning on page 73 for a definition of material
adverse effect. The representation and warranties were used for the purpose of allocation of risk between the
parties to the merger agreement rather than establishing matters of fact. For the foregoing reasons, you
should not rely on the representations and warranties contained in the merger agreement as statements of
factual information. The representations and warranties in the merger agreement relate to, among other
things:
·corporate existence, good standing and qualification to do business;
corporate power and authority to execute and deliver the merger agreement and each other document to be entered
·
into in connection with the merger and, subject to the approval of Richfield stockholders, to perform and comply with
their respective obligations thereunder and consummate the transactions contemplated thereby;
· governmental actions necessary to complete the merger;
absence of any conflict with or violation or breach of organizational documents, laws or regulations or agreements as
·
a result of the execution, delivery or performance of the merger agreement and completion of the merger;
·
capital structure;
71
Table of Contents
absence of preemptive or other similar rights or any debt securities having the right to vote with Richfield
·
stockholders on any matters;
·corporate existence, good standing, qualification to do business and capital structure of subsidiaries;
SEC filings, the absence of misstatements or omissions from such filings and compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley
·
Act of 2002;
·disclosure controls and procedures and internal controls over financial reporting;
· fair presentation of financial statements;
information provided by a party for inclusion in disclosure documents to be filed with the SEC in connection with the
·merger;
conduct of business in the ordinary course of business and absence of any event, occurrence, development or
·
circumstance that has had or would reasonably be expected to have, individually or in the aggregate, a material
adverse effect, in each case since December 31, 2013;
· absence of undisclosed liabilities;
· compliance with laws, court orders and permits;
·absence of pending or threatened legal proceedings and investigations;
·
·
·
·
· material contracts;
· employee benefit plans;
· employment and labor law matters;
·
·absence of any undisclosed broker’s or finder’s fees payable in connection with the merger.
regulatory matters;
insurance; and
tax matters;
properties;
reserve reports;
Richfield also makes representations and warranties relating to, among other things, intellectual property
matters, derivatives, the inapplicability of antitakeover laws, and the stockholder approval required for the
merger.
The representations and warranties in the merger agreement do not survive completion of the merger.
See “—Explanatory Note Regarding the Merger Agreement and the Summary of the Merger Agreement:
Representations, Warranties and Covenants in the Merger Agreement Are Not Intended to Function or Be
Relied on as Public Disclosures” on page 81.
72
Table of Contents
Definition of “Material Adverse Effect”
Several of the representations and warranties in the merger agreement are qualified by “material adverse
effect.”
For purposes of the merger agreement, “material adverse effect” means, with respect to Richfield or Stratex,
as the case may be, any event, change, effect, development, or occurrence that has had, or is reasonably
likely to have, a material adverse effect on the business, financial condition, of continuing results of
operations of that party and its subsidiaries, taken as a whole, in each case other than any event, change,
effect, development, or occurrence effect resulting from:
changes in general economic, financial or other capital market conditions (including prevailing interest rates), except
·
to the extent disproportionately affecting such party and its subsidiaries, taken as a whole, relative to other similarly
situated companies in the industries in which such party and its subsidiaries operate;
any changes or developments generally in the industries in which such party or any of its subsidiaries conducts its
·
business, except to the extent disproportionately affecting such party and its subsidiaries, taken as a whole, relative
to other similarly situated companies in the industries in which such and its subsidiaries operate;
the announcement of, or compliance with, the merger or the other transactions contemplated by the merger
agreement, including the impact thereof on the relationships, contractual or otherwise, of such party or any of its
·
subsidiaries with employees, labor unions, customers, suppliers or partners, and including any lawsuit, action or
other proceeding with respect to the merger or any such other transactions; 
· any action taken at the request of the other party;
any changes or developments in prices for oil, natural gas or other commodities or such party’s raw material inputs
·
and end products);
any adoption, implementation, promulgation, repeal, modification, reinterpretation or proposal of any rule, regulation,
ordinance, order, protocol or any other law of or by any national, regional, state or local governmental entity, or
·
market administrator, except to the extent disproportionately affecting such party and its subsidiaries, taken as a
whole, relative to other similarly situated companies in the industries in which such party and its subsidiaries operate;
any changes in generally accepted accounting principles or accounting standards or interpretations thereof, except to
the extent disproportionately affecting such party and its subsidiaries, taken as a whole, relative to other similarly
·
situated companies in the industries in which such party and its subsidiaries operate;
earthquakes, any weather-related or other force majeure event or natural disasters or outbreak or escalation of
hostilities or acts of war or terrorism, except to the extent disproportionately affecting such party and its subsidiaries,
·
taken as a whole, relative to other similarly situated companies in the industries in which such party and its
subsidiaries operate;
any failure by such party to meet any financial projections or forecasts or estimates of revenues, earnings or other
·
financial metrics for any period; and
·any changes in the share price or trading volume of the such party’s stock or its credit ratings.
Conduct of Business Pending the Merger
In general, except (i) as may be required by law, (ii) as set forth in the confidential disclosure schedules
delivered to the other party concurrently with execution of the merger agreement, (iii) as consented to by the
other party in writing, (iv) as expressly contemplated by the merger agreement, from the date of the merger
agreement until completion of the merger, Stratex, Richfield and their respective subsidiaries are required to
conduct their respective business in the ordinary course and to use commercially reasonable efforts to
preserve intact their respective lines of business, rights, franchises, and permits and relationships with third
parties.
73
Table of Contents
Except (i) as required by applicable law, (ii) as consented to by Stratex, or (iii) as contemplated or required by
the merger agreement, from the date of the merger agreement through completion of the merger, each of
Richfield and each of its subsidiaries is not permitted to, among other things:
· amend its organizational documents;
split, combine or reclassify any shares of its capital stock or authorize the issuance of any other securities in respect
·
of, in lieu of or in substitution for shares of its capital stock, except for any such transaction by a wholly owned
subsidiary of Richfield which remains a wholly owned subsidiary after such transaction;
authorize or pay any dividends on or make any distribution with respect to its outstanding shares of capital stock
(whether in cash, assets, stock or other securities), except dividends or distributions by any direct or indirect wholly
·
owned subsidiary only to Richfield or to another wholly owned subsidiary of Richfield in the ordinary course of
business;
adopt a plan of complete or partial liquidation, dissolution, merger, consolidation, restructuring, recapitalization or
other reorganization, other than the merger or take any action with respect to any securities owned by such person
·
that would reasonably be expected to prevent, materially impede or materially delay the consummation of the merger
or any other transaction contemplated by the merger agreement;
make any acquisition of any other person or business or make any loans, advances or capital contributions to, or
·
investments in, any other person;
except for authorized expenditures made with the proceeds of the loan agreement, not make any capital expenditures
·
exceeding $25,000 in the aggregate;
sell, lease, license, transfer, exchange or swap, or otherwise dispose of or encumber any properties or non-cash
assets, except (1) sales, transfers and dispositions of obsolete or worthless equipment, (2) sales, transfers and
·
dispositions of inventory, commodities and produced hydrocarbons, crude oil and refined products in the ordinary
course of business, or (3) sales, leases, transfers or other dispositions made in connection with any transaction
among Richfield and its wholly owned subsidiaries or among Richfield’s wholly owned subsidiaries;
authorize any capital expenditures, except for (1) expenditures contemplated by Richfield’s reserve report as of
December 31, 2013, but only to the extent Richfield has sufficient cash on hand to make such expenditures without
·
incurring additional debt other than the loan agreement, (2) expenditures made in response to any emergency,
whether caused by war, terrorism, weather events, public health events, outages or otherwise, and (3) expenditures
made to acquire or re-lease oil and gas leases owned by Richfield that will be expiring in 2014;
enter into any new contract to sell hydrocarbons other than in the ordinary course of business consistent with past
·
practice, but in no event having a duration longer than 30 days;
except as required by law or the terms of any Richfield benefit plan in effect on the date of the merger agreement, not
(1) establish, adopt, amend, modify, commence participation in or terminate (or commit to establish, adopt, amend,
modify, commence participation in or terminate) any collective bargaining agreement, bonus, profit-sharing, thrift,
pension, retirement, deferred compensation, stock option, restricted stock agreement, plan or arrangement covering
any current or former directors, officers, employees, consultants, independent contractors or other service providers or
other existing benefit plan (other than amendments or modifications to broad-based Richfield benefit plans in the
ordinary course of business that do not materially increase the cost or expense to Richfield of providing or
administering such benefits), (2) increase in any manner the compensation, severance or benefits of any current or
·
former directors, officers, employees, consultants, independent contractors or other service providers, (3) pay or
award, or commit to pay or award, any bonuses or incentive compensation, (4) enter into any new or modify any
existing employment, severance, termination, retention or consulting agreement with any current or former directors,
officers, employees, consultants, independent contractors or other service providers, (5) accelerate any rights or
benefits, (6) fund any rabbi trust or similar arrangement, (7) change any actuarial assumptions used to calculate
funding obligations with respect to any benefit plan or change the manner in which contributions to such plans are
made or the basis on which such contributions are determined, except as may be required by GAAP or applicable
law, or (8) hire or terminate the employment or services of (other than for cause) any officer, employee, independent
contractor or consultant;
74
Table of Contents
materially change financial accounting policies or procedures or any of its methods of reporting income, deductions
·
or other material items for financial accounting purposes, except as required by GAAP, SEC rules or policy or
applicable law;
issue, sell, pledge, dispose of or encumber, or authorize the issuance, sale, pledge, disposition or encumbrance of,
any shares of its capital stock or other ownership interests or any securities convertible into or exchangeable for any
such shares or ownership interest, or any rights, warrants or options to acquire any such shares of capital stock,
·
ownership interest or convertible or exchangeable securities or take any action to cause to be exercisable any
otherwise unexercisable option under any existing Richfield benefit plans (except as otherwise provided by the terms
of any Richfield warrant or convertible note identified in the Richfield’s confidential disclosure schedule);
incur, assume, guarantee or otherwise become liable for any indebtedness for borrowed money or any guarantee of
such indebtedness, except for (1) indebtedness under the loan agreement, (2) any indebtedness among Richfield
and its wholly owned subsidiaries or among those wholly owned subsidiaries, (3) any indebtedness incurred to
replace, renew, extend, refinance or refund any existing indebtedness on substantially the same or more favorable
terms to Richfield than such existing indebtedness, and (4) for any guarantees by Richfield of indebtedness of its
·
subsidiaries or guarantees by its subsidiaries of Richfield indebtedness, which indebtedness is incurred in
compliance with the foregoing restrictions; provided, however, that in the case of each of clauses (2) through (4), such
indebtedness does not impose or result in any additional restrictions or limitations that would be material to Richfield
and its subsidiaries, or, following the merger, Stratex and its subsidiaries, other than any obligation to make
payments on such indebtedness and other than any restrictions or limitations to which Richfield or any subsidiary
was subject under the terms of any indebtedness outstanding as of the date of the merger agreement;
waive, release, assign, settle or compromise any claim, action or proceeding, other than waivers, releases,
·
assignments, settlements or compromises equal to or lesser than the amounts reserved with respect thereto on the
most recent consolidated balance sheet of Richfield and its subsidiaries prior to the merger agreement;
make, change or revoke any tax election outside the ordinary course of business, change any tax accounting method,
file any amended tax return, enter into any closing agreement, request any tax ruling, settle or compromise any tax
·
proceeding, or surrender any claim for a refund of taxes, in each case, if such action would reasonably be expected
to increase by a material amount the taxes of Richfield or Stratex;
except for refinancing permitted above or for transactions between Richfield and its subsidiaries or among its
subsidiaries, prepay, redeem, repurchase, defease, cancel or otherwise acquire any indebtedness or guarantees
thereof of Richfield or any subsidiary, other than (1) at stated maturity and (2) any required amortization payments
·
and mandatory prepayments (including mandatory prepayments arising from any change of control put rights to
which holders of such indebtedness or guarantees thereof may be entitled), in each case in accordance with the
terms of the instrument governing such indebtedness as in effect on the date of the merger agreement; or
·agree, in writing or otherwise, to take any of the foregoing prohibited actions.
75
Table of Contents
Except (i) as required by applicable law, (ii) as consented to by Richfield, (iii) as contemplated or required by
the merger agreement, (iv) for the other exceptions described below, from the date of the merger agreement
through completion of the merger, each of Stratex and each of its subsidiaries is not permitted to, among
other things:
· amend its organizational documents;
authorize or pay any dividends on or make any distribution with respect to its outstanding shares of capital stock
·
(whether in cash, assets, stock or other securities), except dividends or distributions by any direct or indirect wholly
owned subsidiary only to Stratex or to another wholly owned subsidiary of Stratex in the ordinary course of business;
adopt a plan of complete or partial liquidation, dissolution, merger, consolidation, restructuring, recapitalization or
other reorganization, other than the merger or take any action with respect to any securities owned by such person
·
that would reasonably be expected to prevent, materially impede or materially delay the consummation of the merger
or any other transaction contemplated by the merger agreement;
issue, sell, pledge, dispose of or encumber, or authorize the issuance, sale, pledge, disposition or encumbrance of,
any share of capital stock or other ownership interest or any securities convertible into or exchangeable for any such
shares or ownership interest, or any rights, warrants or options to acquire any such shares of capital stock, ownership
interest or convertible or exchangeable securities or take any action to cause to be exercisable any otherwise
unexercisable option under any existing Stratex benefit plans (except as otherwise provided by the terms of the
·
merger agreement or the express terms of any unexercisable or unexercised options or warrants outstanding on the
date hereof), other than (1) as contemplated by the merger agreement, (2) issuances and sales of convertible debt,
warrants, capital stock, and other securities for cash, (3) the sale of Richfield common stock pursuant to the exercise
of options if necessary to effectuate an option direction upon exercise or for withholding of taxes, or (4) for
transactions among Richfield and its wholly owned subsidiaries or among its wholly owned subsidiaries;
make, change or revoke any tax election outside the ordinary course of business, change any tax accounting method,
file any amended tax return, enter into any closing agreement, request any tax ruling, settle or compromise any tax
·
proceeding, or surrender any claim for a refund of taxes, in each case, if such action would reasonably be expected
to increase by a material amount the taxes of Stratex or any of its subsidiaries;
unless one or more additional directors have been added to Stratex’s board of directors who satisfy the definition of
·
“Independent Director” set forth in the rules of the NASDAQ Stock Market, grant compensatory cash bonuses or stock
options to any person that is a director, officer, or consultant of Parent on the date of the merger agreement; or
·agree, in writing or otherwise, to take any of the foregoing prohibited actions.
Notwithstanding the above restrictions on Stratex’s activities prior to the completion of the merger, Stratex
and its subsidiaries may take the following actions:
sell or otherwise dispose of assets, including oil and gas leases, working interests, development rights, and
·
ownership interests in any subsidiary to any unrelated third party for fair market value;
·issue convertible debt, warrants, capital stock, and other securities in capital raising transactions;
grant options to purchase up to 3,500,000 shares of Stratex common stock to new (non-director) employees or
·
consultants; and
acquire other persons or businesses or make loans, advances or capital contributions to, or investments in, other
·
persons.
76
Table of Contents
Obligation of the Richfield Board of Directors to Recommend the Merger Agreement and Call and Hold a
Stockholders’ Meeting
As soon as reasonably practicable, Richfield has agreed to call and hold a meeting of its stockholders for the
purpose of obtaining the vote of the Richfield stockholders necessary to adopt the merger agreement.
As discussed under “PROPOSALS TO BE CONSIDERED AT THE RICHFIELD SPECIAL MEETING – The
Merger Proposal” beginning on page 50, the Richfield board of directors recommends that Richfield’s
stockholders vote “FOR” the approval of the merger agreement. The Richfield board of directors, however,
can (i) change, qualify, withhold, withdraw or modify in a manner adverse to Stratex its recommendation that
Richfield stockholders approve the proposal to approve the merger agreement, or (ii) recommend a
competing acquisition proposal, in each case under specified circumstances as discussed under “—No
Solicitation by Richfield” beginning on this page below.
No Solicitation by Richfield
Subject to the exceptions described below, Richfield has agreed that neither Richfield nor any of its affiliates,
nor any of their officers, directors, and employees will (and Richfield has agreed to its reasonable best efforts
to cause its agents, financial advisors, investment bankers, attorneys, accountants, and other representatives
(which are collectively referred to in this proxy statement/prospectus as representatives) to not), directly or
indirectly: (i) solicit, initiate or knowingly facilitate or encourage the submission of any “takeover proposal”
(as defined below), (ii) engage in, continue or otherwise participate in any discussions regarding, or furnish
any non-public information in connection with or to encourage or facilitate a takeover proposal, (iii) approve,
recommend, or enter into any letter of intent or similar document with respect to a takeover proposal, (iv)
release any party from any obligations under a standstill agreement or fail to enforce the provisions of any
standstill agreement.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, but subject to the terms and conditions described below, at any time prior to
the approval of the merger agreement by Richfield’s stockholders:
Richfield, directly or indirectly through advisors, agents or other intermediaries, may (i) engage in negotiations or
discussions with any third party that, subject to Richfield’s compliance with the solicitation restrictions described in
the first paragraph of this section (“—No Solicitation by Richfield”) has made, after the date of the merger agreement,
a takeover proposal that Richfield’s board of directors determines in good faith, after consultation with its outside
legal and financial advisors, constitutes a “superior proposal” (as defined below), (ii) furnish to such third party and its
·
representatives non-public information relating to Richfield or any of its subsidiaries pursuant to a customary
confidentiality agreement with such third party with terms no less favorable to Richfield than the confidentiality
agreement between Richfield and Stratex; provided that all such information (to the extent not previously provided or
made available to Stratex) is concurrently provided or made available to Stratex at the time it is provided or made
available to such third party; and
the Richfield board of directors may make an adverse recommendation change following receipt of a superior
proposal, but only if Richfield has (i) given Stratex at least three business days’ prior notice of its intent to take such
action and has at the same time given Stratex a copy of the superior proposal and related agreements, (ii) has
negotiated in good faith any revisions to the terms of the merger made by Stratex which would result in the superior
·
proposal no longer being a superior proposal, (iii) the Richfield board of directors has considered in good faith any
such revisions proposed by Richfield and has determined, after consultation with its outside legal and financial
advisors, that the superior proposal would continue to be a superior proposal if the revisions proposed by Stratex
were put into effect.
Richfield is only permitted to take the actions described in the preceding two bullets if the Richfield’s board of
directors determines in good faith, after considering advice from outside legal and financial counsel, that the
failure to take such action would be inconsistent with its fiduciary duties under applicable law.
Richfield has an obligation to promptly (within 24 hours) notify Stratex of its receipt of a takeover proposal,
the identity of the party making the takeover proposal and the material terms and conditions of the takeover
proposal and must also promptly (within 24 hours) provide to Stratex copies of any written proposals and
draft agreements it has received with respect to the takeover proposal. Richfield must also continue to advise
Stratex, on a current basis, of the status and terms of any discussions and negotiations with the applicable
third party.
77
Table of Contents
A “takeover proposal” is any proposal or offer made by a third party (other than Stratex) for the acquisition,
whether by way of a merger, consolidation, tender offer, exchange offer, business combination,
recapitalization, binding share exchange, joint venture or similar transaction, of more than 25% of Richfield’s
consolidated assets or more than 25% of Richfield’s outstanding common stock or other Richfield securities
representing more than 25% of the voting power of Richfield.
A “superior proposal” is a bona fide, unsolicited written takeover proposal (A) that if consummated would
result in a third party acquiring, directly or indirectly, 75% or more of Richfield’s outstanding common stock or
more than 75% of the consolidated assets (based on the fair market value thereof) of Richfield and its
subsidiaries, taken as a whole, (B) that the Richfield board of directors determines in good faith, after
consultation with its outside financial advisor and outside legal counsel, is reasonably capable of being
completed, taking into account all financial, legal, regulatory and other aspects of such proposal, including all
conditions contained therein and the person making such takeover proposal and (C) that the Richfield board
of directors determines in good faith, after consultation with its outside financial advisor and outside legal
counsel (taking into account at the time of determination any changes to the merger agreement irrevocably
offered by Stratex in response to such takeover proposal, and all financial, legal, regulatory and other aspects
of such takeover proposal, including all conditions contained therein and the person making such proposal,
and the merger agreement and any other factors deemed relevant by Richfield’s board of directors), is more
favorable to the stockholders of Richfield than the merger.
Richfield agreed to, and to cause its affiliates and its and their representatives to, terminate any and all
existing discussions or negotiations, if any, with any third parties and their representatives and financing
sources conducted prior to the date of the merger agreement with respect to any acquisition proposal, and to
promptly request that each third party that has executed a confidentiality agreement within the 24–month
period prior to the date of the merger agreement, in connection with considering a takeover proposal, return
or destroy all confidential information (and all materials incorporating confidential information possessed by
such third party).
Reasonable Best Efforts Covenant
Richfield and Stratex have agreed to use their respective reasonable best efforts to take, or cause to be taken,
all actions and to do, or cause to be done, all things necessary, proper or advisable under applicable law to
complete the merger and the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement as promptly as
practicable, including preparing and filing all required governmental or third-party filings, notices and other
documents, satisfying the conditions to the completion of the merger, obtaining all required governmental or
third-party approvals, defending all lawsuits challenging the merger, and executing and delivering additional
documents necessary to consummate the merger.
Proxy Statement/Prospectus and Registration Statement Covenant
Richfield and Stratex have agreed to prepare and file a proxy statement/prospectus and a registration
statement with the SEC as promptly as practicable and to use their respective commercially reasonable best
efforts to cause the registration statement to become effective under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended,
which is referred to in this proxy statement/prospectus as the Securities Act, as soon after such filing as
practicable and to keep the registration statement effective as long as is necessary to consummate the
merger.
Directors and Officers Insurance
Stratex has agreed to maintain in effect for a period of six years the coverage provided by the policies of
directors’ and officers’ liability insurance and fiduciary liability insurance in effect as of the date of the merger
agreement by Richfield and its subsidiaries with respect to matters existing or arising on or before the
effective time of the merger. However, Stratex will not be required to pay annual premiums in excess of 200%
of the last annual premium paid by Richfield prior to the date of the merger agreement for such insurance,
which we refer to as the maximum amount, but in such case shall purchase as much coverage as reasonably
practicable for such amount. If Richfield elects, in its sole discretion, then Richfield may, prior to the effective
time of the merger, purchase a “tail policy” with respect to acts or omissions occurring or alleged to have
occurred prior to the effective time that were committed or alleged to have been committed by its directors
and officers, in their capacity as such. However, the cost of such policy, if purchased by Richfield, cannot
exceed six (6) times the maximum amount.
78
Table of Contents
Employee Matters
Stratex has agreed that, after the merger, with certain exceptions, it will cause any employee benefit plan in
which Richfield employees are entitled to participate to recognize those employees’ service with Richfield for
purposes of eligibility, vesting, benefit levels and benefit accrual or contribution rates to the same extent such
service was recognized prior to the merger under the comparable Richfield employee benefit plan.
Other Agreements
The merger agreement contains certain other covenants and agreements, including covenants and
agreements requiring, among other things, and subject to certain exceptions and qualifications described in
the merger agreement:
Richfield and Stratex to provide the other party and its representatives with reasonable access to such party’s offices,
·
properties, books and records and other information as may be reasonably requested;
Richfield has agreed to give Stratex the opportunity to participate in the defense or settlement of any stockholder
litigation against Richfield or its directors or executive officers involving or relating to the merger or the other
·
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement and Richfield has agreed to not settle any such litigation without
Stratex’s prior written consent; and
subject to certain exceptions, the parties to consult with each other before issuing any press release or making any
·
public statement with respect to the merger agreement or the merger.
Termination of the Merger Agreement
The merger agreement may be terminated at any time before completion of the merger, whether before or after
Richfield stockholders have approved the merger agreement, in any of the following ways:
· by mutual written consent of Stratex and Richfield;
· by either Stratex or Richfield, if:
the merger has not been completed on or before the initial end date (December 1, 2014), unless all conditions to
completion have been satisfied on the initial end date other than certain conditions relating to Richfield stockholder
approval or the effectiveness of the registration statement of which this proxy statement/prospectus is a part in which
·
case the merger agreement may be terminated by either Richfield or Stratex if the merger has not been completed on
or before January 30, 2015; however, the right to terminate the merger agreement at the end date will not be available
to any party whose breach of any provision of the merger agreement results in the failure of the merger to be
completed by such time;
a final and non-appealable injunction has been entered permanently restraining or otherwise prohibiting the
consummation of the merger and the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement; however, the right to
·
terminate the merger agreement under this paragraph will not be available to any party if such injunction was due to
the failure of such party to perform any of its obligations under the merger agreement;
if the meeting of the Richfield stockholders for the approval of the merger has concluded and Richfield’s stockholders
·
have not approved the merger;
there has been a breach by the other party of any representation or warranty or failure to perform any covenant or
agreement that would result in the failure of the other party to satisfy the applicable condition to the closing related to
accuracy of representations and warranties or performance of covenants, and such breach is not capable of being
cured by the end date or, if such breach is capable of being cured by the end date, such other party is not diligently
·
attempting to cure such breach after written notice from the party seeking to terminate the merger agreement, but only
so long as the party seeking to terminate pursuant to this paragraph is not then in breach of its representations,
warranties, covenants or agreements contained in the merger agreement, which breach would cause a condition to
closing not to be satisfied;
79
Table of Contents
·by Stratex, if prior to the approval of the merger agreement by Richfield’s stockholders;
the Richfield board of directors makes an adverse recommendation change. See “—No Solicitation by Richfield”
·
beginning on page 77;
Richfield has willfully breached any of its obligations described under “—No Solicitation by Richfield” beginning on
·
page 77; or
·
by Richfield, if:
prior to the approval of the merger agreement by Richfield’s stockholders, it has complied with all of its obligations
described under obligations described under “—No Solicitation by Richfield” beginning on page 77, enters into a
·
definitive agreement with respect to a takeover proposal, and pays the termination fee described under “—
Termination Fees and Expenses” beginning on this page below; or
   
if Stratex and Merger Sub breach their obligations to complete the merger within 10 business days after it is required
to take place if all of the conditions to their obligation to complete to the merger have been satisfied or waived in
writing (other than those conditions which by their nature are to be satisfied at the closing, provided Richfield is able
 ·
to satisfy such conditions) and Richfield certifies that such conditions have been satisfied and Richfield is prepared
to satisfy those conditions.
If the merger agreement is validly terminated, the merger agreement will become void and of no effect (except
that certain designated provisions will survive termination). However, none of the parties to the merger
agreement will be relieved or released from any liability resulting from fraud or the willful or intentional breach
of any obligation under the merger agreement occurring prior to termination or as provided in the
confidentiality agreement.
Termination Fees and Expenses
Richfield must pay Stratex a termination fee of $3,000,000 if:
Richfield terminates the merger agreement prior to the approval of Richfield’s stockholders in order to enter into a
·
definitive agreement with respect to a takeover proposal;
Richfield terminates the merger agreement after the Richfield stockholders meeting has concluded without approving
the merger and prior to the approval of Richfield’s stockholders, a takeover proposal has been publicly announced
·
and Richfield and Richfield enters into an agreement for, or consummates, a takeover proposal within 24 months
after Richfield terminates the merger agreement;
Stratex terminates the merger agreement before Richfield’s stockholders have approved the merger because
·
Richfield’s board of directors has made an adverse recommendation change or because Richfield willfully breached
the merger agreement;
Richfield terminates the merger agreement before Richfield’s stockholders have approved the merger and at the time
of such termination Stratex would have been permitted to terminate the merger agreement because of an adverse
·
recommendation change by Richfield’s board of directors or because of Richfield’s willful breach of the merger
agreement; or
·Stratex terminates the merger agreement because of a breach of Richfield’s covenants in the merger agreement.
80
Table of Contents
In the event that Richfield terminates the merger agreement under the circumstances set forth in the first
bullet above, Richfield must also pay up to $300,000 of Stratex’s out of pocket expenses in connection with
the merger agreement.
In the event Richfield terminates the merger agreement because Stratex and Merger Sub have breached their
obligations to complete the merger within 10 business days after it is required to take place, Stratex must pay
to Richfield a $1,000,000 termination fee. At Stratex’s option, the payment of this amount may be made by
crediting it to the amount Richfield is required to repay under the loan agreement. For a description of the
loan agreement see “THE Loan Agreement” beginning on page 82.
Fees and Expenses
The merger agreement provides that each of the parties will bear its own costs and expenses in connection
merger agreement, except for the obligation of Richfield to pay certain expenses of Stratex upon the
termination of the merger agreement as described in “—Termination Fees and Expenses” described on page
80.
Third-Party Beneficiaries
The merger agreement is not intended to and does not confer upon any person other than the parties to the
merger agreement any rights or remedies, except:
the right of Richfield’s directors to enforce the obligation of Stratex to maintain directors and officers insurance as
·
described in “–Directors and Officers Insurance” on page 78; and
·the right of the Richfield stockholders to receive the merger consideration after the completion of the merger.
Amendments; Waivers
Any provision of the merger agreement may be amended or waived before completion of the merger if the
amendment or waiver is in writing and is signed by each party to the merger agreement.
Explanatory Note Regarding the Merger Agreement and the Summary of the Merger Agreement:
Representations, Warranties and Covenants in the Merger Agreement Are Not Intended to Function or Be
Relied on as Public Disclosures
The merger agreement and the summary of its terms in this proxy statement/prospectus have been included
to provide information about the terms of the merger agreement. The merger agreement and the summary of
its terms are not intended to provide any other factual information about Richfield, Stratex, or any of their
respective subsidiaries or affiliates. The representations, warranties, covenants and agreements contained in
the merger agreement were made only for purposes of that agreement and as of specific dates; were made
solely for the benefit of the parties to the merger agreement; may be subject to limitations agreed upon by the
contracting parties, including being qualified by confidential disclosures; may not have been intended to be
statements of fact, but rather, as a method of allocating contractual risk and governing the contractual rights
and relationships between the parties to the merger agreement; and may be subject to standards of
materiality applicable to contracting parties that differ from those applicable to investors. Investors should not
rely on the representations, warranties and covenants or any descriptions thereof as characterizations of the
actual state of facts or condition of Richfield, Stratex or any of their respective subsidiaries or affiliates.
Moreover, information concerning the subject matter of the representations, warranties and covenants may
change after the date of the merger agreement, which subsequent information may or may not be fully
reflected in Richfield’s or Stratex’s public disclosures
81
Table of Contents
THE LOAN AGREEMENT
Concurrently with the execution of the merger agreement, Stratex, Richfield, and certain of Richfield’s
subsidiaries entered into a Note and Security Agreement providing for advances of up to $3,000,000 by
Stratex to Richfield and its subsidiaries. On July 17, 2014, Stratex, Richfield, and the Richfield subsidiaries
that are a party to the Note and Security Agreement amended and restated the Note and Security Agreement
by entering into an Amended and Restated Note and Security Agreement (which we refer to as the loan
agreement) that increased the total amount to be advanced to $4,000,000. Of the total amount that may be
advanced under the loan agreement, up to $2,800,000 is available to fund those costs of Richfield’s Kansas
work program which are approved by Stratex, $400,000 must be used to pay certain liabilities of Richfield and
its subsidiaries, up to $100,000 may be used to acquire additional oil and gas leases in Utah, and the
remaining $700,000 may be used for general corporate purposes.
Advances made under the loan agreement bear interest at an annual rate of 6% and must be repaid upon the
earlier of (1) January 30, 2015, (2) ten business days after the consummation of the merger, or (3) Richfield’s
entry into a superior proposal (as defined in the merger agreement) (for the definition of a superior proposal,
see “THE MERGER AGREEMENT – No Solicitation by Richfield” beginning on page 77).
The obligations of Richfield and its subsidiaries under the loan agreement are secured by security interests
and mortgages in all of their assets.
The loan agreement contains conditions to advances, representations and warranties, covenants and events
of default which are customary for secured commercial loan transactions. In addition, the loan agreement
also:
conditions advances upon the continued accuracy of the representations and warranties set forth in the merger
·
agreement, upon Richfield’s compliance with its obligations under the merger agreement, and upon the absence of a
superior proposal under the merger agreement; and
provides that an event of default will occur if any representation or warranty of Richfield in the merger agreement is
·
false or misleading when made or when deemed to be made under the loan agreement.
As of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, Stratex has advanced approximately $2,057,860 to
Richfield and its subsidiaries under the loan agreement.
THE VOTING AGREEMENTS
Concurrently with the execution of the merger agreement, Stratex also entered into voting agreements with
each member of Richfield’s board of directors, certain stockholders (including its largest creditor), and each
of its executive officers, owning an aggregate of approximately 46% of Richfield’s outstanding common
stock.
The following is a summary of the material terms of the voting agreements. This summary may not contain all
of the information about the voting agreement that is important to you. The summary in this section and
elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus is qualified in its entirety by reference to the form of voting
agreement attached as Annex C to, and incorporated by reference into, this proxy statement/prospectus. You
are encouraged to read the voting agreement in its entirety.
Voting
Each Richfield stockholder who is a party to a voting agreement agreed to vote:
·in favor of the merger, the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement;
against any proposal that could reasonably be expected to result in a breach of any representation, warranty, or
·
obligation of Richfield in the merger agreement;
against any proposal which could reasonably be expected to delay or adversely affect the timely completion of the
·
merger or the fulfillment of the conditions under the merger agreement or change in any manner the voting rights of
any class of shares of Richfield;
·against any extraordinary corporate transaction other than the merger; and
·against any takeover proposal and any change in a majority of the members of Richfield’s board of directors.
82
Table of Contents
Restrictions on Transfer
Each Richfield stockholder who is party to a voting agreement has agreed with Richfield, subject to certain
exceptions, not to (i) sell, assign, pledge, mortgage, encumber, grant an option with respect to, transfer or
dispose of such stockholder’s shares or any interest in such shares; (ii) enter into an agreement or
commitment contemplating the possible sale of, assignment of, pledge of, mortgage of, encumbrance of,
grant of an option with respect to, transfer of or disposition of such stockholder’s shares or any interest
therein; or (iii) reduce such stockholder’s beneficial ownership interest in or risk relating to any such security.
Representations and Warranties
Each party to a voting agreement has made customary representations and warranties, including with respect
to (i) authority to enter into and carry out its obligations under, and enforceability of, the voting agreement
and (ii) the absence of any conflicts or required consents that would interfere with such party’s ability to
perform its obligations under the voting agreement.
Termination
Each voting agreement will terminate upon the earliest to occur of: (i) completion of the merger and (ii) the
termination of the merger agreement in accordance with its terms.
Other Capacities
Each voting agreement provides that nothing in the voting agreement creates an obligation on the part of a
party to act or refrain from acting as a director or officer of Richfield in a manner inconsistent with such
party’s fiduciary obligations as a director or officer of Richfield.
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT
Richfield
The following table sets forth, as of August 18, 2014, certain information regarding beneficial ownership of our
common stock by (i) each person or entity who is known by Richfield to own beneficially more than 5% of the
outstanding shares of our common stock, (ii) each of Richfield’s directors, (iii) each of Richfield’s executive
officers, and (iv) all of Richfield’s current directors and executive officers as a group. As of August 18, 2014,
Richfield had one class of voting securities that consisted of 60,616,448 shares of common stock issued and
outstanding. Beneficial ownership is determined in accordance with the rules of the SEC and does not
necessarily indicate beneficial ownership for any other purpose. Under these rules, beneficial ownership
includes those shares of common stock over which the stockholder had sole or shared voting or investment
power. In computing the number and percentage of shares beneficially owned by a person, shares of
common stock that a person has a right to acquire within sixty (60) days of August 18, 2014, pursuant to
options, warrants or other rights are counted as outstanding, while these shares other persons have the right
to acquire are not counted as outstanding. The following table is based upon information supplied by
directors, officers and principal stockholders.
83
Table of Contents
Percent of
 
Common Stock
Name (1)
Certain Beneficial Owners:
Alan D. Gaines
Wendell Y.M. Lew
Directors and Officers:
Douglas C. Hewitt, Sr.
Glenn G. MacNeil
John J. McFadden
Michael A. Cederstrom
Joseph P. Tate
 
Thomas R. Grimm
Directors and Officers as a Group (6 persons)  18,352,923
Number of
 
Shares
  
  4,866,381 (2)   8.1
  20,997,510(3)   26.7
   
  9,027,333 (4)   14.9
  3,748,045 (5)   6.2
  75,324
   0.1
 
  2,488,875  
   4.1
  2,607,721 (6)   4.3
  405,625
   0.7
   30.3
%
%
 
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
(1)
As used in this table, “beneficial ownership” means the sole or shared power to vote, or to direct the voting of, a
security, or the sole or shared investment power with respect to a security (i.e., the power to dispose of, or to direct
the disposition of, a security). Unless otherwise indicated, the address of each stockholder is 175 S. Main Street,
Suite 900, Salt Lake City, UT 84111.
(2)
Consists of 4,886,381 shares owned by Alan D. Gaines. Mr. Gaines’ children also own 900,000 shares, as to
which he disclaims beneficial ownership. The address of Mr. Gaines is c/o Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc., 30
Echo Lake Road, Watertown, CT 06795.
Consists of the following which is held by the Wendell Y.M. Lew Revocable Living Trust (“Trust”) in which Mr. Lew
(3)
(4)
may deemed to be the beneficial owner by virtue of being the trustee of the Trust: (i) 2,985,131 shares held in the
name of the Trust; (ii) 4,039,760 warrants owned by the Trust to purchase common stock; and (iii) the right to
convert two convertible notes payable into 13,972,616 shares of common stock. The address of the Trust is P.O
Box 22729 Honolulu, HI 96823.
 
Consists of the following shares owned by Douglas C. Hewitt, Sr., or of which Mr. Hewitt may be deemed to be the
beneficial owner: (i) 5,027,333 shares held in the name of Douglas C. Hewitt, Sr. and (ii) 4,000,000 shares held in
the name of the D. Mack Trust by virtue of being the trustee of the trust. The address of the D. Mack Trust is 1775
Stone Ridge Drive, Bountiful, UT 84010.
(5)
Consists of the following shares owned by Glenn G. MacNeil, or of which Mr. MacNeil may be deemed to be the
beneficial owner: (i) 1,874,023 shares held in the name of Glenn G. MacNeil, and (ii) 1,874,022 shares held in the
name of Carolyn Kovachik-MacNeil, Mr. MacNeil’s spouse. The address of Mr. MacNeil and his spouse is 521-11
Bronte Road, Oakville, Ontario, Canada, L6L 0E1.
(6)
Consists of the following shares owned by Joseph P. Tate, or of which Mr. Tate may be deemed to be the
beneficial owner: (i) 2,264,221 shares held in the name of Joseph P. Tate, (ii) 263,500 shares held in the name of
Jennifer Tate, Mr. Tate’s spouse, and (iii) warrants to purchase 80,000 shares of common stock. The address of Mr.
Tate and his spouse is 3252 No. Lake Drive, Milwaukee, WI 53211.
Stratex
The following table sets forth certain information regarding the beneficial ownership of our common stock as
of August 21, 2014 by (i) each of Stratex’s current directors and executive officers; (ii) each person who, to
our knowledge, beneficially owns more than 5% of outstanding shares of our common stock; and (iii) all of
Stratex’s current directors and executive officers as a group. As of August 21, 2014, Stratex had one class of
voting securities that consisted of 56,687,376 shares of common stock issued and outstanding. Beneficial
ownership is determined in accordance with the rules of the SEC and does not necessarily indicate beneficial
ownership for any other purpose. Under these rules, beneficial ownership includes those shares of common
stock over which the stockholder had sole or shared voting or investment power. In computing the number
and percentage of shares beneficially owned by a person, shares of common stock that a person has a right
to acquire within sixty (60) days of August 21, 2014, pursuant to options, warrants or other rights are counted
as outstanding, while the shares other persons have the right to acquire are not counted as outstanding.
84
Table of Contents
Amount
Percent of 
Name and address of Beneficial Owner (1)
 
 
Class
  13,100,000(2)  21.20
Stephen P. Funk (Chief Executive Officer and Director)
Alan D. Gaines (Executive Chairman of the Board)
  7,500,000 (3)  11.68
Matthew S. Cohen (Executive Vice President & General Counsel  1,400,000 (4)  2.42
  1,543,900 (5)  2.65
Michael J. Thurz (Director)
Frederic L. Saalwachter (Director)
  250,000
Avi Dan 
245 E 54th St. 
New York, NY 10022
 Directors and Officers as a Group (5 persons)
5,042,500
23,793,900
33.03
(6)  *
8.96
*Represents beneficial ownership of less than one percent.
(1)
(2)
As used in this table, “beneficial ownership” means the sole or shared power to vote, or to direct the voting of, a
security, or the sole or shared investment power with respect to a security (i.e., the power to dispose of, or to direct
the disposition of, a security). Unless otherwise indicated, the address of the beneficial holder is c/o Stratex Oil &
Gas Holdings, Inc., 30 Echo Lake Road, Watertown, CT 06795. 
 
Includes (i) 8,000,000 shares of common stock, (ii) 3,600,000 shares underlying a stock option, exercisable at
$0.08 per share and (iii) 1,500,000 shares underlying a stock option, exercisable at $0.50 per share, all of which
are held by Rotary Partners LLC, an entity in which Mr. Funk is the sole member and has full voting and
dispositive power. Does not include shares of common stock issuable to Rotary Partners LLC upon consummation
of the merger with respect to 35,000 shares of Richfield common stock owned by it.
(4)
(3) Includes 7,500,000 shares underlying stock options, exercisable at $0.15 per share.
Includes 1,000,000 shares underlying a stock option, exercisable at $0.30 per share, and excludes 1,000,000
shares underlying a stock option, exercisable at $0.30 per share, which shares vest in 2 equal installments on
each of August 8, 2015 and 2016.
(5) Includes 1,500,000 shares underlying a stock option, exercisable at $0.15 per share.
 
(6) Includes 250,000 shares of common stock underlying stock options exercisable at $0.30 per share.
85
Table of Contents
DIRECTORS AND EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF SURVIVING STRATEX
Each of the four current directors of Stratex is expected to continue to serve as a director of Stratex following
the merger. In addition, it is expected that the three additional directors identified in the table below (two of
whom presently serve as directors of Richfield) will serve as directors of Stratex upon completion of the
merger. The names, ages and titles of such individuals and of the persons expected to serve as executive
officers of Stratex after the merger are also set forth in the following table.
Age Position at Stratex
 58  Chairman of the Board and Director
 51  Chief Executive Officer and Director
 48  Executive Vice President and General Counsel
Name
Alan D. Gaines
Stephen P. Funk
Matthew S. Cohen
Michael A. Cederstrom  61  Vice President
 55  Interim Chief Financial Officer
Glenn G. MacNeil
Michael J. Thurz
 49  Director
Frederic L. Saalwachter 70  Director
 70  Director
Joseph P. Tate
John J. McFadden
 69  Director
Officers
Alan D. Gaines Mr. Gaines brings approximately 30 years of experience as an energy investment and
merchant banker. In 1983, Mr. Gaines co-founded Gaines, Berland Inc., a full service investment
bank/advisory and brokerage, specializing in global energy markets, with particular emphasis given small to
mid-capitalization public and private companies. Mr. Gaines’ sold his ownership in this entity in 1998. In 2001
Mr. Gaines founded Dune Energy, Inc. (symbol: DUNR), a publicly traded independent E&P company, and
served as the chairman of the board from 2001 to 2011. Mr. Gaines also served as chief executive officer of
Dune Energy from its inception until April 2007. From April 2005 until August 2008, Mr. Gaines served as vice-
chairman and from April 2005 until July 2008, Mr. Gaines served as a director of Baseline Oil & Gas. From 2006
to 2010, Mr. Gaines served as a director of Cross Canyon Energy Corp., where he also served as chief
executive officer from April 2006 to September 2007 and as chairman of the board from April 2006 to May
2008. From February 2011 until April 2011, Mr. Gaines served as chairman of the board of Strategic American
Oil Corp. (now known as Hydrocarb Energy Corp., symbol: HECC), and from January 2012 until February
2014, Mr. Gaines served on the board of directors of Eagleford Energy Inc. (symbol: EFRDF), both
independent E&P companies. Mr. Gaines holds a B.B.A. in Finance from Baruch College and an M.B.A. in
Finance (with distinction) from The Zarb School, Hofstra University Graduate School of Management.
Stephen P. Funk Mr. Funk brings over 30 years of experience in finance to Stratex. He has served as the
principal of Alta Investments LLC (“Alta”), a company providing specialized investment banking consultant
services, since founding it in 1999. Mr. Funk has consulted on numerous mergers, acquisitions and strategic
alliances. From 2007 through 2010, Mr. Funk served as the managing member of Cherokee Enterprises LLC, a
construction dewatering firm serving the heavy construction industry. From 1999 through 2001, Mr. Funk was
a vice president at Windham Associates, a mergers and acquisition firm and from 1991 to 1999, he worked at
Merrill Lynch as a vice president in Business Financial Services. Mr. Funk graduated from Marist College in
1984 with a B.S. in Business Administration, Finance.
Matthew S. Cohen Mr. Cohen brings over 23 years of experience as a corporate and securities attorney with a
focus on the formation, financing and development of upstream oil & gas companies. From June 2012
through August 2014, Mr. Cohen was a Shareholder in the law firm of Buchanan Ingersoll & Rooney PC. From
March 2008 through May of 2012, he was a Partner in the law firm of Thompson & Knight LLP and from
January 2001 through March of 2008, he served as a Partner of Eaton & Van Winkle. Mr. Cohen graduated
from Emory University in 1988 with a B.A. in Biology and earned his J.D. from Brooklyn Law School in 1991.
Michael J. Thurz Mr. Thurz Michael J. Thurz is a certified public accountant (CPA) with approximately 14 years
of audit experience. Since March 2010, Mr. Thurz has served as a Senior Vice President of Accounting
Resources Inc., a company providing back office accounting through CFO level services for companies
engaged in a variety of industries including oil & gas. While employed at Accounting Resources, Mr. Thurz
assisted Stratex management with day to day accounting activities and the preparation of its periodic reports
for which Accounting Resources was paid an aggregate of $147,000 over the past three and one-half years.
From October 2007 to February 2010, he served as Audit Senior Manager at Saslow, Lufkin & Buggy, LLP and
from February 1993 to June 2007, he served as President of National Supplement Warehouse, a vitamin and
supplement retail store chain. Mr. Thurz received his BSBA (accounting) from the University of Hartford in
1987.
86
Table of Contents
Michael A. Cederstrom Mr. Cederstrom has served as Richfield’s general counsel and corporate secretary
since December 15, 2011. Mr. Cederstrom provided legal services to Richfield as an independent contractor
from March 2011 until December 15, 2011. Mr. Cederstrom served as general counsel to Hewitt Petroleum, Inc.
from May 2009 until March 2011. Mr. Cederstrom has over 31 years of experience as a corporate attorney
representing businesses in various capacities, including SEC reporting and compliance. Mr. Cederstrom has
represented oil and gas exploration and production companies for over 17 years in all areas including
leasing, environmental and regulatory compliance and securities matters. Mr. Cederstrom practiced law with
Dexter & Dexter Attorneys at Law from 2004 to 2008. Mr. Cederstrom’s law practice specialized in business
law, including initial organization of business entities, maintenance of the entity, employment matters and
business tax matters. In 1997 Mr. Cederstrom organized and registered the shares of HEGCO Canada, Inc. on
the CDNX, and served as its general counsel and CFO from 1997 to 2002. Mr. Cederstrom has participated in
the organization of a bank and registration of the bank's shares on the New York Stock Exchange, and has
served on the Board of Directors of two banks and several other businesses. Mr. Cederstrom received a
Bachelor of Science degree in Finance from the University of Utah and a Juris Doctorate degree from
Southwestern University. While at Southwestern University, Mr. Cederstrom earned two Jurisprudence
Awards for exceptional achievement in the study of Tax and Estate Planning.
Glenn G. MacNeil Mr. MacNeil has served as Richfield’s chief financial officer since April 1, 2011. Mr. MacNeil
brings over 30 years of international experience in chief financial officer and director roles in both the oil and
gas and financial services industries. Mr. MacNeil is a Canadian Professional Accountant (CPA) and a U.S.
Certified Public Accountant of South Carolina (CPA). Mr. MacNeil has been an officer and served as director
for numerous private and publicly-held companies, some of which are as follows: chief financial officer and
executive vice president of GCAN Insurance Company, a Canadian regulated insurance company, from 2008
to 2011; finance director of Nostra Terra Oil and Gas Company, PLC, a U.K. based LSE-AIM listed oil and gas
company, from 2007 to 2009; finance director of CNA Insurance Company Limited, a European regulated
insurance company, from 2004 to 2008; chief financial officer and executive vice president of Canadian
Operations of Continental Casualty Company, a Canadian regulated insurance company (also known as
“CNA Canada”), from 1998 to 2004; and vice president finance, Canadian operations of Everest Reinsurance
Company and vice president finance and director of Everest Insurance Company of Canada, Canadian
regulated reinsurance and insurance companies, from 1988 to 1998. Mr. MacNeil had leading roles in
acquisitions, divestitures, turnaround situations and start-up businesses. In addition to serving on Richfield’s
board of directors, Mr. MacNeil serves as a director of HEGCO Canada Inc., a TSX-V listed, non-trading shell
company. Mr. MacNeil is a member of the Ontario Institutes of Certified Professional Accountants (CPA), and
Certified Public Accountants of South Carolina (CPA). Mr. MacNeil received a Bachelor of Business
Administration degree (BBA) from the Cape Breton University, Nova Scotia.
Frederic (“Ric”) L. Saalwachter Frederic (“Ric”) L. Saalwachter has decades of experience in the energy
industry with capital markets financing transactions and advisory services provided to a wide variety of oil &
gas and other energy companies. As an investment banker, Mr. Saalwachter has arranged numerous debt
and equity financings and provided strategic advice in connection with a large number of mergers and
acquisitions. It is anticipated that Mr. Saalwachter will join the Company’s Compensation Committee when
constituted. Presently, Mr. Saalwachter serves as a Managing Director in Capital Markets at StormHarbour
Securities, LP, a position he has held since March 2014. He was previously Managing Director and Head of
the Energy Investment Banking Group at the PrinceRidge Group and for most of the prior 16 years, he served
as Managing Director in Energy Banking for the Sanders Morris Group and affiliated companies. Previously,
he was a senior banker for Shearson Lehman, Kemper Securities and Warburg Paribas Becker. Mr.
Saalwachter was a co-founder of a group of oilfield service companies with businesses primarily dedicated to
offshore drilling. Mr. Saalwachter holds a B.A. degree from Fairfield University.
John J. McFadden has served on Richfield’s Board of Directors since May 18, 2008 and serves as the
Chairman of Richfield’s Compensation and Audit Committees. Mr. McFadden brings over 40 years of
experience in the investment banking industry. Since 1998 Mr. McFadden has been self-employed as a
consultant, providing consultation to his clients regarding both investment banking and energy matters. His
clients include Equitable Gas, Select Energy and Optimira Energy. From 1996 until 1998, Mr. McFadden was
employed as the Senior Managing Director of Cambridge Holding and Cambridge Partners, LLC, a private
investment company based in New York, NY. From 1968 until 1996 Mr. McFadden was employed by The First
Boston Corporation (later Credit Suisse First Boston) with a variety of responsibilities in corporate finance
and public finance, including service as Vice President and Treasurer. Mr. McFadden has previously served
as a director of two publicly-traded companies, of Advanced Battery Technologies, Inc. and China Digital
Animation, Inc. Mr. McFadden received a Bachelor of Arts degree from St. Bonaventure University.
87
Table of Contents
Joseph P. Tate has served on Richfield’s Board of Directors since March 31, 2012 and serves as the
Chairman of Richfield’s Nominating and Corporate Governance Committees and as a member of Richfield’s
Audit Committee and Compensation Committee. Mr. Tate has more than 40 years of entrepreneurial
experience. In 1967, he founded Valley Sanitation, a two-truck waste hauling business in Fort Atkinson,
Wisconsin. The company had three employees and annual revenues of $40,000 the first year. In 1993, he
merged his 12-location business with 10 others to form Superior Services, Inc., a solid waste, special waste
and hazardous waste business serving the Midwest (“Superior”). By 1999, Superior had a successful initial
public offering, a secondary offering and finally, sold to Vivendi, a French conglomerate. At the time of the
sale, Superior had over 3,000 employees. Mr. Tate served as President/CEO and Chairman of the Board at
Superior. After the sale of Superior, Mr. Tate started Tate Enterprises, a company that offers professional
management services to the organizations in which he is a substantial equity partner. Mr. Tate is an officer,
director and/or significant equity holder in several companies including OnMilwaukee.com, an internet city
guide; TMX, a decorative mulch company; Tate Farm, a ranch in Utah; Mason Car Wash, a car wash and oil
change business; Sherman Disposal, a solid waste disposal company; Coastal Disposal, a solid waste
disposal company; Midwest Compost, a grass and leaves transfer station; and Rapport Leadership, an
organizational and leadership development company. Mr. Tate recently retired from the non-profit boards of
Second Harvest of Wisconsin and the Next Door Foundation. He currently serves as a director of CEO
Leadership Academy, The Tate Family Foundation and Rapport Leadership.
Richfield Executive Compensation
Summary Compensation Table
The table below sets forth compensation earned in 2013 and 2012 by Richfield’s named executive officers
who are expected to be officers or directors of Stratex after the consummation of the merger for services
rendered in all capacities to Richfield and its subsidiaries.
Name and
Principal Position
Alan D. Gaines
Year   Salary
Bonus
Stock
Awards
Option
  
Awards
($)
  (1)
($)
($)
  (2)
($)
  (3)
Non-Equity
  
Incentive
Compensation
  ($)
Executive Chairman of
the Board
Glenn G. MacNeil
Chief Financial Officer
and Director
Michael A. Cederstrom
General Counsel and
Corporate Secretary
(5)  2013   192,000
2012   -
(7)  2013   -
2012   138,000
(8)  2013   266,000
2012   216,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
795,009
-
-
352,500   -
-
-
322,500   -
-
-
-
-
-
-
All Other
  
Compensation
Total
($)
987,009
-
($)
  (4)
-
-
326,000
326,000
188,000
678,500
-
266,000
50,000
588,500
(1)
(2)
In 2013, base salary compensation was earned by and paid to Richfield’s named executive officers as follows: (i)
Mr. Gaines was appointed Executive Chairman of the Board of Richfield on May 6, 2013. Mr. Gaines’ annual
salary was $288,000 and he earned $192,000 in 2013 all of which was accrued and unpaid as of December 31,
2013. (ii) Mr. Cederstrom earned $266,000 of which $201,242 was paid in cash in 2013 and the remaining
$64,758 was accrued and unpaid as of December 31, 2013. In 2012, base salary compensation was earned by
 
and paid to our named executive officers as follows:; (i) Mr. MacNeil’s services to Richfield were governed by an
employment agreement relating to his services while in the United States, under which Mr. MacNeil earned
$138,000; and a financial services agreement through MacKov relating to services performed while in Canada,
under which MacKov earned $138,000, for an aggregate of $276,000, all of which was paid in cash in 2012; and
(ii) Mr. Cederstrom earned $216,000, all of which was paid in cash in 2012.
  
This column reflects amounts awarded pursuant to our incentive plan and other stock awards, each of which were
established and approved by the Board of Directors.
88
Table of Contents
This column reflects amounts based upon the Black-Scholes valuation model for stock option awards. Mr. Gaines
(3) 
was awarded 3,500,000 options which are exercisable at $1.00 for a period of seven years. The total estimated
 
valuation of Mr. Gaines’ options was $1,590,018 at the time of the award of which $795,009 was vested and
expensed during 2013.
  
 
(4) 
In 2013, “All Other Compensation” earned by our named executive officers included: (i) Mr. MacNeil’s services to
Richfield were governed by an employment agreement relating to his services while in the United States, under
which Mr. MacNeil earned $0 in 2013; and a financial services agreement through MacKov relating to services
performed while in Canada, under which MacKov earned $326,000 in consulting fees of which $68,853 was paid
 
in cash in 2013 and the remaining $257,147  was accrued and unpaid as of December 31, 2013.   In 2012, “All
Other Compensation” earned by our named executive officers included: (i) Mr. MacNeil’s $188,000 includes
$138,000 earned by MacKov for consulting services and $50,000 which was earned by MacNeil for director’s
fees, all of which was paid in cash in 2012; and (ii) Mr. Cederstrom, earned $50,000 all of which was paid in cash
in 2012 as corporate secretary fees.
(5) Mr. Gaines was appointed Executive Chairman of the Board on May 6, 2013 and resigned on May 6, 2014.
 
 
Since our inception on April 8, 2011, Glenn G. MacNeil has served as Richfield’s Chief Financial Officer and as
(6) 
one of its directors. During 2011, Mr. MacNeil’s services as Chief Financial Officer were governed by a financial
services agreement between Richfield and MacKov.  In 2012, Mr. MacNeil’s services as Chief Financial Officer
were governed by an employment agreement relating to his services while in the United States, as well as a
financial services agreement through MacKov relating to services performed while in Canada.
 
From Richfield’s inception until December 15, 2011, Mr. Cederstrom provided services to Richfield as a
consultant.  Effective December 15, 2011, Mr. Cederstrom was appointed as Richfield’s General Counsel and
Corporate Secretary.
(8)
Employment and Consulting Agreements
Richfield has entered into written executive employment agreements with Mr. MacNeil and Mr. Cederstrom, as
well as a financial services agreement with MacKov relating to services provided by Glenn G. MacNeil, which
we call executive agreements, each of which became effective as of January 1, 2012, with the exception of Mr.
Alan D. Gaines whose employment agreement became effective on May 6, 2013. The compensation payable
to each named executive officer under such officer’s executive agreement is set forth in the footnotes to the
Summary Compensation Table above. Other than terms relating to each named executive officer’s
compensation, the executive agreements contain identical terms and conditions, which are described below.
Each of the executive agreements provides that year-end cash and/or share bonuses are at the discretion of
the compensation committee or Board of Directors, and are based on Richfield’s achievement of specified
predetermined and mutually agreed-upon performance objectives each year. Effective January 1, 2013, the
previous Board of Director fees of $50,000 per year for Mr. MacNeil and Mr. Cederstrom’s previous corporate
secretary fees of $50,000 per year were added to their annual salary or consulting fees and are no longer
compensated separately as director or corporate secretary fees.
Richfield entered into financial services agreements with MacKov relating to Mr. MacNeil’s services as Chief
Financial Officer. In 2012 and 2013, Mr. MacNeil’s services as Chief Financial Officer were governed in part by
an employment agreement between Richfield and Mr. MacNeil for services provided while residing in the
United States and in part by a financial services agreement, effective January 1, 2012, between Richfield and
MacKov for Mr. MacNeil’s services provided while residing in Canada. MacKov is an Ontario, Canada
incorporated private company that is wholly owned and controlled by Mr. MacNeil and his spouse.
Alan D. Gaines’ employment agreement dated May 6, 2013 was modified on January 15, 2014 canceling
3,500,000 outstanding stock options and issuing 4,908,532 restricted Company common stock representing
9.9% of the Company’s common shares at the time. The stock was fully vested and the fair value of
$1,472,560, or $0.30 per share, was expensed in the first quarter of 2014.
89
Table of Contents
Elements of Compensation
The total compensation and benefits program for Richfield’s executives generally consists of the following
components:
·base salaries and/or consulting fees;
   
 ·annual incentive bonuses;
   
 ·discretionary bonuses;
   
 ·long-term equity-based incentive compensation;
   
 ·health and welfare benefits;
   
 ·perquisites; and
   
 ·severance payments/change of control.
Base Salaries
Richfield provides base salaries to compensate its executive officers for services performed during the fiscal
year. This provides a level of financial certainty and stability in a historically volatile and cyclical industry.
Base salaries are designed to reflect the experience, education, responsibilities and contribution of each
individual executive officer.
Annual Incentive Bonuses
Richfield provides annual stock or cash incentive bonuses to our directors, executive officers, employees
and consultants. These bonuses provide variable compensation earned only when performance goals
established, from time to time, by Richfield’s Board of Directors are achieved. Incentive bonuses are designed
to reward these individuals for the achievement of certain corporate and executive performance objectives
set by our Board of Directors and for contributions to the achievement of certain of our objectives. Any
annual incentive bonus paid by Richfield is payable in cash or Richfield stock, at the election of the individual
receiving such bonus.
Discretionary Bonuses
In addition to annual incentive bonuses discussed above, the compensation committee of Richfield’s Board
of Directors may also approve the payment of discretionary bonuses to officers and other employees in
recognition of significant achievements.
Health and Welfare Benefits
Richfield offers health and welfare programs to all eligible employees. Under the terms of their employment
agreements, the named executive officers are eligible for the same broad-based benefit programs on the
same basis as the rest of our employees. Our health and welfare programs include health, pharmacy and
dental benefits.
Severance Payments/Change of Control
Richfield’s employment and/or consulting agreements in place with each of our executive officers providing
for lump-sum severance compensation upon termination of the officer’s employment for a variety of reasons,
including a change of control.
90
Table of Contents
Stratex Executive Compensation
The following table sets forth information regarding each element of compensation that Stratex paid or
awarded for 2013 and 2012 to its named executive officers who are expected to be directors or officers of
Stratex after the consummation of the merger.
Name and Principal
Position
Stock  
Awards
($) (1)
    10
    4,416
Option 
  
Awards
($) (2)
   501,517
   171,124
All Other
  
Compensation
9,000
  3,300
Total($)
760,527 
  387,173
Year  Salary($)  Bonus
Steve P. Funk
Chief Executive Officer
2013   250,000     0
  2012   208,333     0
(1)  Related to the issuance of preferred stock during 2012 and 2013.
(2)  Related to the vesting of options during 2012 and 2013.
Director Compensation
Stratex does not provide compensation to its employee directors for their services as directors. Commencing
August 2014, it was determined that non-employee directors would each receive $7,500 per quarter as
compensation for serving as a director and an additional $2,500 per quarter for serving on a committee.
Employment Agreements
Mr. Funk entered into an employment agreement dated April 1, 2012 with Stratex Oil & Gas, Inc., a wholly
owned subsidiary of Stratex (which we call SOG). That employment agreement originally had a five year term.
On November 22, 2013, Mr. Funk, SOG and Stratex executed an amendment extending the term of Mr. Funk’s
employment until April 1, 2019. Under the terms of his amended employment agreement, Mr. Funk presently
receives an annual base salary of $302,500 with annual increases of 10% per year. Mr. Funk is also entitled to
receive an annual cash bonus in an amount to be determined by Stratex’s Board of Directors.  Stratex has
agreed to promptly reimburse Mr. Funk for all reasonable and necessary business expenses, including
without limitation, telephone and facsimile charges incurred by him on behalf of Stratex. In addition the Statex
has agreed to provide Mr. Funk with a monthly automobile allowance of $750.
Pursuant to his employment agreement as amended, Mr. Funk has been granted options to acquire (i) up to
1,500,000 shares of common stock, at an exercise price of $0.50 per share and (ii) 3,600,000 shares of
common stock, at an exercise price of $0.08 per share. Additionally, Mr. Funk was issued 50 shares of Stratex
preferred stock under his initial employment agreement and an additional 10 shares of Stratex preferred stock
when the amendment to his employment agreement was executed. The shares of Stratex preferred stock
have no liquidation or dividend preference and each share of Stratex preferred stock entitles the holder to
one million (1,000,000) votes on all matters submitted to a vote of Stratex’ stockholders. On August 20, 2014,
in order to satisfy a condition to the merger as set forth in the merger agreement, Mr. Funk surrendered for
cancellation, all shares of preferred stock held by Rotary Partners LLC (an entity in which Mr. Funk owns
100% of the membership interests) in exchange for 7,000,000 shares of Stratex common stock. This issuance
was unanimously approved by Stratex’s Board of Directors (with Mr. Funk abstaining).
Stratex entered into an Employment Agreement with Alan Gaines dated as of May 6, 2014, pursuant to which
he agreed to serve as the Chairman of the Board of Directors of Stratex and was accordingly elected by the
Stratex Board of Directors to serve as a director of Stratex and as the Chairman of its Board of Directors.
Previously, Mr. Gaines served as Executive Chairman of the Board of Directors of Richfield from May 2013 to
May 6, 2014. The Board of Directors of both Richfield and Stratex determined that it would be in the best
interests of both companies for Mr. Gaines to resign from Richfield and to join Stratex in order to facilitate the
merger.
Mr. Gaines’ employment agreement provides for Mr. Gaines to serve as the Chairman of our Board of
Directors, at an annual base salary of $350,000. The initial term of employment under the Employment
Agreement is five (5) years, unless earlier terminated by Stratex or Mr. Gaines by reason of disability, for
cause, for “good reason,” change of control or otherwise. In addition to his base salary, commencing
January 1, 2015, Mr. Gaines will be eligible for a targeted annual performance bonus equal to 100% of his then
applicable base salary, as determined by our Board, based upon certain performance criteria to be adopted
by the Board upon the recommendation of Stratex’s compensation committee.  The actual bonus may be less
than or more than the target bonus based upon the assessment by the Board, in its sole and absolute
discretion, of Mr. Gaines’ performance against such criteria. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall
Mr. Gaines’ bonus awarded in any year exceed 200% of Mr. Gaines’ then applicable base salary.  Stratex has
also agreed to reimburse Mr. Gaines for all reasonable out of pocket expenses incurred by him in furtherance
of Stratex’s business.
91
Table of Contents
Upon termination of Mr. Gaines’ employment by Stratex without “cause”, upon his resignation for “good
reason”, or upon his termination following a “change of control” (each as defined in his employment
agreement) Mr. Gaines would be entitled to receive from Stratex a severance payment equal to two and ninety
nine one-hundredths times (2.99X) his then current base salary plus his then targeted annual bonus.  Mr.
Gaines would also be entitled to any unpaid Bonus from the preceding year of employment.
Mr. Gaines has agreed that, during the term of his employment and for a one-year period after his termination
(other than termination by him for good reason or by us without cause), not to engage, directly or indirectly,
as an owner, employee, consultant or otherwise, in any business engaged in the exploration, drilling or
production of natural gas or oil within any five (5) mile radius from any property in which Stratex then has an
ownership, leasehold or participation interest.  Mr. Gaines is further prohibited during the above time period
from soliciting or inducing, directly or indirectly, any of our then-current employees or customers, or any
customers of Stratex during the one year preceding the termination of his employment.
By virtue of a prior Consulting Agreement dated October 15, 2013, as amended on December 20, 2014,
between Stratex and Mr. Gaines, Stratex granted a warrant to Mr. Gaines, exercisable for up to 7,500,000
shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $0.15 per share.
On August 8, 2014, Stratex entered into an Employment Agreement with Matthew S. Cohen to serve as its
Executive Vice President & General Counsel. The Employment Agreement provides for an annual base salary
of $230,000, subject to a 10% increase per annum, commencing January 1, 2015. The initial term of
employment under the Employment Agreement is four (4) years commencing on the date Mr. Cohen
commences work with the Company (currently contemplated to be on or around September 2, 2014), unless
earlier terminated by Stratex or Mr. Cohen by reason of disability, for cause, for “good reason,” change of
control or otherwise. Upon the execution of his Employment Agreement, Mr. Cohen was issued (i) 400,000
shares of Stratex common stock and (ii) a stock option exercisable for up to 2,000,000 shares of Stratex
common stock at an exercise price of $0.30 per share. Such stock option vests over a 2 year period, expires 5
years from the date of the grant and provides for cashless exercise.
In addition to his base salary, commencing January 1, 2015, Mr. Cohen will be eligible for a targeted annual
performance bonus equal to 80% of his then applicable base salary, as determined by Stratex’s Board, based
upon certain performance criteria to be adopted by the Board upon the recommendation of Stratex’s
compensation committee.  The actual bonus may be less than or more than the target bonus based upon the
assessment by the Board, in its sole and absolute discretion, of Mr. Cohen’s performance against such
criteria. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall Mr. Cohen’s bonus awarded in any year exceed
160% of his then applicable base salary.  Stratex has also agreed to reimburse Mr. Cohen for his health
insurance premiums and all reasonable out of pocket expenses incurred by him in furtherance of company
business.
Upon termination of Mr. Cohen’s employment by Stratex without “cause”, upon his resignation for “good
reason”, or upon his termination following a “change of control” (each as defined in his Employment
Agreement) Mr. Cohen will be entitled to receive from Stratex a severance payment equal to two times
(2.0X) his then current base salary plus his then targeted annual bonus.  He will also be entitled to any unpaid
bonus from the preceding year of employment.
On April 11, 2014 Stratex entered into a written employment agreement with Jeffrey B. Robinson to serve as
its Director of Field Operations.  The Employment Agreement provides that Mr. Robinson is to serve for an
initial term of three years at a base salary of $150,000 per year, which was increased to $165,000 per year in
August 2014.  The Employment Agreement also provides that Mr. Robinson shall be entitled to receive a cash
bonus for each year of employment with Stratex in an amount to be determined by Stratex’s Board of
Directors, and that Mr. Robinson is entitled to the use of a company automobile and reimbursement of certain
health insurance expenses.  Pursuant to his Employment Agreement, we also granted Mr. Robinson a non-
qualified common stock option, exercisable to purchase up to 1,000,000 shares of Stratex common stock at
an exercise price of $0.39 per share.
92
Table of Contents
Pursuant to his Employment Agreement, Stratex may terminate Mr. Robinson’s employment with or without
“Cause” and Mr. Robinson can resign with or without “Good Reason”.  In the event that Stratex terminates
Mr. Robinson with Cause or in the event Mr. Robinson resigns without Good Reason, then Stratex shall be
responsible to pay him the sum of any unpaid salary and bonuses through the effective date of
termination.  In the event that Stratex terminates Mr. Robinson without Cause or if he resigns for Good
Reason, then Stratex shall pay him, as severance pay, an amount equal to the sum of any unpaid salary
through the date of termination, plus an amount equal to one year of his then current base salary.  The
Employment Agreement also contains limitations on the disclosure of Confidential Information by Mr.
Robinson, and contains provisions prohibiting Mr. Robinson from competing with Stratex and/or soliciting
our employees during the term of the Employment Agreement and for a period of one year thereafter.
Mr. Robinson’s stock option award provides that Mr. Robinson may, prior to April 11, 2019, exercise the stock
option with respect to: (i) 500,000 shares immediately, (ii) an additional 250,000 shares commencing on April
11, 2015 and (iii) the remaining 250,000 shares commencing on April 11, 2016. Subject to the terms of Mr.
Robinson’s Employment Agreement, upon the termination of his employment with Stratex, Mr. Robinson shall
have the right to exercise the Stock Option only for the number of Optioned Shares that have vested as of that
date.  Moreover, Mr. Robinson shall have a period of six months following the cessation of his employment
with the Company to exercise his stock option for the number of shares then vested. The stock option
provides for cashless exercise and certain “piggy-back” registration rights.
Certain Related Party Transactions
Joseph P. Tate
Joseph P. Tate became one of Richfield’s directors effective March 31, 2012. Mr. Tate has entered into the
following transactions with Richfield between January 1, 2012 and June 30, 2014:
Mr. Tate is a beneficial owner of land within the HUOP.  Richfield entered into two oil and natural gas leases with Mr.
Tate and his spouse (“Tate”) as joint tenants, totaling 1,823 acres. The Tate leases consisted of i) a new lease
Richfield entered into in March 2012 relating to 400 net acres, for $100,000; and ii) the renewal of an existing lease
Richfield entered into on March 2012 for a five-year term relating to 1,423 net acres, for $283,200.  The total amount
of $383,200 was paid to Tate through the issuance of 153,280 shares of Richfield common stock, valued at $2.50 per
share. In March 2014, Richfield consolidated and replaced the prior Tate leases with a new lease covering a
combined 1,823 net acres.  The initial bonus for the new lease totals $182,308 which was paid through the issuance
·
of 729,232 shares of Richfield common stock, valued at $0.25 per share, which represents a prepayment of all delay
rentals for the 10 year primary term commencing on April 15, 2014.  The initial bonus amount is similar to third party
10 year primary term leases obtained by Richfield in the HUOP at or around the time of the transaction. Pursuant to
the terms of the new Tate lease, Tate is entitled to 12.50% landowner royalty-interest revenues relating to
hydrocarbons produced by Richfield.  No oil or natural gas has been extracted from the leased land and therefore no 
landowner royalties have been paid to Tate.
In March 2012, Tate and Richfield agreed to the repayment of a $100,000 outstanding payable, including interest of
·
$18,000, through the issuance of 47,200 shares of common stock, valued at $118,000, or $2.50 per share.
In October 2012, MacKov assigned warrants to purchase 88,057 shares of Richfield common stock to Joseph P. Tate
and several unaffiliated investors for total cash consideration of $17,611, or $0.20 per warrant.  Mr. Tate and the other
·
unaffiliated investors then exercised the warrants to purchase 88,057 shares of Richfield common stock for total cash
consideration of $140,889, or $1.60 per share.
In May 2013, Mr. Tate purchased 250,000 shares of common stock of Richfield for cash in the amount of $200,000, or
$0.80 per share. The shares were subject to a ratchet provision that in the event Richfield sold shares of common
stock or convertible securities at any time prior to December 31, 2013 at a price per share less than $0.80, Richfield
would issue an additional amount of shares of common stock to make the effective price of the shares of common
·
stock equal to the price per share of common stock that were sold for less than $0.80. In addition, Richfield granted
warrants to Mr. Tate to purchase up to 125,000 shares of common stock with an exercise price of $1.00 that expired
in May 2014.  In January 2014, 262,821 shares of common stock were issued pursuant to the terms of this provision.
The fair value of these shares at the time of issuance was $63,077 or $0.24 per share.
93
Table of Contents
Glenn MacNeil, Interim Chief Financial Officer
Glenn G MacNeil, Richfied’s Chief Financial Officer and a director of Richfield, along with his spouse, owns
100% of the ownership interests in MacKov Investments Limited, an Ontario, Canada incorporated private
company which we call MacKov.
Richfield participated in the following transactions with MacKov between January 1, 2012 and March 31, 2014:
In November 2012, MacKov sold ORRIs ranging from 0.25% to 2.25% in 1,127 net acres of oil and natural gas
 ·
properties located in Kansas to the D. Mack Trust and one unaffiliated investor;
In February 2012, MacKov purchased a 1.50% working interest in the Koelsch Field from Richfield for cash of
$4,545. In October 2012, MacKov sold all of its 5.00% working interest in the Koelsch Field to Richfield for $262,500.
The consideration consisted of MacKov exercising 154,753 outstanding warrants to purchase 154,753 shares of
 ·
Richfield’s common stock valued at $247,605 or $1.60 per share and Richfield’s issuance of 5,958 shares of
Richfield common stock valued at $14,895 or $2.50 per share. Each of these transactions were completed on the
same terms as other independent third-party transactions in the Keolsch Field at or around the time of the
transaction;
In October 2012, MacKov sold all of its 1.00% carried working interest BPO and APO in the HPI Liberty #1 Well, its
1.00% working interest BPO and APO in the Liberty Prospect, its 2.25% working interest BPO and 1.75% working
 ·
interest APO in the HPI Liberty #1 Well and Liberty Prospect to Richfield in exchange for 96,800 shares of Richfield
common stock, valued at $242,000 or $2.50 per share. Each of these transactions were completed on the same
terms as Richfield’s other independent third-party transactions at or around the time of the transactions;
In October 2012, MacKov sold all of its 0.50% working interest in the deep zones and its 0.25% working interest in
the shallow zones of the HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect to Richfield in exchange for 25,000 shares of Richfield’s
 ·
common stock, valued at $62,500 or $2.50 per share. Each of these transactions were completed on the same terms
as our other independent third-party transactions at our around the time of the transaction;
In February 2012, MacKov purchased a 0.50% working interest in the Moroni #1-AXZH Well and the 320 acre
leasehold from Richfield for cash of $38,781. This purchase was made on the same terms as other independent
 ·
third-party transactions in the Independence Field that were completed at or around the time of the transaction. On
June 30, 2012, in connection with Richfield’s sale to Skyline Oil, MacKov sold its 0.50% working interest in the
Moroni #1-AXZH Well and the surrounding 320 acres to Skyline Oil;
On June 30, 2012, MacKov settled a short term loan in the amount of $217,050 along with $82,172 of interest for a
total of $299,222 for consideration consisting of a payment from Richfield to MacKov of $287,713 in cash and
 ·
MacKov’s election to exercise warrants to purchase 7,193 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $11,509 or
$1.60 per share. Each of these transactions were completed on the same terms as Richfield’s other independent
third-party loan transactions at or around the time of the transaction;
In November 2012, MacKov granted a demand loan to Richfield in the amount of $65,000 with interest accruing at
10.0% per annum, secured by a 1% working interest in certain HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect leases , which we
 ·
call the MacKov demand note. On December 31, 2012, the Company paid all accrued interest under the MacKov
Demand Note, in the amount of $727 and the principal was transferred to an independent third party.
As of March 31, 2014, MacKov has no working interests or ORRIs in oil or natural gas properties that Richfield
controls or in which Richfield owns an interest and MacKov has no warrants outstanding to purchase
Richfield’s common stock.
For the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, MacKov received $0 and $12,642, respectively, in royalties
relating to ORRIs and oil sales from working interest from Kansas leases including the Koelsch Field that
were previously owned by MacKov.
94
Table of Contents
For a description of amounts paid to Mr. MacNeil and MacKov as compensation for Mr. MacNeil’s service as
Richfield’s Chief Financial Officer and one of Richfield’s directors, see “– Richfield Executive Compensation”
beginning on page 88.
Involvement in Certain Legal Proceedings
Mr. Funk is subject to the terms of a consent order entered into with the New Jersey Bureau of Securities in
March 2006 (the “New Jersey Consent Order”). The New Jersey Consent Order permanently enjoins Mr. Funk
from, among other things, offering, selling, or promoting the sale of unregistered securities in New Jersey in
violation of the securities registration requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Securities Law or issuing
securities or engaging in any securities-related activity in New Jersey without registering as a broker-dealer,
agent, investment adviser or investment adviser representative in New Jersey. The New Jersey Consent
Order was entered into in connection with an action brought against Mr. Funk and others in connection with
the sale of unregistered promissory notes in New Jersey (Peter C. Harvey, acting Attorney General of New
Jersey and Franklin L. Wildman, Chief of the New Jersey Bureau of Securities v. Wellesley Services, Inc. et al.,
Superior Court of New Jersey, Chancery Division, Essex County, (No. C-188-03).  Mr. Funk also entered into a
consent order with the Connecticut Banking Commissioner in January 2003 relating to the sale of
unregistered promissory notes of the same issuer in Connecticut (the “Connecticut Consent Order”). The
Connecticut Consent Order fined Mr. Funk $25,000 and barred him from acting as a broker-dealer, agent,
investment adviser or investment adviser agent in Connecticut for five years
DESCRIPTION OF STRATEX CAPITAL STOCK
The authorized capital stock of Stratex consists of 750,000,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.01 per
share, and 400 shares of preferred stock, par value $0.0001 per share. As of the date of this proxy
statement/prospectus, there are no outstanding shares of Stratex preferred stock and 56,687,376 shares of
Stratex common stock are outstanding. It is expected that, after giving effect to the consummation of the
merger (and assuming no dissenters’ rights are exercised), there will be 117,303,824 shares of Stratex
common stock outstanding.
The following summary of the capital stock of Stratex does not purport to be complete and is qualified in its
entirety by reference to the description of the rights of the holders of Stratex common stock set forth in
“Comparison of Stockholder Rights,” to the provisions of applicable law, to Stratex’s amended and restated
articles of incorporation and to its bylaws.
Common Stock
Except as provided by law, holders of Stratex common stock are entitled to one vote for each share held of
record on all matters submitted to a vote of the stockholders, will have the right to vote for the election of
directors and do not have cumulative voting rights. Holders of Stratex common stock are entitled to receive
ratably in proportion to the shares of common stock held by them such dividends (payable in cash, stock or
otherwise), if any, as may be declared from time to time by Stratex board of directors out of funds legally
available for dividend payments. All outstanding shares of common stock are fully paid and non-assessable,
and the shares of common stock to be issued to the Richfield stockholders after the consummation of the
merger will be fully paid and non-assessable. The holders of Stratex common stock have no preferences or
rights of conversion, exchange, pre-emption or other subscription rights. There are no redemption or sinking
fund provisions applicable to the common stock. In the event of any voluntary or involuntary liquidation,
dissolution or winding-up of Stratex’s affairs, holders of Stratex common stock will be entitled to share ratably
in Stratex’s assets in proportion to the shares of common stock held by then that are remaining after payment
or provision for payment of all of Stratex’s debts and obligations.
95
Table of Contents
Preferred Stock
All of the 400 authorized shares of preferred stock have been designated as Series A preferred stock. The
holders of the Series A preferred stock are not entitled to receive dividends or distributions upon liquidation
of Stratex. The holders of Series A preferred stock are entitled to 1,000,000 votes for each share held of
record on all matters submitted to a vote of the stockholders. The holders of Stratex Series A preferred stock
have no preferences or rights of conversion, exchange, pre-emption or other subscription rights. There are
no redemption or sinking fund provisions applicable to the Series A preferred stock.
Anti-Takeover Effects of Provisions of Stratex Articles of Incorporation
Stratex’s articles of incorporation authorize the issuance of up to 400 shares of Series A preferred stock. The
holders of the Series A preferred stock are entitled to 1,000,000 votes for each share held of record on all
matters submitted to a vote of the stockholders. Although there are no shares of Series A preferred stock
presently outstanding, the ability to issue Series A preferred stock in the future could make acquisitions of
Stratex by means of a tender offer, a proxy contest or otherwise or removal of Stratex incumbent officers and
directors more difficult. These provisions may also have the effect of preventing changes in Stratex’s
management. It is possible that these provisions could make it more difficult to accomplish or could deter
transactions that stockholders may otherwise consider to be in their best interest or in Stratex’s best
interests, including transactions that might result in a premium over the market price for shares of Stratex
common stock.
96
Table of Contents
MARKET INFORMATION AND DIVIDENDS
Market Prices
The following table sets forth the high and low sales prices of Stratex’s and Richfield’s common stock as
reported on the OTCQB and the OTCQX, respectively.
The following table sets forth the high and low sales prices of Stratex’s and Richfield’s common stock as
reported on the OTCQB and the OTCQX, respectively.
Fiscal Year Ending December 31, 2014:  
 $ 0.61
First Quarter
 $ 0.33
Second Quarter
 
  
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2013:   
 $ 0.24
Fourth Quarter
 $ 0.15
Third Quarter
 $ 1.11
Second Quarter
 $ 1.73
First Quarter
 
  
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2012:   
Fourth Quarter
Third Quarter
Second Quarter
Stratex Common Stock 
   High     
 
 Low
  
 
 $ 0.32  
 $ 0.20  
 
    
    
 
 $ 0.15  
 $ 0.07  
 $ 0.16  
 $ 0.89  
    
 
    
 
 $ 0.93  
 $ 1.65  
 $ 0.3
$ 0.95
 $ 2.9
 $ 2.5
Richfield Common Stock 
    High  
 
 
  
 
 $ 0.29
 $ 0.22
 
 
  
 
  
 
 $ 0.35
 $ 0.55
 
 
 $ 0.60
 
 $ 1.04
 
  
  
 
 
 $ 3.50
(2)
 $ -
 $ -
(2)
Low
  
 $ 0.16
 $ 0.17
  
  
 $ 0.22
 $ 0.32
 $ 0.40
 $ 0.75
  
  
 $ 2.99
 $ -
 $ -
(2)
(2)
First Quarter
$ -
(1)  $ -
(1) $ -
(2)
$ -
(2)
(1)First date reported trading was May 31, 2012
(2)First date reported trading was December 31, 2012
Richfield Dividend Policy
Richfield has never declared or paid any dividends on its capital stock. Richfield currently intends to retain all
available funds and any future earnings to support operations and finance the growth and development of its
business and does not intend to pay cash dividends on its common stock for the foreseeable future. Any
future determination related to Richfield’s dividend policy will be made at the discretion of its board of
directors.
Stratex Dividend Policy
Stratex has never declared or paid any dividends on its capital stock. Stratex currently intends to retain all
available funds and any future earnings to support operations and finance the growth and development of its
business and does not intend to pay cash dividends on its common stock for the foreseeable future. Any
future determination related to Stratex’s dividend policy will be made at the discretion of its board of directors.
COMPARISON OF STOCKHOLDER RIGHTS
If the merger is consummated, stockholders of Richfield will become stockholders of Stratex. The rights of
Stratex stockholders are governed by and subject to the provisions of the Colorado Business Corporation
Act and the articles of incorporation and bylaws of Stratex, rather than the provisions of Nevada Revised
Statutes and the articles of incorporation and bylaws of Richfield. The following is a summary of the material
differences between the rights of holders of Stratex common stock and the rights of holders of Richfield
common stock, but is not a complete description of those differences and is qualified in its entirety by
reference to the relevant provisions of (i) the Colorado Business Corporation Act, which we refer to as the
CBCA, (ii) the Nevada Revised Statutes, which we refer to as the NRS, (iii) the Amended and Restated Articles
of Incorporation of Stratex, which we refer to as the Stratex charter, (iv) the Articles of Incorporation of
Richfield, as amended, which we refer to as the Richfield charter, (v) the Bylaws of Stratex, which we refer to
as the Stratex bylaws, (vi) the Amended and Restated By-Laws of Richfield, which we refer to as the Richfield
bylaws, and (vii) the description of Richfield common stock set forth in Item 11 of its Form 10-12G/A filed with
the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 17, 2012.
97
Table of Contents
This section does not include a complete description of all differences among the rights of Stratex
stockholders and Richfield stockholders, nor does it include a complete description of the specific rights of
such holders. Furthermore, the identification of some of the differences in the rights of such holders as
material is not intended to indicate that other differences that may be equally or more important do not exist.
You are urged to read carefully the relevant provisions of the CBCA and the NRS, as well as the governing
documents of each of Stratex and Richfield. Copies of the governing documents of Stratex are available,
without charge, to any person, including any beneficial owner to whom this proxy statement/prospectus is
delivered, by following the instructions listed under the section entitled “Where You Can Find More
Information” on page 106.
Summary of Material Differences Between the Rights of Stratex Stockholders and the Rights of Richfield
Stockholders
Authorized
Capital
Stock
Stratex Stockholder Rights
The authorized capital stock of Stratex consists of
750,000,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.01 per
share, and 400 shares of preferred stock, par value
$0.0001 per share.  The terms of the preferred stock are
as set forth in the Stratex charter and include, but are not
limited to, no liquidation rights, no right to receive
dividends, and voting rights equal to 1,000,000 times the
number of preferred shares held by such stockholder.
Richfield Stockholder Rights
The authorized capital stock of Richfield
consists of 250,000,000 shares of common
stock, par value $0.001, and 50,000,000
shares of preferred stock, par value
$0.001.  The board of directors has the right
to determine the rights, preferences,
privileges and restrictions granted to and
imposed upon the preferred stock or any
series thereof.
Board of
Directors
Size
Classification
and Term
Vacancies
The Stratex bylaws provide that the number of directors
may not be less than 1 and not more than 10.  The number
of directors is to be established from time-to-time by
resolution of the directors.
Stratex does not have a classified board.  The Stratex
bylaws provide that all of the directors are elected for a
one year term at the annual meeting of stockholders by a
plurality of the votes cast.
The Stratex bylaws provide that vacancies, however
caused or created, on the board of directors shall be filled
by the affirmative vote of a majority of the remaining
directors, though less than a quorum of the board, or at a
special meeting of stockholders called for the purpose of
filling a vacancy on the board.
The Richfield bylaws provide that the number
of directors may be up to 7.
Richfield does not have a classified
board.  The Richfield bylaws provide that
each director shall hold office until the next
annual meeting of stockholders.
Pursuant to the NRS, all vacancies, including
those caused by an increase in the number of
directors, may be filled by a majority of the
remaining directors, though less than a
quorum.
98
Table of Contents
Removal
Standard of
Stratex Stockholder Rights
Pursuant to the CBCA, the stockholders may remove a
director with or without cause unless the articles of
incorporation provide that directors may be removed only
for cause.  Stratex’s charter does not contain such
restriction.  Pursuant to the CBCA, a director may be
removed by judicial proceeding commenced by either the
corporation or by stockholders holding at least 10% of the
outstanding shares of any class, if the court finds that the
director engaged in fraudulent or dishonest conduct or
gross abuse of authority or discretion with respect to the
corporation and that removal is in the best interests of the
corporation.
The CBCA sets forth the standard of conduct for directors,
requiring that a director of a Colorado corporation perform
his or her duties in good faith, with the care an ordinarily
Richfield Stockholder Rights
Pursuant to the NRS, a director may be
removed by the vote of stockholders
representing not less than 2/3rds of the voting
power of the issued and outstanding stock
entitled to vote.
The NRS provides that directors shall
exercise their powers in good faith and with a
view to the interests of the corporation.  The
Conduct of
Directors
Transactions
with
Directors
prudent person in a like position would exercise under
similar circumstances, and in a manner the director
reasonably believes to be in the best interests of the
corporation.
Stratex’s charter provides that no contract or other
transaction between Stratex and one or more of its
directors is void or voidable solely because (i) of the
director relationship or interest, (ii) of the director’s
presence at a meeting of the board or a committee thereof
which authorizes, approves or ratifies such contract or
transaction, or (iii) the director’s vote is counted for such
purpose if (1) the fact of the interest/relationship is
disclosed or known by the board or committee that
authorizes the transaction by a vote or consent sufficient
for the purpose without counting the votes of the interested
directors; (2) the fact of the interest/relationship is
disclosed or known to the stockholders entitled to vote
and the stockholders approve the transaction; or (3) the
transaction is fair and reasonable to the corporation.
NRS includes a presumption that directors act
in good faith, on an informed basis and with a
view to the interests of the corporation.
Richfield’s charter provides that no contract or
other transaction between the company and
any other person, or corporation, or in which
the corporation is interested, will be affected
or invalidated by:  (i) the fact that one or more
directors or officers of Richfield is interested or
is a director or officer of such other firm or
corporation; or (ii) the fact that any director or
officer may be a party to or may be interested
in any such contract or transaction, so long as
the contract or transaction is authorized,
approved or ratified by the board by sufficient
vote thereon by disinterested directors to
which such interest or relationship has been
disclosed.
99
Table of Contents
Stockholder
Meetings
Stratex Stockholder Rights
Richfield Stockholder Rights
Special
Meetings
Stratex’s bylaws provide that special meetings of the
stockholders may be called by the president, the board of
directors or the holders of 10% or more of all shares entitled
to vote at such special meeting.
Record Date
Stratex’s bylaws provide that the board of directors may fix a
record date not more than 50 days prior to a meeting of
stockholders.
Actions by
Written
Consent
The CBCA provides that the stockholders may take action by
written consent so long as: (i) all of the stockholders entitled
to vote thereon consent to such action in writing; or (ii)
except in certain circumstances, the stockholders holding
shares having not less than the minimum number of votes
that would be necessary to authorize or take such action at a
meeting at which all of the shares entitled to vote thereon
were present and voted consent to such action in writing.
Stratex’s charter provides that a majority of shares of
common stock entitled to vote, represented in person or
proxy, constitutes a quorum.
Stratex’s charter provides that each share of common stock
is entitled to one vote and each fractional share of common
stock is entitled to a corresponding fractional vote.
Quorum and
Voting
Requirements
Richfield’s bylaws provide that special
meetings of the stockholders may be
called by resolution of the board or by the
president at the request of the holders of
not less than a majority of all outstanding
shares of Richfield entitled to vote at the
meeting.  
Richfield’s bylaws provide that the board
of directors may fix a record date not more
than 70 days and not less than 10 days
prior to a meeting of stockholders.
Richfield’s bylaws provide that unless
otherwise provided by the NRS, any
action required to be taken at a meeting of
stockholders may be taken by unanimous
written consent.
Richfield’s bylaws provide that a majority
of the outstanding shares of Richfield
entitled to vote, represented in person or
by proxy, constitute a quorum.
Pursuant to Richfield’s bylaws, each
outstanding share is entitled to one vote.
The affirmative vote of a majority of the
outstanding shares represented at a
Furthermore, each share of Series A preferred stock is
entitled to one million times that number of votes.
meeting at which a quorum is present
shall be the act of the stockholders of
Richfield. However, in the case of electing
directors, Richfield’s bylaws permit
cumulative voting.
100
Table of Contents
Liability and
Indemnification
of Directors
and Officers
Personal
Liability
Indemnification
Stratex Stockholder Rights
Richfield Stockholder Rights
Stratex’s charter provides that no director shall
be liable to the company or any stockholder for
monetary damages for breach of fiduciary duty
as a director, except if the director (i) shall be
liable under the CBCA for unlawful
distributions, (ii) breaches the director’s duty of
loyalty to the company or the stockholders, (iii)
shall have not acted in good faith, or in failing to
act, shall not have acted in good faith, (iv) shall
have acted or failed to act in a manner involving
intentional misconduct or a knowing violation of
the law; or (v) shall have derived an improper
personal benefit.
Stratex’s bylaws provide that the company must
indemnify its directors and officers, former
directors or officers, or any person that served at
its request as  a director or officer of another
corporation in which Stratex owns shares or of
which it is a creditor and the personal
representatives of all such persons, against
expenses actually and necessarily incurred in
connection with the defense of any action, suit,
or proceeding in which they, or any of them,
were made parties, or a party, by reason of their
position, except where the individual is
adjudged to be liable for negligence or
misconduct in the performance of any duty
owed to Stratex.
The NRS provides that a director or officer is not
individually liable to the corporation or its
stockholders or creditors for any damages as a result
of any act or failure to act in his or her capacity as a
director or officer unless it is proven that: (i) the act or
omission constitutes a breach of fiduciary duty; and
(ii) the breach of those duties involved intentional
misconduct, fraud or a knowing violation of the law.
Furthermore, Richfield’s charter provides that no
director shall be personally liable to the company or
any stockholder for monetary damages for breach of
fiduciary duty as a director, except as provided in the
NRS. However, a director will be liable for reason
that, in addition to any and all other requirements for
such liability, the director: (i) breached his duty of
loyalty to the company or its stockholders; (ii) did not
act in good faith, or in failing to act, did not act in
good faith; (iii) acted in a manner involving
intentional misconduct or a knowing violation of law
or, in failing to act, acted in a manner involving
intentional misconduct or a knowing violation of the
law; or (iv) derived an improper personal benefit.
Richfield’s charter gives the company authority to
purchase insurance on behalf of any director or
officer against any liability asserted against such
officer or director and incurred by such person in
their capacity as a director or officer, or arising out of
such person’s status as a director or officer, whether
or not the company would have the power to
indemnify such person against such liability under
Richfield’s charter.
The NRS also permits indemnification of directors
and officers that are not liable for breach of fiduciary
duty and acted in good faith and in a manner which
he or she reasonably believed to be in or not
opposed to the best interests of the company, and
with respect to any criminal action or proceeding,
had no reasonable cause to believe the conduct was
unlawful.
101
Table of Contents
Richfield Stockholder Rights
The NRS provides that, except for a
change of the registered agent by a
company, an amendment to the articles
of incorporation requires board and
stockholder approval.
Richfield’s bylaws provide that the
bylaws may be amended, altered or
repealed by a majority vote of the board
or by a majority vote of the
stockholders.
The NRS provides stockholders the
right to dissent, subject to certain
limitations, from certain corporate
actions, including a merger.  In order to
dissent, stockholders must comply with
certain statutory prerequisites,
including providing written notice,
before the vote is taken, of the
stockholder’s intent to demand
payment for his or her shares if the
proposed action is effectuated and not
voting his or her shares in favor of the
proposed action.
Stratex Stockholder Rights
Amendments
to
 
Organizational
Documents
Articles of
Incorporation
Bylaws
Dissenters’
Rights
The CBCA provides that the board of directors may, without
stockholder action, make certain procedural amendments to
the charter that are explicitly provided for in the CBCA.  Other
amendments to be submitted for stockholder approval must be
proposed by either the board or stockholders representing at
least 10% of all of the votes entitled to be cast on the
amendment.  A majority of shares outstanding present in
person or by proxy at a meeting where there is a quorum must
approve the amendment for it to be effective.
Stratex’s bylaws provide that the bylaws may be altered,
amended or repealed by the board of directors by resolution of
a majority of the board.  The CBCA provides that stockholders
may amend the bylaws even though the bylaws may also be
amended by the board.
The CBCA provides a number of corporate actions which give
rise to dissenters’ rights, which include, but are not limited to:
(i) consummation of a plan of merger to which the corporation
is a party if: (1) approval by the stockholders is required by the
CBCA or Stratex’s charter; or (2) the corporation is a
subsidiary that is being merged with its parent; (ii)
consummation of a plan of share exchange and the
company’s shares will be acquired; (iii) consummation of a
sale, lease, exchange, or other disposition of all, or
substantially all, of the property of the company or a company
controlled by Stratex for which stockholder approval is
required by the CBCA; and (iv) consummation of a
conversion.
102
Table of Contents
Stratex Stockholder Rights
Stratex’s bylaws provide that dividends may be declared by the board.  Further,
Stratex’s charter provides that common stock holders are entitled to dividends as
and when declared by the board, except that no common stock dividend can be
paid for any year unless the holders of preferred stock receive the maximum
Richfield
Stockholder
Rights
Richfield’s bylaws
provide the board
of directors may
declare, and the
company may pay,
Dividends
allowable preferred stock dividend for such year.  However, the charter also
provides that the holders of Series A preferred stock are not entitled to receive
dividends.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the CBCA provides that no distribution
can be made if it would cause the company not to be able to pay its debts as they
come due in the usual course of business, or if the company’s total assets would be
less than its total liabilities plus the amount that would be needed, if the company
dissolved at the time of distribution to satisfy the preferential rights upon dissolution
of stockholders whose preferential rights are superior to those receiving the
distribution.
Anti-
Takeover
Provisions
The CBCA requires a majority of all votes entitled to be cast on an extraordinary
transaction to be voted in favor of such transaction.
dividends on its
outstanding shares
in the manner and
upon the terms and
conditions provided
by Nevada law and
the company’s
charter.
The NRS requires
a majority of all
votes entitled to be
cast on an
extraordinary
transaction to be
voted in favor of
such transaction.
Votes on
Extraordinary
Corporate
Transactions
Votes on
Transactions
with Certain
Stockholders,
including
Business
Combinations
Involving
Interested
Stockholders
The CBCA has no anti-takeover provisions.
103
Table of Contents
Stratex
Stockholder
Rights
Richfield Stockholder Rights
The NRS generally prohibits a Nevada corporation with 200 or more stockholders of record
and with a class of voting shares registered under Section 12 of the Exchange Act from
engaging in a combination, referred to as a variety of transactions, including mergers,
combinations, asset sales, issuance of stock and other actions resulting in a financial
benefit to the Interested Stockholder, with an “Interested Stockholder” referred to generally
as a person that is the beneficial owner of 10% or more of the voting power of the
outstanding voting shares, for a period of two years following the date that such person
became an Interested Stockholder unless the Board of Directors of the corporation first
approved either the combination or the transaction that resulted in the stockholder’s
becoming an Interested Stockholder. If this approval is not obtained, the combination may
be consummated after the three year period expires if either (a) (1) the Board of Directors of
the corporation approved the combination or the purchase of the shares by the Interested
Stockholder before the date that the person became an Interested Stockholder, (2) the
transaction by which the person became an Interested Stockholder was approved by the
Board of Directors of the corporation before the person became an interested stockholder,
or (3) the combination is approved by the affirmative vote of holders of a majority of voting
The CBCA
Constituency
and Related
Provisions
has no anti-
takeover
provisions.
power not beneficially owned by the Interested Stockholder at a meeting called no earlier
than two years after the date the Interested Stockholder became such; or (b) the aggregate
amount of cash and the market value of consideration other than cash to be received by
holders of common stock and holders of any other class or series of shares meets the
minimum requirements set forth in NRS Sections 78.441 through 78.443, and prior to the
consummation of the combination, except in limited circumstances, the Interested
Stockholder would not have become the beneficial owner of additional voting shares of the
corporation. A Nevada corporation may adopt an amendment to its articles of incorporation
expressly electing not to be governed by these sections of the NRS, if such amendment is
approved by the affirmative vote of a majority of the disinterested shares entitled to vote;
provided, however, such vote by disinterested stockholders is not required to the extent the
Nevada corporation is not subject to such provisions. Such an amendment to the articles of
incorporation does not become effective until 18 months after the vote of the disinterested
stockholders and does not apply to any combination with an Interested Stockholder whose
date of acquiring shares is on or before the effective date of the amendment. Because
Richfield has not adopted a provision in its articles in which it elects not to be governed by
the sections of the NRS relating to business combinations, the statute applies to
combinations involving Richfield
104
Table of Contents
Stratex
Stockholder
 
Rights
Richfield Stockholder Rights
The NRS provides that in the context of a change of control transaction, directors and officers may
consider: (i) the interests of the company’s employees, suppliers, creditors and customers; (ii) the
economy of the state and nation; (iii) the interests of the community and of society; and (iv) the long-term
as well as short-term interests of the company and its stockholders, including the possibility that these
interests may be best served by the continued independence of the corporation. Directors and officers
are not required to consider the effect of a proposed corporate action upon any particular group having
an interest in the company as a dominant factor.
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the shares of Stratex common stock to be issued in the merger will be passed upon by
Buchanan Ingersoll & Rooney, PC. Stratex will receive an opinion from Buchanan Ingersoll & Rooney PC
concerning the United States federal income tax consequences of the merger.
EXPERTS
The consolidated financial statements of Richfield as of December 31, 2013 and 2012, and for each of the two
years in the period ended December 31, 2013, included in this proxy statement/prospectus have been audited
by Mantyla McReynolds, LLC, an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in their report,
which is included herein. Such consolidated financial statements have been so included in reliance upon the
report of such firm given upon their authority as experts in accounting and auditing.
The consolidated financial statements of Stratex as of December 31, 2013 and 2012, and for each of the two
years in the period ended December 31, 2013 included in this proxy statement/prospectus have been audited
by Mahoney Sabol & Company, LLP, independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in their report,
which is included herein. Such consolidated financial statements have been so included in reliance upon the
report of such firm given upon their authority as experts in accounting and auditing.
105
Table of Contents
Estimates of Richfield’s oil and natural gas reserves, related future net cash flows and the present values
thereof related to Richfield’s properties as of December 31, 2013 included elsewhere in this document were
based in part upon reserve reports prepared by independent petroleum engineers, Pinnacle Energy Services
L.L.C. Richfield has included these estimates in reliance on the authority of such firms as experts in such
matters.
Estimates of Stratex’s oil and natural gas reserves, related future net cash flows and the present values
thereof related to Stratex’s properties as of December 31, 2013 included elsewhere in this document were
based in part upon reserve reports prepared by independent petroleum engineers, LaRoche Petroleum
Consultants, Ltd.. Stratex has included these estimates in reliance on the authority of such firms as experts in
such matters.
STOCKHOLDER PROPOSALS
Richfield may hold an annual meeting in 2015 only if the merger has not already been completed. For
inclusion in the proxy statement and form of proxy relating to the Richfield 2015 annual meeting of
stockholders, should one be held, stockholder proposals submitted pursuant to Rule 14a-8 of the Exchange
Act must be received by Richfield not later than [__________________].
OTHER MATTERS
As of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, the Richfield board of directors knows of no matters that
will be presented for consideration at the Richfield special meeting other than as described in this proxy
statement/prospectus. If any other matters properly come before the Richfield special meeting or any
adjournments or postponements of the meeting and are voted upon, the enclosed proxy will confer
discretionary authority on the individuals named as proxy to vote the shares represented by the proxy as to
any other matters. The individuals named as proxies intend to vote in accordance with their best judgment as
to any other matters.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
Stratex and Richfield each files annual, quarterly and special reports, proxy statements and other information
with the SEC under the Exchange Act. You may read and copy any of this information at the SEC’s Public
Reference Room at 100 F Street, N.E., Room 1580, Washington, D.C. 20549 on official business days during
the hours of 10:00 am to 3:00 pm. Please call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 for further information on the Public
Reference Room. The SEC also maintains an Internet website that contains reports, proxy and information
statements, and other information regarding issuers, including Stratex and Richfield, who file electronically
with the SEC. The address of that site is www.sec.gov.
Investors may also consult Stratex’s and Richfield’s websites for more information concerning the merger
described in this proxy statement/prospectus. Richfield’s website is www.richfieldoilandgas.com and
Stratex’s website is www.stratexoil.com. Information included on these websites is not incorporated by
reference into this proxy statement/prospectus.
Stratex has filed with the SEC a registration statement of which this proxy statement/prospectus forms a part.
The registration statement registers the shares of Stratex common stock to be issued to Richfield
stockholders in connection with the merger. The registration statement, including the attached exhibits and
schedules, contains additional relevant information about Stratex common stock. The rules and regulations
of the SEC allow Stratex to omit certain information included in the registration statement from this proxy
statement/prospectus.
You can obtain any of the documents listed above from the SEC, through the SEC’s website at the address
described above or from Stratex by requesting them in writing or by telephone at the following addresses:
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
30 Echo Lake Road
Watertown, CT 06795
(713) 353-4786
Attn: Stephen P. Funk
106
Table of Contents
These documents are available from Stratex without charge, excluding any exhibits to them unless the exhibit
is specifically listed as an exhibit to the registration statement of which this proxy statement/prospectus
forms a part.
This document is a prospectus of Stratex and is a proxy statement of Richfield for the Richfield special
meeting. Neither Stratex nor Richfield has authorized anyone to give any information or make any
representation about the merger or Stratex or Richfield that is different from, or in addition to, that contained
in this proxy statement/prospectus or in any of the materials that Stratex has incorporated by reference into
this proxy statement/prospectus. Therefore, if anyone does give you information of this sort, you should not
rely on it. The information contained in this proxy statement/prospectus speaks only as of the date of this
proxy statement/prospectus unless the information specifically indicates that another date applies
INFORMATION WITH RESPECT TO RICHFIELD
The Business
Richfield was incorporated in Nevada on April 8, 2011 and is an independent oil and gas exploration and
production company with projects in Kansas, Utah and Wyoming. The focus of its business is acquiring,
retrofitting and operating or selling oil and gas assets and related production.
Richfield uses its research technology to identify prospective properties in Kansas and Oklahoma that were
initially developed between the 1920s and 1950s, but which may be subject to further development through
the use of more modern production techniques. These properties currently include 2,106 gross (2,011 net)
acres. Richfield has identified significant oil and natural gas reserves from these early exploration properties,
many of which were previously underdeveloped due to inefficient and antiquated exploration and production
methods and low commodity prices. In most cases these wells were developed and left fallow by major oil and
gas companies. Using current technology and methodologies, Richfield has successfully developed both
production and proved reserves within these fields, and intends to continue to pursue this strategy in the
future.
In addition, Richfield has three properties on the Utah–Wyoming Overthrust, including one property
containing a well that Richfield is in the process of refurbishing in order to place it into production. Richfield
currently owns or leases 2,311 gross (1,971 net) acres on the Utah-Wyoming Overthrust, near the border
between northern Utah and south-western Wyoming.
Richfield has conducted a limited amount of exploration for oil and natural gas reserves in the Central Utah
Overthrust region, where Richfield is participating in 33,270 gross (12,530 net) acres.
Richfield’s predecessor company, Hewitt Petroleum, Inc., a Delaware corporation, was incorporated on May
18, 2008. On January 1, 2009, Hewitt Petroleum entered into a Purchase and Sale Agreement with Hewitt
Energy Group, LLC for the acquisition of certain subsidiaries, other assets and liabilities including Hewitt
Energy Group, Inc., a Texas corporation, and its subsidiary Hewitt Operating, Inc., a Utah corporation, certain
oil and natural gas leases, well equipment, and certain liabilities. At the time of the acquisition, Hewitt Energy
Group, LLC was owned and controlled by Douglas C. Hewitt, Sr., Richfield’s Executive Chairman, President
and Chief Executive Officer.
On March 4, 2011, Hewitt Petroleum entered into a Stock Exchange Agreement effective March 31, 2011 with
Freedom Oil & Gas, Inc., a Nevada corporation, which called for the exchange of stock in Hewitt Petroleum for
all of the outstanding stock of Freedom. As a result of the transaction, Freedom became a wholly owned
subsidiary of Hewitt Petroleum. This acquisition allowed for the consolidation of working interests held by
Hewitt Petroleum and Freedom in several Utah exploration projects, as well as the acquisition by Hewitt
Petroleum of the remaining assets and liabilities of Freedom.
Contemporaneously with Richfield’s incorporation, it merged with its predecessor company, Hewitt
Petroleum. In connection with that merger, Hewitt Petroleum was merged out of existence and Richfield
assumed all of the assets and liabilities of Hewitt Petroleum. On June 20, 2011, Freedom was merged with and
into Richfield and Richfield assumed all of the assets and liabilities of Freedom.
107
Table of Contents
Richfield’s principal executive offices are located at 175 South Main Street, Suite 900, Salt Lake City, Utah
84111, and its telephone number is (801) 519-8500. Richfield currently has approximately eight full-time
equivalent employees and two consultants providing services.
Properties
Richfield maintains its headquarters at 175 South Main Street, Suite 900, Salt Lake City, Utah 84111 and has
temporary operational facilities in Russell County, Kansas and Juab County, Utah. The Kansas facilities
include a storage yard for equipment and its Utah facilities are currently located on the current HPI Liberty #1
Well site in Juab County, Utah.
Richfield has been involved in leasing, exploring and drilling activities in Kansas, Utah and Wyoming since
our formation. Richfield is currently participating in 35,455 gross acres of owned mineral rights and leasehold
interests, and has been involved in conducting seismic surveys, and drilling projects in these states. As of
July 25, 2014, Richfield had 40 total wells, including 14 producing wells, 14 shut-in wells, nine active saltwater
disposal wells and three wells that are currently in the process of completion. As set forth in its Reserves and
Engineering Evaluation, dated April 4, 2014, and effective as of December 31, 2013 (the “2013 Pinnacle
Reserve Report”), prepared by Pinnacle Energy Services L.L.C., as of December 31, 2013 Richfield had 13
producing wells, 17 shut-in wells, eight active saltwater disposal wells and three wells that were in the process
of completing.
Mid-Continent Project
In 2009, Richfield began development of its Mid-Continent Project by selling working interests to third parties
to provide development funding. As of July 25, 2014, Richfield had five fields in its Mid-Continent Project,
which contain 37 total wells, including 14 producing wells, two wells in the completion stage of development,
12 shut-in wells, and nine saltwater disposal wells. Richfield owns a 100% working interest in three of its fields
in Kansas, the Gorham Field, the South Haven Field and the Trapp Field. As of July 25, 2014, these three fields
collectively contained 27 wells, including 10 producing wells, one well in the completion stage of
development, 10 shut-in wells, and six saltwater disposal wells. Richfield has two other Kansas fields, which
include the Perth Field, in which it owns an 75% working interest and which contains three total wells,
including two producing wells and one saltwater disposal well, and the Koelsch Field, in which Richfield owns
an 85.5% working interest, with the exception of the RFO Koelsch #25-1 Well in which it owns an 83.5%
working interest. The Koelsch Field contains five total wells including two producing wells; two shut-in wells
and one saltwater disposal well. Richfield has one project in Oklahoma, the Bull Field, in which the leases
have currently expired that contain two wells, including one shut-in well and one saltwater disposal well.
Richfield’s current total acreage position in its Mid-Continent Project is 2,106 gross (1,991 net) acres.
Utah-Wyoming Overthrust Project
Richfield has one field and two prospects in the Utah-Wyoming Overthrust Project, the Graham Reservoir
Field, the Hogback Ridge Prospect and the Spring Valley Prospect. The Hogback Ridge Prospect, located in
Rich County, Utah, incorporates 1,511 acres, in which Richfield owns a 100% working interest. The Graham
Reservoir Field, located in Uinta County, Wyoming, incorporates 640 acres and contains one well in the
completion stage of development, in which Richfield owns a 20% working interest. The Spring Valley
Prospect, located in Uinta County, Wyoming, incorporates a 160 acre parcel of land, in which Richfield owns
the mineral rights and a 100% working interest. Richfield’s total acreage position in the Utah-Wyoming
Overthrust Project is 2,311 gross (1,919 net) acres.
Central Utah Overthrust Project
Richfield has five prospects in the Central Utah Overthrust Project, the Liberty Prospect, the HUOP Freedom
Trend Prospect, the Independence Prospect, the Pine Springs Prospect, and the Edwin Prospect, which
include one shut-in well and one well in the completion stage of development. Richfield is the operator of
each of these prospects, through its subsidiary Hewitt Operating, Inc. The Liberty Prospect incorporates
approximately 447 acres, in which Richfield owns a 62.2% working interest before payout (“BPO”) and a
47.1% working interest after payout (“APO”). Richfield has one well in the Liberty Prospect, which it refers to
as the “HPI Liberty #1 Well.” Richfield began drilling the HPI Liberty #1 Well in April 2010, and it is currently in
the completion stage of development. Richfield owns a 51.8% working interest BPO and a 38.1% working
interest APO in the HPI Liberty #1 Well. The HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect incorporates approximately
11,411 acres, in which Richfield owns an 89.5% working interest BPO and APO in the deep zones and owns a
44.3% working interest BPO and a 41.3% working interest APO in the first well to be drilled in the shallow
zones. Richfield owns a 44.3% working interest BPO and APO in all wells to be drilled in the other shallow
zones. The Independence Prospect incorporates approximately 20,000 acres, in which Richfield owns a 3.0%
working interest and which contains one shut-in well Richfield refers to as the “Moroni #1-AXZH Well.” The
Pine Springs Prospect incorporates 561 acres, in which Richfield owns a 100% working interest BPO and
APO. The Edwin Prospect incorporates 946 acres, in which Richfield owns a 100% working interest BPO and
APO. Richfield’s total acreage position in the Central Utah Overthrust Project is 35,455 gross (14,683 net)
acres which includes an option to purchase leases covering 4,241 acres within the Central Utah Overthrust
Project.
108
Table of Contents
Perth Field
On June 1, 2014, Stratex purchased a 25% working interest in the Perth Field, which incorporates 330 acres,
located in Sumner County, Kansas from Bear Petroleum LLC for a cost of $299,086. Upon the purchase
Stratex became the operator of that field. Richfield owns the remaining 75% working interest in the Perth Field.
At the time of the purchase the field contained two production wells and one saltwater disposal well. During
the month of July Stratex, as operator, has reworked both production wells including the installation of two
submersible pumps, both of these wells are currently producing. In addition, Stratex has filed with the Kansas
Corporation Commission permits for drilling two additional wells within the Perth Field. The two wells will be
production wells, both wells have been staked as to location and drilling will commence during the month of
August 2014.
The Perth Field was discovered in 1945 and has produced a total of 1.84 million barrels of oil from the Wilcox
Formation based on information maintained by the Kansas Corporation Commission. The field was mostly
abandoned in the 1980s. Research indicates that this field has high water content that is compatible with
dewatering production methodology and has the potential of producing a significant amount of additional oil.
The field has one salt water disposal well which we believe is sufficient to the disposal of high volumes of
water. There are also other zones in this field, which have not been fully tested, that we believe could contain
additional reserves. These zones include Lansing/Kansas City, Mississippi, and Arbuckle.
Legal Proceedings
On September 30, 2013 Roger Buller filed an action against Richfield Oil & Gas Company in the Twentieth
Judicial District Court of Russell County, Kansas. The case was filed based on a claimed failure to pay a Note
in full. Richfield contends that the Note has been paid in full by the issuance of Richfield Common Stock
which was accepted by Mr. Buller for the payment of the Note. The action requests the sum of $50,386 plus
interest. The Company believes that this claim was paid in full in September 2011 and plans on vigorously
defending the action.
Litigation in the Ordinary Course
We may become involved in litigation from time to time relating to claims arising in the ordinary course of our
business. We do not believe that the ultimate resolution of such claims would have a material effect on our
business, results of operations, financial condition or cash flows. However, the results of these matters
cannot be predicted with certainty, and an unfavorable resolution of one or more of these matters could have
a material effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion is intended to assist in understanding Richfield’s results of operations and financial
condition. Richfield’s consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in
this proxy statement/prospectus contain additional information that should be referred to when reviewing this
material. Certain statements in this discussion may be forward-looking. These forward-looking statements
involve risks and uncertainties, which could cause actual results to differ from those expressed in this report.
Unless the context requires otherwise, references in this section to the “Company,” “we,” ”our,” and “us”
refer to Richfield Oil and Gas Company.
109
Table of Contents
Overview of our Business
We are an independent oil and gas exploration and production company with projects in Kansas, Utah and
Wyoming. The focus of our business is acquiring, retrofitting and operating or selling oil and gas assets and
related production. We have three primary strategic directions:
●
We use our research technology to identify prospective properties in Kansas that were initially developed between
the 1920s and 1950s, but which may be subject to further development through the use of more modern production
techniques. We refer to these properties as our “Mid-Continent Project,” which currently includes 2,106 gross (1,991
net) acres. We have identified significant oil and natural gas reserves from these early exploration properties, many
of which were previously underdeveloped due to inefficient and antiquated exploration and production methods and
low commodity prices. In most cases these wells were developed and left fallow by major oil and gas companies.
Using current technology and methodologies, we have successfully developed both production and proved
reserves within these fields, and we intend to continue to pursue this strategy in the future.
●
We have three properties on the Utah–Wyoming Overthrust, including one property containing a well that was
placed into production during 2013 but is currently shut-in. We currently own or lease 2,311 gross (1,975 net) acres
on the Utah-Wyoming Overthrust, near the border between northern Utah and south-western Wyoming.  We refer to
these properties as our “Utah-Wyoming Overthrust Project.” We intend to conduct additional development activities
with respect to our Utah-Wyoming Overthrust Project.
We have conducted a limited amount of exploration for oil and natural gas reserves in the Central Utah Overthrust
region, where we are participating in over 33,899 gross (13,531 net) acres.  We refer to these properties as our
“Central Utah Overthrust Project.” We and our partners intend to conduct drilling operations, acquire additional
acreage and conduct further exploration activities with respect to our Central Utah Overthrust Project.
●
Our approach to acquiring leases and developing producing properties focuses on three types of
development activities:
●Activities involving the identification, acquisition and development of leases of property in which oil or natural gas is
known to exist. 
    
 
●Activities involving low or moderate exploration and development risk. These include leases of property where oil
and natural gas has been produced in the past but there are no existing wells.
●
Activities involving the acquisition of properties where it is reasonably believed that potential hydrocarbon values
exist based on analysis involving geochemical, radiometric, gravitational and seismic data. This may include
projects that have never been drilled or tested for oil and natural gas in the past.
We have developed a database to evaluate wells that are on record in our Kansas areas of operation. The
database contains extensive well records, including information on historic production, seismic data,
geological data, well depth, well logs and drilling records, and where available, handwritten driller notes
concerning rock formation depths and other relevant information. This system has been developed internally
from data obtained from appropriate state agencies and private organizations. The database enables us to
identify potential bypassed hydrocarbons throughout the state of Kansas.
Through statistical modeling and data evaluation, we believe greater oil and natural gas reserves exist and
can be found, measured, and produced in areas where initial reserves were previously found but abandoned
prior to full development. We believe that with our current technologies and systems, acquiring and
developing older fields mitigates exploration risk and is a safe and predictable method of managing our
business.
110
Table of Contents
Production History
Year ended December 31, 2013 compared to the year ended December 31, 2012
The following table presents information about our produced oil volumes during the year ended December
31, 2013 compared to the year ended December 31, 2012. We did not produce natural gas during these time
periods. As of December 31, 2013, and December 31, 2012 we were selling oil from a total of 13 gross wells
(12.3 net).
Years Ended
 
December 31,
 
 2013
  2012
 
    
 
     
Net Production:
   11,331    10,931 
Oil (Bbl)
    
 
 
    
 
Average Sales Price:
 $92.34   $87.14  
Oil (per Bbl)
 
 
    
Average Production Costs:    
 
 $79.44   $69.93  
Oil (per Bbl)
Six months ended June 30, 2014 compared with six months ended June 30, 2013
The following table presents information about our produced oil volumes during the six months ended June
30, 2014 compared to the six months ended June 30, 2013. We did not produce natural gas during these time
periods. As of June 30, 2014, we were selling oil from a total of 14 gross wells (13.2 net), compared to 16 gross
wells (15.2 net) as of June 30, 2013.
June 30,
  2014
Three Months Ended  Six Months Ended 
 
 
 June 30,
 
 
 2014
  2013
Net Production:
   
  
 
Oil (Bbl)
   2,358
    3,465     4,403     5,858  
 
 
     
    
Average Sales Price:
     
    
 
  $ 88.22   $95.22   $88.40  
Oil (per Bbl)
 $ 98.27
 
    
     
 
Average Production Costs:    
 
     
 $ 147.55   $ 66.17   $110.48   $76.56  
Oil (per Bbl)
2013
The following table presents information about our produced oil volumes during the six months ended June
30, 2014 compared to the six months ended June 30, 2013. We did not produce natural gas during these time
periods. As of June 30, 2014, we were selling oil from a total of 14 gross wells (13.2 net), compared to 16 gross
wells (15.2 net) as of June 30, 2013.
Net Production:
Oil (Bbl)
 
Average Sales Price:
Oil (per Bbl)
June 30,
  2014
Three Months Ended  Six Months Ended 
 
 June 30,
  2013
 
 2014
   
  
 
    3,465     4,403     5,858  
   2,358
 
     
    
    
     
 
  $ 88.22   $95.22   $88.40  
 $ 98.27
2013
Average Production Costs:    
Oil (per Bbl)
$ 147.55   $ 66.17   $110.48   $76.56
Depletion of Oil and Gas Properties
Year ended December 31, 2013 compared to year ended December 31, 2012
Our depletion expense is driven by many factors, including certain exploration costs involved in the
development of producing reserves, production levels and estimates of proved reserve quantities and future
developmental costs.  Our depletion expense totaled $132,260 and $110,296 for 2013 and 2012, respectively.
The following table presents our depletion expenses per barrel of oil for 2013 and 2012.
Years Ended
 
December 31,
 2013   2012  
 
 
    
 
Depletion of Oil (per Bbl) $11.66  $10.09
111
Table of Contents
Six months ended June 30, 2014 compared with six months ended June 30, 2013
Our depletion expense is driven by many factors, including certain costs incurred in the development of
producing reserves, production levels and estimates of proved reserve quantities.  Our depletion expense
totaled $26,547 and $55,392 for the three and six months ended June 30, 2014, respectively, compared to
$41,783 and $66,031 for the three and six months ended June 30, 2013, respectively.
The following table presents our depletion expenses per barrel of oil for the three and six months ended June
30, 2014 and 2013.
Depletion of Oil (per Bbl): $ 11.26   $ 12.06
Three Months Ended  Six Months Ended 
 
 June 30,
  June 30,
 2014
 
  2014
     
 
    
  $ 12.58   $ 11.27
2013
2013
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2013 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2012
The following presents an overview of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2013,
compared to the year ended December 31, 2012.
Average Daily Production. Our net oil production for 2013 averaged approximately 31 Bopd after royalties
compared to approximately 30 Bopd for 2012.
Oil Revenues. Our oil revenues increased by $93,770 or 9.8% from $952,566 for 2012 to $1,046,336 for 2013.
The increase in revenue is due to an increase in our average price of $5.20 per barrel or $58,914. Production
increased by 400 barrels of oil in 2013 over 2012 accounts for the balance of the increase of $34,856.
Net Loss on Earnings Per Share. We realized a net loss of $6,799,584 (approximately $(0.19) per basic and
diluted share of common stock) for 2013 compared to a net loss of $7,993,196 (approximately $(0.28) per
basic and diluted share of common stock) for 2012. The decrease in net loss on earnings per share was
primarily due to a decrease of $1,889,897 in our operating expenses and an increase in our weighted average
shares outstanding for the year in the amount of 7,519,947 shares.
Operating Expenses. Total operating expenses were $6,271,501 for 2013 compared to $8,161,398 for
2012. The $1,889,897 or 23.2% decrease in operating expenses was due primarily to a decrease in general and
administrative expenses ($2,811,585) which was offset by a decrease in the gain on sale of assets ($366,286);
increases in asset retirement obligations ($161,901); increases in lease expirations ($156,739); increases in
production expenses ($135,672); and all other items ($101,090).
Production Expenses. Our production expenses for 2013 were $900,129, or $79.44 per barrel of oil, compared
to $764,457, or $69.93 per barrel of oil, for 2012, which represents a $135,672 or 17.7% increase. The overall
production expenses increased mainly due to one-time repair costs incurred on our Wasatch National Forest
#16-15 Well that were necessary after it was put into production. This increase was partially offset by a large
one time repair charge in our Perth field during 2012 that we did not incur in 2013. Our cost per barrel
continues to remain above the industry averages due to our fixed costs, such as electricity, personnel and
related expenses, and the cost of maintaining our 27 current non-producing wells including eight salt water
disposal wells that are underutilized. We expect our fixed costs on a per barrel basis will decline as we place
into production our non-producing wells.
112
Table of Contents
Exploration Expenses. Exploration expenses decreased 18.4%, or $30,781, from $167,212 for 2012 to
$136,431 for 2013. This decrease is mainly due to less work performed in 2013 on our undeveloped Utah
prospects. In 2013, we focused more of our resources on our proved properties, which are primarily in
Kansas.
Lease Expirations. Lease expirations were $182,032 for 2013 compared to $25,293 for 2012. The $156,739
increase in lease expirations was attributable mainly to one lease in Kansas that we were unsuccessful in
renewing due to excessive terms requested by the mineral owner, as well as a reserve established in 2013 for
future leases that will expire in Utah because they are either over current market value for their renewal, do
not have a renewal option or we will elect not to renew.
Depletion, Depreciation, Amortization and Accretion. We recorded depletion, depreciation, amortization and
accretion of $382,690 during 2013 compared to $261,739 during 2012. The increase of 46.2%, or $120,951 was
mainly due to increased depreciation of $95,422 during 2013 on our well and office equipment as a result of
$1,223,833 in equipment additions since 2012. Depletion expense increased by $21,964 as a result of an
increase in overall production volumes with a shift to more production in the Koelsch and South Haven fields
that have a higher depletion cost per barrel. The remaining increase of $3,565 is due to an increase of
accretion of the discount on our asset retirement obligation.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses were $4,571,642 for 2013
compared to $7,383,227 for 2012. The $2,811,585 or 38.1% decrease was attributable to: (i) $2,266,693
decrease of employee and director compensation; (ii) $1,483,135 decrease in consulting fees; (iii) a $391,514
increase in legal and audit fees due to our efforts in raising capital, and (iv) a net decrease of $248,280 in all
other expense items. The general and administrative expenses include $1,140,601 and $3,609,444 in 2013 and
2012, respectively for non-cash equity compensation.
Asset Retirement Obligation Expenses. We had $161,601 in asset retirement obligation expenses for 2013
compared to zero in 2012. This increase is due to the cost for plugging three wells in Kansas during 2013
exceeding the asset retirement obligation liability for those three wells. These wells had been shut-in since
our purchase of the leases. They were in very poor mechanical condition that was unknown to us prior to
starting our rework operations.
Gain on Sale of Assets. During 2013 we had a net gain on sale of assets of $105,106 compared to $471,392 for
2012. The gain on sale of assets in 2013 is primarily attributable to the sale of 71.25% working interest in our
Wasatch National Forest #16-15 Well. The gain on sale of assets in 2012 is mainly attributable the sale of 21%
working interest in the Prescott Lease and a 5% carried interest in the Perth Field.
Other Income (Expenses). Total other income and expenses during 2013 was a net expense of $1,572,852
compared to a net expense of $783,964 for 2012 representing an increase of $788,888 or 100.6%.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt. In 2013, we incurred a loss on the extinguishment of debt in the amount of
$1,103,702. This is a non-cash expense and is the result of our effort to reduce our debt through conversions
to common stock with a ratchet provision and warrants.
Gain on Derivative Valuation. The Company incurred a gain of $756,776 on the derivative valuation of the
ratchet provision on certain shares of common stock. This is a non-cash gain determined by the change in
the fair value of the provision for the year 2013.
Interest and Finance Expenses. For the year 2013, we incurred interest and finances expenses of $1,257,143
compared to $1,104,612 for the year 2012. The $152,531 increase in 2013 over 2012 is due to an increase of
$293,054 in expenses mainly due to incentive payments for new debt issued and payments made to extend
due dates on notes payable during the year 2013, an increase of $184,477 associated with the modification of
previously issued warrants, offset by a decrease of $325,000 in debt issuance fees we incurred in 2012 that
did not occur in 2013. The interest and finance expenses include $865,347 and $220,549 in non-cash stock
and warrant issuances for the years 2013 and 2012, respectively.
Interest Income. For 2012, the Company had $299,879 of interest income associated with past due receivables
from a working interest holder. In 2013, we had $850 in interest income.
113
Table of Contents
Six Months Ended June 30, 2014 Compared to the Six Months Ended June 30, 2013
The following presents an overview of our results of operations for the six ended June 30, 2014, compared to
the six months ended June 30, 2013.
Average Daily Production. Our net oil production for the six months ended June 30, 2014 averaged
approximately 24 Bopd after royalties compared to approximately 32 Bopd for the six months ended June 30,
2013. The decrease in production in 2014 compared to 2013 is due to the temporary shut-in of wells and other
temporary well repair downtime in Kansas and Wyoming.
Oil Revenues. Our oil revenues decrease by $98,580, or 19.0%, from $517,840 for the six months ended June
30, 2013 to $419,260 for the six months ended June 30, 2014. The decrease in revenue is due to a decrease of
1,455 barrels of oil produced for the six months ended June 30, 2014 over the same period in 2013, equating
to a decrease of $128,620 partially offset by an $6.82 increase in the weighted average price per barrel sold for
the six months ended June 30, 2014, equating to an increase of $30,040.
Net Loss on Earnings Per Share. We realized a net loss of $4,875,043, or $0.09 per basic and diluted share of
common stock, for the six months ended June 30, 2014, compared to a net loss of $3,736,801 or $0.11 per
basic and diluted share of common stock for the six months ended June 30, 2013. The higher net loss of
$1,139,242 was due mainly to the increase in our general and administrative expenses and the loss on share
issuances, partially offset by an increase in the gain on the settlement of liabilities and a lower loss on the
extiguishment of debt.
Operating Expenses. Total operating expenses were $3,884,029 for the six months ended June 30, 2014
compared to $3,109,465 for the six months ended June 30, 2013. The $774,564 or 24.9% increase in operating
expenses was due primarily to an increase in general and administrative expenses of $760,468.
Production Expenses. Our production expenses for the six months ended June 30, 2014 were $486,454 or
$110.48 per barrel of oil, compared to $448,446 or $76.56 per barrel of oil, for the six months ended June 30,
2013, which represents a $38,008 or 8.5% increase. The overall production expenses increased due to higher
repair costs on our wells. Our cost per barrel for the six months ended June 30, 2014 continues to remain
above the industry averages due to our fixed costs, such as electricity, personnel and related expenses, and
the cost of maintaining our 26 current non-producing wells including nine salt water disposal wells that are
underutilized. We expect our fixed costs on a per barrel basis will decline as we place into production our
non-producing wells.
Exploration Expenses. Exploration expenses increased 86.9%, or $62,178, from $71,511 for the six months
ended June 30, 2013 to $133,729 for the six months ended June 30, 2014. We performed some additional work
on our undeveloped Utah prospects as a result of funding availability from the proceeds of the sale of
working interest.
Lease Expiration. Lease expirations increased from $46,937 for the six months ended June 30, 2013 to
$113,933 for the six months ended June 30, 2014. The increase of $66,996 was due to a charge in the amount
of $106,907 required for leases pertaining to property in our undeveloped Utah prospects that will be expiring
in the next year without the option contained in the lease to renew, partially offset by an net decrease of
$39,911 on our other developed properties in Kansas for the six months ended June 30, 2014.
Depletion, Depreciation, Amortization and Accretion. We recorded depletion, depreciation, amortization and
accretion of $210,847 during the six months ended June 30, 2014 compared to $183,150 during the six
months ended June 30, 2013. The increase of 15.1% or $27,697 was mainly due to increased depreciation of
$38,489 during the six months ended June 30, 2014 as a result of increased well equipment additions since
June 30, 2013. Depletion expense decreased by $10,639 as a result of a decrease in overall production
volumes, partially offset by an increase in the cost per barrel. The remaining decrease of $153 is due to the
net change in accretion of the discount on our asset retirement obligation.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses were $2,947,996 for the six
months ended June 30, 2014 compared to $2,187,528 for the six months ended June 30, 2013. The increase of
$760,468 or 34.8% was due to $1,041,413 in non-cash stock compensation to one of our directors, partially
offset by a decrease of $340,397 in expenses for external consultants including legal and accounting; a net
increase of $59,452 in all other expenses during the six months ended June 30, 2014 from the same period in
2013.
Asset Retirement Obligation Expense. We incurred asset and retirement obligation expenses in the amount of
$4,380 for the six months ended June 30, 2014 compare to $136,507 during the six months ended June 30,
2013. This decrease of $132,127 is due to the additional expense in 2013 for the plugging of three wells in
Kansas that exceeded their asset retirement obligation liability.
114
Table of Contents
Other Income (Expenses). Total other income and expenses during the six months ended June 30, 2014 was
a net expense of $1,410,627 compared to a net expense of $1,143,609 for the six months ended June 30, 2013
representing a decrease of $267,018 or 23.3% as detailed below.
Gain on settlement of liabilities. The Company realized a gain on settlement of liabilities in the amount of
$421,975 for the six months ended June 30, 2014 compared to a gain of $30,367 for the six months ended
June 30, 2013. This increase of $391,608 is due to the favorable settlement terms of outstanding liabilities for
cash and common stock.
Loss on extinguishment of debt. The Company incurred a loss on extinguishment of debt in the amount of
$530,218 for the six months ended June 30, 2014 compared to a loss of $631,353 for the six months ended
June 30, 2013. This decrease in the loss of $101,135 is due to the efforts made in 2013 to reduce debt through
the conversions to common stock with a ratchet provision and warrants. In 2014, the extinguishment of one
of our convertible notes resulted in a loss of $545,466 which was partially offset by other gains on
extinguishment of debt in the amount of $15,248.
Interest and Finance Expenses. For the six months ended June 30, 2014, we incurred interest and finances
expenses of $659,882 compared to $542,623 for the six months ended June 30, 2013. The increase of
$117,259 in 2014 over 2013 is due primarily to an increase of $189,703 in interest expense due to extension
and conversion incentives on convertible notes during the six months ended June 30, 2014 offset by $72,444
due to reduced interest expenses from lower outstanding debt during the period because of the conversion
to common stock of notes payable in previous periods and lower overall interest rate terms on current debt.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is a measure of a company’s ability to meet potential cash requirements. We have historically met
our capital requirements through the issuance of common and preferred stock, short-term borrowings and
selling working interests in our oil and natural gas properties. In the future, we expect to generate cash from
sales of crude oil from production from our existing wells and new wells we intend to develop. Until cash
provided by our operations is sufficient to cover our expenses and execute our development plans, we intend
to continue to finance our operations through additional debt or equity financings, if available.
The following table summarizes our total current assets, total current liabilities and working capital deficiency
as of June 30, 2014 compared to December 31, 2013:
December 31, 
 
  2013
 
 
 
  $613,822
Current Assets    
Current Liabilities    
 
Working Capital Deficiency   $(4,257,814) $(8,233,790 )
June 30,
 2014
 $721,265
   4,979,079     8,847,612
Cash and cash equivalents were $93,363 as of June 30, 2014, compared to $60,395 as of December 31, 2013.
Changes in the net cash provided by and (used in) our operating, investing and financing activities for the six
months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 are set forth in the following table:
Net cash used in operating activities  
Net cash used in investing activities  
Net cash provided by financing activities
Increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents $32,968
Net Cash
 Six Months Ended
  Increase
 
 June 30,
 2014
  (Decrease)  
 $(1,956,470) $(825,835 ) $(1,130,635)
 
   (45,300
)   (636,264 )   590,964
 
   2,034,738     1,257,371    777,367
  $(204,728 ) $237,696
2013
115
Table of Contents
Net cash from operating activities is derived from net loss from operations adjusted for non-cash items,
changes in the balances of accounts receivables, deposits and prepaid expenses, accounts payables,
accrued expenses and other payables. For the six months ended June 30, 2014, we used net cash in
operating activities in the amount of $1,956,470 compared to $825,835 for the six months ended June 30,
2013. This decrease in net cash of $1,130,635 from 2013 to 2014 was primarily due to a decrease in accounts
payable of $593,497, an increase in accounts receivables of $346,564 an increase in deposits and prepaid
expenses of $294,646, partially offset by a net increase of $104,072 from all other operating items.
Net cash from investing activities is derived from the proceeds and disbursements from sales and purchases
of oil and gas properties, including wells and related equipment. For the six months ended June 30, 2014, we
had cash used in investing activities in the amount of $45,300 compared to cash used by investing activities
in the amount of $636,264 for the six months ended June 30, 2013. This increase in net cash of $590,964 was
primarily due to an increase in the proceeds from sale of oil and gas assets in the amount of $550,734 as well
as fewer purchases of oil and gas properties and other equipment in the amount of $40,230.
Net cash from financing activities is derived from the proceeds from the issuance of equity securities and
notes and convertible notes payable reduced by payments on our notes and convertible notes payable. For
the six months ended June 30, 2014, we had net cash provided by financing activities of $2,034,738 compared
to net cash provided by financing activities 1,257,371 for the six months ended June 30, 2013, resulting in an
increase of $777,367 in our net cash period over period. This increase is due primarily to an increase of
$1,859,927 in cash raised through the issuance of equity securities in 2014 over 2013 offset by a decrease of
$694,000 in funds raised through the issuance of common stock, and increase of $442,531 in payments on
our notes payable, convertible notes payable, and capital leases and an increase in cash from all other
financing activities totaling $53,971.
Satisfaction of our cash obligations for the next 12 months and our ability to continue as a going concern
Our operations do not produce significant cash flow and we rely almost exclusively on external sources of
liquidity. As of June 30, 2014, we have a $4,257,814 working capital deficiency and we need additional funding
to pay our current liabilities, continue as a going concern and execute our business plan. We have historically
addressed working capital deficiencies through frequent private sales of stock and warrants for cash,
exchanges of stock and warrants in satisfaction of liabilities or for services, issuing short- and long-term
promissory notes and sales of our assets. The Company intends to make its planned capital expenditures in
order to continue its drilling programs, but does not have sufficient realized revenues or operating cash flows
in order to finance these activities internally. As a result, the Company has obtained financing in order to fund
its working capital and capital expenditure needs. On May 6, 2014 the Company entered into an Agreement
and Plan of Merger with Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc. a Colorado corporation (“Stratex Merger”). Upon the
execution of the Stratex Merger agreement the Company entered into a $3,000,000 loan agreement with
Stratex which was amended in July 2014 to increase the loan amount to $4,000,000 and extend the due date
from November 2014 to January 2015.
We will continue to depend on these and other external sources of liquidity for the foreseeable future. If we
cannot obtain the necessary capital to pay our current liabilities, we may be subject to litigation and
foreclosure proceedings. We will also need to obtain additional funding to make our planned capital
expenditures. If we are unable to secure such additional funding, we will be unable to pursue our plans, we
may have to cease or significantly curtail our operations, including our plans to acquire additional acreage
positions and development activities. Our ability to raise additional capital is critical to our ability to continue
to operate our business.
Our independent registered public accounting firm’s report on our December 31, 2013 financial statements
expresses doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The report includes an explanatory
paragraph stating that there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern due to
substantial losses from operations, negative working capital, negative cash flow, and the lack of sufficient
capital, as of the date the report was issued, to support our planned capital expenditures to continue our
drilling programs through 2014 or later. The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to
the recoverability and classification of recorded assets and classification of liabilities that might be necessary
should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
We are not currently generating significant revenues, and our cash and cash equivalents will continue to be
depleted by our ongoing development efforts as well as our general and administrative expenses. Until we are
in a position to generate significant revenues, we will need to continue to raise additional funds to continue
operating as a going concern. We may seek this additional funding through the issuance of debt, preferred
stock, equity or a combination of these instruments. We may also seek to obtain financing through the sale of
working interests in one or more of our projects. We cannot be certain that funding from any of these sources
will be available on reasonable terms or at all. If we are unable to secure adequate funds on a timely basis on
terms acceptable to us, we may have to cease or significantly curtail our operations including our plans to
acquire additional acreage positions and development activities.
116
Table of Contents
Over the next twelve months, we do not expect our existing capital and anticipated funds from operations to
be sufficient to sustain our planned expansion. Consequently, we intend to seek additional capital to fund
growth and expansion through equity financings, debt financings and/or credit facilities. We have no
assurance that such financing will be available, and if available, the terms under which such financing would
be given.
Our lack of significant operating history makes predictions of future operating results difficult. Our prospects
must be considered in light of the risks, expenses and difficulties frequently encountered by companies in an
early stage of development, particularly companies in the oil and gas exploration industry. Such risks include,
but are not limited to, an evolving and unpredictable business model and the management of growth. To
address these risks we must, among other things, implement and successfully execute our business and
marketing strategy, continue to develop and upgrade technology and products, respond to competitive
developments, and attract, retain and motivate qualified personnel. We have no assurance that we will be
successful in addressing such risks, and the failure to do so would have a material adverse effect on our
business prospects, financial condition and results of operations.
117
Table of Contents
Effects of Inflation and Pricing
The oil and gas industry is cyclical and the demand for goods and services by oil field companies, suppliers
and others associated with the industry put significant pressure on the economic stability and pricing
structure within the industry. Typically, as prices for oil and natural gas increase all other associated costs
increase as well. Conversely, in a period of declining prices, associated cost declines are likely to lag and may
not adjust downward in proportion to the declining prices. Material changes in prices also impact our current
revenue stream, estimates of future reserves, impairment assessments of oil and natural gas properties, and
values of properties in purchase and sale transactions. Material changes in prices can impact the value of oil
and gas companies and their ability to raise capital, borrow money and retain personnel. While we do not
currently expect business costs to materially increase, higher prices for oil and natural gas could result in
increases in the costs of materials, services and personnel.
Critical Accounting Policies
The establishment and consistent application of accounting policies is a vital component of accurately and
fairly presenting our consolidated financial statements in accordance with United States generally accepted
accounting principles (“GAAP”), as well as ensuring compliance with applicable laws and regulations
governing financial reporting. While there are rarely alternative methods or rules from which to select in
establishing accounting and financial reporting policies, proper application often involves significant
judgment regarding a given set of facts and circumstances and a complex series of decisions.
Asset Retirement Obligations
We have significant obligations to plug and abandon our oil and natural gas wells and related equipment.
Liabilities for asset retirement obligations are recorded at fair value in the period incurred. The related asset
value is increased by the same amount. Asset retirement costs included in the carrying amount of the related
asset are subsequently allocated to expense as part of our depletion calculation.
Estimating future asset retirement obligations requires us to make estimates and judgments regarding timing,
existence of a liability, as well as what constitutes adequate restoration. We use the present value of
estimated cash flows related to our asset retirement obligations to determine the fair value. Present value
calculations inherently incorporate numerous assumptions and judgments, which include the ultimate
retirement and restoration costs, inflation factors, credit adjusted discount rates, timing of settlement, and
changes in the legal, regulatory, environmental and political environments. To the extent future revisions to
these assumptions impact the present value of our existing asset retirement obligation liability, a
corresponding adjustment will be made to the carrying cost of the related asset.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue from the sale of crude oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids is recorded when the significant risks
and rewards of ownership of the product is transferred to the buyer, which is usually when legal title passes
to the external party. For crude oil and natural gas liquids, delivery generally occurs upon pick up at the field
tank battery and natural gas delivery occurs at the pipeline delivery point. Revenue is not recognized for the
production in tanks, or oil in pipelines that has not been delivered to the purchaser. Revenue is measured net
of discounts and royalties. Royalties and severance taxes are incurred based on the actual price received
from the sales. We use the sales method of accounting for natural gas balancing of natural gas production,
and we would recognize a liability if the existing proven reserves were not adequate to cover the current
imbalance situation. For all periods reported, we had no natural gas production.
Stock-Based Compensation
We have accounted for stock-based compensation under the provisions of FASB Accounting Standards
Codification (ASC) 718. This standard requires us to record an expense associated with the fair value of
stock-based compensation. We use the Black-Scholes option valuation model to calculate the value of
options and warrants at the date of grant. Option pricing models require the input of highly subjective
assumptions, including the expected price volatility. Changes in these assumptions can materially affect the
fair value estimate.
118
Table of Contents
Stock Issuance
We record the stock-based awards issued to consultants and other external entities for goods and services at
either the fair market value of the goods received or services rendered or the instruments issued in exchange
for such services, whichever is more readily determinable, using the measurement date guidelines
enumerated in FASB ASC 505-50.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under FASB ASC 740. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined
based upon differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities and are
measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to
reverse. Accounting standards require the consideration of a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets if it
is “more likely than not” that some component or all of the benefits of deferred tax assets will not be realized.
The tax effects from an uncertain tax position can be recognized in the consolidated financial statements only
if the position is more likely than not of being sustained if the position were to be challenged by a taxing
authority. We have examined the tax positions taken in our tax returns and determined that there are no
uncertain tax positions. As a result, we have recorded no uncertain tax liabilities in our consolidated balance
sheet.
Oil and Gas Properties
We account for oil and natural gas properties by the successful efforts method. Under this method of
accounting, costs relating to the acquisition of and development of proved areas are capitalized when
incurred. The costs of development wells are capitalized whether productive or non-productive. Leasehold
acquisition costs are capitalized when incurred. If proved reserves are found on an unproved property,
leasehold costs are transferred to proved properties. Exploration dry holes are charged to expense when it is
determined that no commercial reserves exist. Other exploration costs, including personnel costs, geological
and geophysical expenses and delay rentals for oil and natural gas leases, are charged to expense when
incurred. The costs of acquiring or constructing support equipment and facilities used in oil and natural gas
producing activities are capitalized. Production costs are charged to expense as incurred and are those costs
incurred to operate and maintain our wells and related equipment and facilities.
Depletion of producing oil and natural gas properties is recorded based on units of production. Acquisition
costs of proved properties are depleted on the basis of all proved reserves, developed and undeveloped, and
capitalized development costs (wells and related equipment and facilities) are depleted on the basis of proved
developed reserves. As more fully described below, proved reserves are estimated by our independent
petroleum engineer and are subject to future revisions based on availability of additional information. Asset
retirement costs are recognized when the asset is placed in service, and are depleted over proved reserves
using the units of production method.
Oil and natural gas properties are reviewed for impairment when facts and circumstances indicate that their
carrying value may not be recoverable. We compare net capitalized costs of proved oil and natural gas
properties to estimated undiscounted future net cash flows using management’s expectations of future oil
and natural gas prices. These future price scenarios reflect our estimation of future price volatility. If net
capitalized costs exceed estimated undiscounted future net cash flows, the measurement of impairment is
based on estimated fair value, using estimated discounted future net cash flows based on management’s
expectations of future oil and natural gas prices. We have recorded no impairment on any of our properties.
Unproven properties that are individually significant are assessed for impairment and if considered impaired
are charged to expense when such impairment is deemed to have occurred.
The sale of a partial interest in a proved oil and natural gas property is accounted for as normal retirement
and no gain or loss is recognized as long as this treatment does not significantly affect the units-of-
production depletion rate. If the units-of-production rate is significantly affected, then the sale is accounted
for as the sale of an asset, and a gain or loss is recognized. The unamortized cost of the property or group of
properties is apportioned to the interest sold and interest retained on the basis of the fair values of those
interests. A gain or loss is recognized for all other sales of producing properties and is included in the results
of operations. The sale of a partial interest in an unproved property is accounted for as a recovery of cost
when substantial uncertainty exists as to recovery of the cost applicable to the interest retained. A gain on the
sale is recognized to the extent the sales price exceeds the carrying amount of the unproved property. A gain
or loss is recognized for all other sales of nonproducing properties and is included in the results of
operations.
119
Table of Contents
Oil and Gas Reserves
The determination of depreciation, depletion and amortization expense as well as impairments that are
recognized on our oil and natural gas properties are highly dependent on the estimates of the proved oil and
natural gas reserves attributable to our properties. Our estimate of proved reserves is based on the quantities
of oil and natural gas which geological and engineering data demonstrate, with reasonable certainty, to be
recoverable in the future years from known reservoirs under existing economic and operating conditions.
The accuracy of any reserve estimate is a function of the quality of available data, engineering and geological
interpretation, and judgment. For example, we must estimate the amount and timing of future operating costs,
production taxes and development costs, all of which may in fact vary considerably from actual results. In
addition, as the prices of oil and natural gas and cost levels change from year to year, the economics of
producing our reserves may change and therefore the estimate of proved reserves may also change. Any
significant variance in these assumptions could materially affect the estimated quantity and value of our
reserves.
The information regarding present value of the future net cash flows attributable to our proved oil and natural
gas reserves are estimates only and should not be construed as the current market value of the estimated oil
and natural gas reserves attributable to our properties. Thus, such information includes revisions of certain
reserve estimates attributable to our properties included in the prior year’s estimates. These revisions reflect
additional information from subsequent activities, production history of the properties involved and any
adjustments in the projected economic life of such properties resulting from changes in oil and natural gas
prices. Any future downward revisions could adversely affect our financial condition, our borrowing ability,
our future prospects and the value of our common stock.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements under GAAP in the United States requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of
contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported
amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. The most significant estimates relate to
proved oil and natural gas reserve volumes, certain depletion factors, future cash flows from oil and natural
gas properties, estimates relating to certain oil and natural gas revenues and expenses, valuation of equity-
based compensation, valuation of asset retirement obligations, estimates of future oil and natural gas
commodity pricing and the valuation of deferred income taxes. Actual results may differ from those estimates.
New Accounting Pronouncements
From time to time, new accounting pronouncements are issued by FASB that we adopt as of the specified
effective date. If not discussed, management believes that the impact of recently issued standards, which are
not yet effective, will not have a material impact on our financial statements upon adoption.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In April 2014, Richfield entered into a lease option agreement with LT Land Group, L.L.C., which we call “LT
Land” for Richfield to purchase all oil and gas leases acquired by LT Land in Utah. The premium paid for the
option agreement which expires in June 2015, was $21,919 and was paid by $16,639 in cash and $5,280 paid
by the issuance of 24,000 shares of Richfield common stock valued at $0.22 per share. The exercise price to
be paid by Richfield to acquire the leases is the cost of the leases to LT Land plus 35%. No partial exercises of
the leases are allowed. At the time of exercise of the lease option, if Richfield’s (or its successor by merger) 10
trading day average stock price is $0.30 or more per share, then the exercise price must be paid in shares of
common stock of Richfield (or its successor by merger), at a value of $0.30 per share. If Richfield’s (or its
successor by merger) 10 trading day average stock price is below $0.30 per share, then the exercise price
must be paid in cash.
120
Table of Contents
We currently do not have any other off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have
a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses,
results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
None
INFORMATION WITH RESPECT TO STRATEX
Business Overview
Stratex is an independent oil and gas company focused on the acquisition and subsequent exploitation and
development of predominantly crude oil in Texas and Kansas as well as varied non-operated working
interests in North Dakota, Montana and Utah.  In Texas, Stratex has an interest in a property located in Zavala
County. Stratex’s Zavala County acreage lies within the established oil rim of the prolific Eagle Ford Shale
play, one of the most actively drilled formations in the United States. Stratex intends to target multiple stacked
pay zones present on its Zavala County acreage, specifically the San Miguel, Austin Chalk and Buda
formations, which all produce locally. Stratex’s management presently views its Zavala County property as an
integral component of its current development program.
Stratex currently owns an interest in 41 wells, 31 of which account for Stratex’s present net production and
cash flow. Currently, Stratex holds approximately 10,513 net leasehold acres in Sheridan, Roosevelt,
Montana, Williams, Billings, Divide, Mountrail, and Stark Counties, North Dakota and Zavala County, Texas,
Sumner and Lane Counties, Kansas, and Juap County, Utah.
Stratex was originally incorporated as Poway Muffler and Brake Inc. in California on August 15, 2003 to enter
the muffler and brakes business.  On December 15, 2008, a merger was effected with Ross Investments Inc., a
Colorado shell corporation.    Ross Investments was the acquirer and the surviving corporation.  Ross
Investments Inc. then changed its name to Poway Brake and Muffler Inc. On May 25, 2012, Stratex filed an
Amendment to its Certificate of Incorporation by which the company changed its name from Poway Muffler
and Brake, Inc., a Colorado corporation, to Stratex Oil and Gas Holdings, Inc.
On July 6, 2012, Stratex Acquisition Corp., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
merged with and into Stratex Oil & Gas, Inc., a Delaware corporation, which we refer to as SOG. SOG was the
surviving corporation of that merger transaction. As a result of that merger, Stratex acquired the business of
SOG, and continue the business operations of SOG as a wholly-owned subsidiary.
Stratex’s principal executive offices are located at 30 Echo Lake Road, Watertown, Connecticut 06795, and its
telephone number is (713) 353-4786. Stratex currently has 3 employees.
Business Strategy
Our present corporate strategy is to internally identify certain opportunities which could take the form of the
purchase of producing properties with meaningful development drilling upside, bolt on acreage and/or
production and farm-ins. We intend to evaluate such opportunities utilizing subsurface geology, geophysical
data, existing well control and analysis of well bore economics, and may retain the services of outside
consultants on a contract basis.
Historically, Stratex has only held small, non-operated working interests in North Dakota, Montana and
Kansas.  By virtue of our joint ventures in Zavala County, Texas (discussed below), the Company intends to
actively exploit this property by serving as operator and owning much larger working interests.  By assuming
the role of operator, subject to the terms of the underlying leases, the Company will be able to exert far greater
control over the timing of expenditures, drilling and completion costs, and operating budgets.
121
Table of Contents
Drilling and Acreage Plans
Zavala County, Texas Project
On December 3, 2013 we entered into a Joint Development Agreement with Eagleford Energy, Inc., which we
call Eagleford, and its wholly owned subsidiary, Eagleford Energy Zavala, Inc., which we call Eagleford Zavala,
which was amended on January 24, 2014, which agreement, as amended, we call the Eagleford JDA. Pursuant
to the Eagleford JDA, Eagleford Zavala assigned to the Company, a fifty percent (50%) undivided working
interest in, and the exclusive right to operate and develop, an oil and gas lease dated September 1, 2013
covering approximately 2,629 acres in Zavala County, Texas, which we call the Zavala County Lease.
Pursuant to the Eagleford JDA, in March of 2014, the Company completed the hydraulic fracturing, which we
call fracing, of the Matthews #1H well. Had this frac not been completed by March 31, 2014, the Primary Term
of the Zavala County Lease would have expired. Under the terms of the Eagleford JDA, we paid 100% of the
costs of frac of the Matthews #1H well, in return for a 66.67% WI and a 50% WI in the well after payout.
“Payout” means the point in time when the Company shall have recouped from the proceeds of oil and gas
production from such Matthews #1H Well, after deducting (a) severance, production, windfall profit and other
taxes payable on such share of production, and (b) lessor's royalties of twenty percent (20%) and overriding
royalties of five percent (5%) an amount equal to the aggregate of all costs incurred by the Company in
connection with the frac and completion. As further consideration for the rights granted to the Company
under the Eagleford JDA, we paid $300,000 as follows: (i) $150,000 was delivered on December 4, 2013 to the
lessors under the Zavala County Lease, on behalf of Eagleford Zavala, (ii) $50,000 was delivered to Eagleford
on December 4, 2013 and (iii) $100,000 was delivered to Eagleford on January 14, 2014.
On April 11, 2014, Stratex entered into a Joint Development Agreement with Quadrant Resources LLC, which
we call Quadrant, and Eagleford Zavala, which agreement we call the Quadrant JDA, in order to exploit
significant medium and heavy grade original oil in place underlying the Zavala County Lease.   Pursuant to
the Quadrant JDA, Quadrant has agreed, at its sole cost and expense, to drill three wells and to rework five
wells to test the San Miguel formation, which we call the Phase I Work Program, on the Zavala County Lease.
Under the terms of the Quadrant JDA, Stratex serves as operator and conducts the Phase I Work Program
under the direction of Quadrant. Quadrant has undertaken to cause the Phase I Work Program to be
completed by June 15, 2015.  Provided that Quadrant has satisfied certain conditions set forth in the Quadrant
JDA by that date, Quadrant will earn the right to receive a conveyance, which we call the Conveyance, of an
undivided fifty percent (50%) working interest in the Matthews Lease, but only insofar as the Zavala County
Lease covers and includes the Surface-San Miguel Interval underlying such lands, which we call the
Development Area. At such point in time, Stratex and Eagleford Zavala will each hold a 25% working interest
in the Development Area. With respect to seven of the eight Phase I Wells, Stratex has the right to receive
16.66% of the revenues before Payout and 25.0% of the revenues after Payout. Stratex will not be entitled to
participate in any revenues derived from the reworking of the Matthews No. 3V Well.
With respect to the Zavala County Lease, Stratex’s management believes that there are up to 42 horizontal
drilling locations in the Eagle Ford formation alone as well as 14 horizontal locations in the Austin Chalk and
32 horizontal locations in the Buda, with additional locations possible.
Under the terms of the Zavala County Lease, an annual minimum royalty of $850,000 is required to keep the
lease in full force and effect. Additionally, beginning in the second lease year (which commences September
1, 2014), the Zavala County Lease contains a requirement that at least two new wells are drilled per
year.  Failure to meet these and other requirements will result in a termination of the Zavala County Lease,
except for such acreage retained by production.
Summer County, Kansas Project
As a prelude to the closing of the merger, on June 1, 2014, Stratex purchased a 25% working interest in the
Perth Field, which incorporates 330 acres, located in Sumner County, Kansas from Bear Petroleum LLC for a
cost of $299,086. By virtue of this acquisition, Stratex replaced Bear Petroleum as the operator of that field
and, given the fact that Richfield owned the remaining 75% working interest in the Perth Field, Stratex’s
management felt this was an opportunity to buy out a minority interest operator. At the time of the purchase,
the field contained two production wells and one saltwater disposal well. During the month of July, Stratex, as
operator, reworked both production wells and installed two downhole submersible pumps. Both of these
wells are currently on production. In addition, Stratex has filed with the Kansas Corporation Commission
permits for drilling two additional wells within the Perth Field. Such wells have been staked as to location and
drilling is expected to commence during August 2014.
122
Table of Contents
The Perth Field was discovered in 1945 and has produced a total of 1.84 million barrels of oil from the Wilcox
Formation based on information maintained by the Kansas Corporation Commission. The field was mostly
abandoned in the 1980s. Research indicates that this field has high water content that is compatible with
dewatering production methodology and has the potential of producing significant volumes of incremental
oil. The field has 1 salt water disposal well which we believe is sufficient for the disposal of high volumes of
water. There are also other zones in this field which have not been fully tested that Stratex’s management
believes could contain additional potential reserves. These zones include the Lansing/Kansas City,
Mississippi, and Arbuckle.
Joint Development Agreement with New Era Energy (Caldwell County, Texas)
On July 30, 2014, Stratex entered into a Joint Development Agreement, which we call the New Era Energy JDA
with New Era Energy, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, which we call New Era Energy. Pursuant to
the New Era Energy JDA, New Era Energy has a period of 60 days in which to acquire oil and gas lease(s)
covering approximately 699.5 acres in Caldwell County, Texas. If New Era Energy acquires this lease within
the 60 day period, as may be extended by Stratex, Stratex has the option to purchase from New Era Energy
an undivided 50% working interest in the lease.  If Stratex elects to purchase the working interest in the lease,
Stratex has agreed, at its sole cost and expense, to drill and complete two vertical wells (the “Carried Wells”)
on the lease to test the Austin Chalk formation.  Stratex has six months following its acquisition of the
working interest in which to complete the Carried Wells.  If Stratex does not complete the Carried Wells within
the six month period, New Era Energy has the option to terminate the New Era Energy JDA and to obtain an
assignment from Stratex of Stratex’s 50% working interest in the lease.
In connection with the New Era Energy JDA, Stratex and New Era Energy have also agreed to enter into a
joint operating agreement which will govern the operations on the lease and which provides for the proposal
and drilling of additional wells after the completion of the Carried Wells.  The joint operating agreement names
Stratex as operator and New Era Energy as non-operator.  All costs and expenses incurred in connection
with all operations conducted in wells on the lease other than Carried Wells are to be borne 50% by Stratex
and 50% by New Era Energy.  With respect to the Carried Wells, Stratex has the right receive two-thirds of the
revenues before payout and one-half of the revenues after payout.  With respect to all wells other than the
Carried Wells completed on the lease, each of Stratex and New Era Energy has the right to receive one-half of
the revenues from such wells.
Other Non-Operated Working Interests
Stratex presently holds small, non-operated working interests in the following areas:
Utah
Upon executing the merger agreement, Stratex completed the purchase from Richfield of an undivided three
percent (3%) working interest in the Liberty #1 well, located in Juab County, Utah, along with certain leases
covering approximately 447 mineral acres. Stratex was also granted a right of first refusal to acquire from
Richfield, or its affiliate HOI Utah Property Series, L.L.C. – HUOP Freedom Trend Series, an undivided three
percent (3%) of 8/8ths out of its working interest in certain deep rights pertaining to Richfield’s Overthrust
Project located near Fountain Green, Utah. Stratex paid Richfield total consideration of $500,000 for these
interests.
The Bakken, Montana and North Dakota
The Bakken formation is an oil-bearing strata underlying parts of the Williston Basin of Montana and North
Dakota. The Bakken is located between 8,000 and 11,000 feet below surface and is comprised of three
members: the lower shale, middle dolomite, and upper shale. The middle member holds the majority to the oil
reserves. Oil production in this region dates back to the 1950s, but was largely unsuccessful. The vertical
wells drilled around this time couldn’t produce oil at high rates. The vertical wells only had about 50 to 100
feet of the shaft that reached the middle Bakken. The application of horizontal wells with fracturing
technology has allowed production to dramatically increase.
123
Table of Contents
The Three Forks, North Dakota
The Three Forks formation is made up of sand and porous rock directly below North Dakota’s portion of the
Bakken formation, where oil-producing rock is sandwiched between layers of shale about 2 miles
underground.
Permian & Gulf Coast
The Permian Basin is an oil-and-gas-producing area located in West Texas and the adjoining area of
southeastern New Mexico. The Permian Basin covers an area approximately 250 miles wide and 300 miles
long. The Permian Basin, has oil and natural gas production ranging from depths from a few hundred feet to
five miles below the surface has produced over 29 billion barrels of oil and 75 trillion cubic feet of gas and it is
estimated by industry experts to contain recoverable oil and natural gas resources exceeding what has been
produced over the last 90 years. Recent increased use of enhanced-recovery practices in the Permian Basin
has produced a substantial impact on U.S. oil production.
Disclosure of Reserves
Below is a summary of oil and gas reserves as of the fiscal-year ended December 31, 2013.
Reserves category
Reserves
 
Synthetic gas 
Liquid Natural Gas 
Natural gas 
Oil 
  
  
  
 
(Mcf)
(Barrels)
(Mcf)
(Barrels)
   
   
   
    
   
    427
  20,952    16,995
   
   
   
   
    427
  20,952    16,995
   
   
   
   
   
   
  2,417    2,099
   
   
   
   
   
    427
Proved
Developed:
North America
 
Undeveloped:
North America
 
TOTAL PROVED   23,369    19,094
-
 
-
 
 
-
 
-
-
Our proved oil and natural gas reserves are all located in the United States, primarily in the Bakken and the
Williston Basin in Montana and North Dakota.  The reservoir engineering reports used in this Report on Form
10-K is calculated as of December 31, 2013. The estimates of proved reserves at December 31, 2013 are based
on reports prepared by LaRoche Petroleum Consultants, Ltd., which we call the LacRoche Engineering
Reports. Proved reserves were estimated in accordance with the guidelines established by the SEC and the
Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”).
Proved reserves and future net revenue to the evaluated interests were based on economic parameters and
operating conditions considered applicable as of December 31, 2013 and are pursuant to the financial
reporting standards of the SEC and prepared in accordance with the SPE 2007 Standards promulgated by the
Society of Petroleum Engineers.  The reserves projections in this evaluation are based on the use of the
available data and accepted industry-engineering methods.
Qualifications of Technical Persons and Internal Controls over Reserves Estimation Process
Our policies regarding internal controls over the recording of reserves estimates requires reserves to
comply with the SEC definitions and guidance and be prepared in accordance with the SPE 2007 Standards
promulgated by the Society of Petroleum Engineers.  Our procedures require that our reserve report be
prepared by a third-party registered independent engineering firm at the end of every year based on
information we provide to such engineer. We accumulate historical production data for our wells, calculate
historical lease operating expenses and differentials, update working interests and net revenue interests,
obtain updated authorizations for expenditure (“AFEs”) and obtain geological and geophysical information
from operators. This data is forwarded to our third-party engineering firm for review and calculation. Our Chief
Executive Officer / Chief Financial Officer provide a final review of our reserve report and the assumptions
relied upon in such report.
124
Table of Contents
William M. Kazmann, Petroleum Engineer and Geological Advisor, was our third party reserve engineer
for the preparation of our reserve reports for the past 3 years.  Mr. Kazmann has been a petroleum
engineering and geological advisor for more than 35 years with multi-disciplinary experience in the oil and
gas industry.  He meets or exceeds the education, training, and experience requirements set forth in the
Standards Pertaining to the Estimating and Auditing of Oil and Gas Reserves Information promulgated by the
Society of Petroleum Engineers and is proficient in judiciously applying industry standard practices to
engineering and geoscience evaluations as well as applying SEC and other industry reserves definitions and
guidelines.
125
Table of Contents
Proved Undeveloped Reserves
As of December 31, 2013, there were 2,417 (Barrels) of oil and 2,099 (Mcf) of gas in undeveloped reserves.
During fiscal year 2013, we focused primarily on the acquisition of existing well properties.  As a result,
investment in converting proved undeveloped reserves to proved developed reserves was limited.
Oil and Gas Production, Production Prices and Production Costs
Oil and Gas Production
The following table summarizes the production of oil and natural gas by geographical area for the period
ended December 31, 2013.
Product
Oil (Bbls)   7,074
Gas (Mcf)   561
Williston Basin  Denver-Julesburg Basin  Arbuckle Basin  Total  
   8,051 
   561
794
    -
183
-
7,635
183
794
8,612
BOE
Production Prices
The following table summarizes the average sales price per unit of oil and natural gas by geographical
area for the period ended December 31, 2013:
Product
Oil (Bbls)  $ 87.60
Gas (Mcf)  $ 2.97
LNG(Bbls)   N/A
Williston Basin  Denver-Julesburg Basin  Arbuckle Basin
$ 90.09
    N/A
    N/A
90.65
N/A
N/A
$
Production Prices
Average production costs per Barrel of Oil Equivalent (BOE) including ad valorem and severance taxes were
$32.74 for the period ended December 31, 2013.  Excluding severance taxes, production costs per BOE were
$20.50 for the period ended December 31, 2013.
The following table summarizes the weighted average prices utilized in the reserve estimates for 12/31/13 as
adjusted for location, grade and quality:
Prices utilized in the reserve estimates:
Denver-Julesburg Basin  Arbuckle Basin
Oil per Bbl(a)
Gas per MCF(a)
Williston
Basin
   
  
 $ 86.01   $
 $ 5.14
  $
91.27
4.24
$ 89.97
  $ -
(a)
The pricing used to estimate our December 31, 2013 reserves were based on a 12-month unweighted average
realized price as adjusted for location, grade and quality.
Oil and natural gas reserve quantity estimates are subject to numerous uncertainties inherent in the
estimation of quantities of proved reserves and in the projection of future rates of production and the timing
of development expenditures. The accuracy of such estimates is a function of the quality of available data
and of engineering and geological interpretation and judgment.
126
Table of Contents
Capitalized Costs Related to Oil and Gas Assets 2013
 
Proved properties
Unproved properties
3,225,769    2,454,855  
  1,520,870    2,162,315
2012
Total
Less: amount impaired
Capitalized cost, net of impairment
Less: accumulated depletion
 
 
Costs incurred in Oil and Gas Activities:
 
Development
Exploration
Total
4,746,639    4,617,170  
  (2,268,977)  (1,515,112)
  2,477,662    3,102,058  
  (707,143 )  (574,809 )
  1,770,519    2,527,249  
 
   
 
  2013
   
 
 
  734,642
 
  -
  734,642
2012
    
   374,967
   -
   374,967
127
Table of Contents
Future cash flows relating to proved reserves:
 
 
Future cash inflows
Future operating costs
Future development costs
2012
2013
  
 
  1,865,657   2,385,359 
  (849,221 )  (922,697 )
 
  -
-
-
(39,138 )  (38,217 )
Future asset retirement costs
  -
 
Future income taxes
  977,298    1,424,445 
Future net cash flows
  (216,870 )  (342,462 )
10% discount factor
  760,428    1,081,983 
Standardized measure
   
 
 
 
Reconciliation of future cash flows relating to proved reserves:   
  2013
 
 
   
 
 
Undiscounted value as at January 1
  1,424,445   410,990  
  198,960    1,134,242 
Extensions and discoveries
  -
Dispositions
 
  (847,257 )  (959,388 )
Production
Revisions of prior volume estimates
  201,150    1,175,741 
  -
Revisions of pricing
   (337,240 )
  977,298    1,424,445 
Undiscounted value as at December 31
10% discount factor
  (216,870 )  (342,462 )
  760,428    1,081,983 
Standardized measure
2012
-
Oil and Gas Properties, Wells, Operations and Acreage
The following table summarizes as of the date hereof, the total gross and net productive wells, expressed
separately for oil and gas and the total gross and net developed acreage (i.e., acreage assignable to
productive wells).
Sheridan County, MT   1.00    0.04   
Roosevelt County, MT  1.00    1.00
Oil Wells
 Gross   Net
Gas Wells   Total Wells  
  Gross  Net  Gross   Net
 
    -    1.00    0.04 
    -    1.00    1.00
-
-
Billings County, ND   16.00   0.03   
Stark County, ND
  5.00    0.04   
Williams County, ND   1.00    0.00   
  1.00    0.00   
Divide County, ND
Juap County, UT
  1.00    0.03   
  7.00    0.01   
Weld County, CO
Zavala County, TX
  1.00    0.67   
Sumner County, KS   4.00    1.00   
Lane County,  KS
  3.00    0.20   
  41.00   3.02   
Total
-
-
-
-
 
 
-
 
-
-
-    16.00   0.03 
    -    5.00    0.04 
    -    1.00    0.00 
    -    1.00    0.00 
     
   1.00    0.03 
     
   7.00    0.01 
    -    1.00    0.67 
     
   4.00    1.00 
    -    3.00    0.20 
    -    41.00   3.02
HBP Acreage   Total Acreage  
 Gross   Net
Gross   Net
320
   16
   260    420
16
Sheridan County, MT   320
Roosevelt County, MT  420
   260  
Billings County, ND   20,480   197    20,480   197  
 
Stark County, ND
  6,400    71
Williams County, ND   1,222    2
 
 
   4
Divide County, ND
  640
Callahan County, TX   58
   37
 
  2,629    1,315   2,629    1,315 
Zavala County, TX
Weld County, CO
  355
 
 
Juap County, UT
  447
 
Sumner County, KS   40
  480
Lane County,  KS
 
Total
  33,433   2,153   33,433   1,153
240    355
   447
   13
   40
   10
   25
   480
6,400    71
   1,222    2
   4
   640
   58
   37
40
   13
   10
   25
128
Table of Contents
The following table summarizes as of the date hereof, the amount of undeveloped leasehold acreage
expressed in both gross and net acres by geographic area and the minimum remaining terms of leases and
concessions.
Held by
 
Production Acreage
 Gross
Sheridan County, MT   -
Billings County, ND    6,353
Stark County, ND
   -
Williams County, ND    -
Divide County, ND    -
Golden Valley , ND    -
Montrail County, ND    -
Sumner County, KS    290
Total
6,643
Net
      -
      26
      -
      -
      -
      -
      -
      73
      98
Total Acreage   Total Acreage Subject to Expiration  Expiration Date
-
121     640
Gross   Net
  Gross
   7,274    1,661    7,274
   6,353    26
   640
   1,349    37
   -
   53,259   6,322    53,259
   640
   290
   69,806   8,360    63,163
120     640
   73
1,349
    -
-
-
Net
      1,661
      -
      121
      37
      -
      6,322
      120
      -
      8,262
Range
   Range 2014-2015
 
    
 
   2017
 
   2017
   2017
 
   Range 2015-2019 
 
   2017
As of August 22, 2013, we have approximately 10,513 net acres in Sheridan County, Roosevelt County,
Montana, Williams County, Divide County, Mountrail County, Golden Valley County, and Stark County, North
Dakota, Zavala County, Texas, Juap County, Utah and Lane County and Sumner County Kansas. The
expiration of the majority of these leases ranges from 3 to 5 years and in some instances, the acreage has
additional options to extend the lease maturity. We do not own the majority working interest in this acreage,
nor do we have any ability to influence the potential development of this acreage within the terms of the
lease.  For our leased acreage we are currently evaluating our options to selectively drill some of these leases
to hold this acreage by production.
Our non-operated minority interest acreage is primarily not held by production as only 98 of our 8,360 net
acres undeveloped is held by production.  Our acreage exposure is very granular; we also hold 11 leases with
a typical working or royalty interest ranging from less than 1% to 64%. We hold approximately 8,262 net acres
that expire from 2014 to 2019 with the majority of the leases not having any extension options.
Properties
Office Locations
Our corporate offices are located at 30 Echo Lake Road, Watertown, CT, 06795. Additionally, we have a field
office located at 2906 First Ave. North, Billings, MT, 59104; which is leased on a month by month basis.  We
have also opened a corporate office in Houston, Texas.
129
Table of Contents
Leasehold Holdings
Current Producing Properties
The Company presently owns small, non -operated working interests in the following:
Kansas Wells – 2,080 gross and 25 net mineral acres located in Acres located in Lane and Ellis Counties,
Kansas with 8 producing wells. The lease currently has 5 producing wells with an average royalty interest of
1.620%, and 3 producing wells with an average working interest of 6.503%. These wells are producing 2
barrels per day.  There is also additional spacing for 18 wells.
Olson Well – 640 gross and 4 net mineral acres in Divide County, North Dakota. We have acquired small
leasehold in Divide County, North Dakota.  The lease currently has 1 well with a working interest of 5.00% and
produces less than 1 barrel of oil per day.
Fortuna Wells 6,662 gross and 87 net mineral acres in Stark, Williams and Sheridan County, North Dakota,
with 6 operating wells. These wells are producing 1 barrels per day. Stratex holds an average of 1.36919 %
working interest in these wells.
Double LL Wells – 21,759 gross and 198 net mineral acres in Billings and Stark County, North Dakota, with 15
operating wells. These working interest wells are producing 3 barrels per day. There is also 6,353 gross and
26 net mineral acres in Billings County that are undeveloped and unproven. Stratex holds an average of
.19758% working interest in these wells. Stratex is currently participating in 2 additional wells
Liberty #1 – 447 gross and 13 net mineral acres in Juap County, Utah, with 1 operating well. Presently Stratex
owns a 3% working interest in the Liberty #1. This well in still in the process of being completed.
Wattenberg Lease – Presently Stratex is participating in 7 wells that are currently being drilled in Weld County
Colorado. Stratex holds an average of .283888% working interest in these wells.
The Company presently owns and operates working interests in the following wells:
Tininencko 4-19 420 gross and 215 net mineral acres operating well in Roosevelt County, Montana with one
operating well. The Operating well (Tininenko 4-19) is producing 28 gross barrels per day. Stratex holds a
100% working interest in this well.
Texas Wells (Zavala County Lease) – Presently 2,629 gross and 1,314.5 net acres in Zavala County Texas.
There is currently 1 producing well (the Matthews #1H) which is producing 17 gross barrels per day. Stratex
holds a 66.66% working interest in this well before payout and a 50% working interest after payout.
Perth Wells (Sumner County, Kansas) – Presently 40 gross and 10 net acres in Zavala County Texas. There
are currently 2 producing wells and 1 Salt water delivery well which are producing 40 gross barrels per day.
Stratex holds a 25% working interest in these wells. There is also 290 gross and 73 net mineral acres in
Sumner County that are developed and proven.
130
Table of Contents
The following represent a detail listing of Stratex’s producing wells as of August 22, 2014.
State
  
  
 Montana
Well Name
 
Montana Wells
Tininenko 4-19
 
Kansas Wells
Muncell Lawrence 21-23  Kansas
Lawrence 32-23
 Kansas
 Kansas
Lawrence 42-23
 Kansas
Conner 14-27
 Kansas
Hollamon Mcgrew
THECLA HAAS – 1
 Kansas
 Kansas
FRED HAAS -1
FRED HAAS- 2
 Kansas
County   Formation  Basin
   
   
  Roosevelt  Ratcliffe
   
  
  Lane
  Lane
  Lane
  Lane
  Lane
  Lane
  Lane
  Lane
Arbuckle
  Arbuckle
  Arbuckle
  Arbuckle
  Arbuckle
  Arbuckle
  Arbuckle
  Arbuckle
Williston
  
  
 Arbuckle
 Arbuckle
 Arbuckle
 Arbuckle
 Arbuckle
 Arbuckle
 Arbuckle
 Arbuckle
Sumner
  Sumner
  Sumner
  Sumner
Whitten 12-2
 Kansas
Whitten 12-3
 Kansas
Whitten 12-4
 Kansas
AJ Dowis (SWD)
 Kansas
 
  
Olson Well
  
Olson 35-261H
 North Dakota  Divide
 
  
Double LL Wells
  
Burian 1-27HCLR
 North Dakota  Billings
Epsom 1-31HCLR
 North Dakota  Billings
Kostelecky 1-1HCLR
 North Dakota  Billings
Elizabeth Ann 1-32 HCLR North Dakota  Billings
Kubas 1-22HCLR
 North Dakota  Billings
Charnwood 1-31HCLR  North Dakota  Billings
Arbuckle
  Arbuckle
  Arbuckle
  Arbuckle
   
   
  Bakken
   
   
  Bakken
  Bakken
  Bakken
  Bakken
  Bakken
  Bakken
Arbuckle
 Arbuckle
 Arbuckle
 Arbuckle
  
  
 Williston
  
  
 Williston
 Williston
 Williston
 Williston
 Williston
 Williston
Narvik 1-35 HCLR
Krehlik 1-11 HCLR
Proch 1-7HCLR
Zalesky 34-8PH
Cymbaluk 21-25 TFH
Chruszch 43x-29f
Kuntz 1-23-14h-142-98
Metz 1-33 HCLR
Luptak 1-24HI
Volesky 1-23H
Perch 1-30H
 
Fortuna Wells
Paluck 21-28 THF
Arthaud 21-29 THF
Duletski 21-16 TFH
Duletski 11-16TFH
Lynn 5502-11 1H
Teal Peterson 33-12
 
Liberty Wells
Liberty #1
 
Eagleford Wells
Mathews #1H
Bakken
 North Dakota  Billings
  Bakken
 North Dakota  Billings
  Bakken
 North Dakota  Billings
  Bakken
 North Dakota  Stark
  Bakken
 North Dakota  Billings
  Bakken
 North Dakota  Billings
  Bakken
 North Dakota  Billings
  Bakken
 North Dakota  Billings
  Bakken
 North Dakota  Billings
  Bakken
 North Dakota  Billings
  Bakken
 North Dakota  Billings
   
  
   
  
  Bakken
 North Dakota  Stark
  Bakken
 North Dakota  Stark
  Bakken
 North Dakota  Stark
 North Dakota  Stark
  Bakken
 North Dakota  Williams   Bakken
 Montana
  
  
 Utah
  
  
 Texas
Williston
 Williston
 Williston
 Williston
 Williston
 Williston
 Williston
 Williston
 Williston
 Williston
 Williston
  
  
 Williston
 Williston
 Williston
 Williston
 Williston
  Sheridan   Red River  Williston
   
  
   Jaup
   
   
  Zavala
Twin Creek Central Utah
   
   
  Eagleford  Permian
Wattenberg Wells
  
  Colorado Weld Codell Wattenberg
Excel 25N-22HN
 Colorado  Weld Codell Wattenberg
Howard 9C-22HZ CODL
 Colorado  Weld Codell Wattenberg
Howard 24C-22HZ NBBR
 Colorado  Weld Codell Wattenberg
Howard 10N-22HZ CODL
 Colorado  Weld Codell Wattenberg
Howard 42N-22HZ NBBR
Howard 25C-22HZ CODL
 Colorado  Weld Codell Wattenberg
Howard Federal 40N-22HZ NBBR Colorado  Weld Codell Wattenberg
131
Table of Contents
The following represent our mineral lease holdings as of June 30, 2014
Unproven Properties:
55,259 gross and 6,322 net mineral acres in Golden Valley, North Dakota. We have leaseholds totaling 55,259
gross acres in Golden Valley, North Dakota which were acquired under a long-term lease option. The
conventional oil play consists of two objective formations; 1) Bakken – A sandstone that has produced over
80M barrels of oil and is present over our acreage, 2) Three Forks Sanish.
7,274 gross and 1,661 net mineral acres located in Sheridan County, Montana.
640 gross and 121 net mineral acres in Stark County, North Dakota. Stark County has seen significant
development recently as firms are exploring the potential of the Bakken play in the county.
640 gross and 120 net mineral acres in Mountrail County, North Dakota. We have gained a foothold in
Mountrail County, which has been the focal point of drilling in the Williston Basin and the best performing
county in North Dakota. The North Dakota State Industrial Commission has reported Mountrail’s most recent
monthly production rate, December 2011, at 5.1 million barrels of oil.
1,313 gross and 37 net mineral acres in Williams County, North Dakota. Williams County has also been a top
producing county in North Dakota and the most recent production statistics by the North Dakota Industrial
Commission (NDIC) report monthly production at 2.4 million barrels of oil.
640 gross and 4 net mineral acres in Divide County, North Dakota. We have acquired small leasehold in
Divide County, which has picked up in development lately. The lease currently has 1 well being drilled with a
working interest of 5.00%.
132
Table of Contents
Legal Proceedings
On October 17, 2013, the Stratex filed a complaint (Index No. 67528/2013) in the Westchester County Supreme
Court of the State of New York (the “Court”) against Timothy Kelly (“Kelly”) seeking damages against Kelly
for breach of fiduciary duty and usurpation of corporate opportunities.  Kelly previously served as the
President, Chief Operating Officer, Secretary and as a Director of Stratex.  He resigned from each of these
positions on August 30, 2013.  Stratex’s complaint alleges that Kelly, prior to his resignation, engaged in a
pattern of self-dealing and exposed the company to adverse criticism and hostility from its stockholders by:
(i) purchasing at least one oil well and land that would have been profitable to the company; (ii) claiming to sell
shares of the company’s stock that he either obtained from other stockholders or that did not exist and (iii)
misrepresenting the nature of the stock for his personal profit.  Stratex is seeking $4,000,000 in compensatory
damages, as well as costs, interest and such other relief as the Court may deem just and proper.  On January
21, 2014, Kelly filed a counterclaim for breach of contract against Stratex, alleging that Stratex breached that
certain Termination Agreement, dated August 30, 2013 between Kelly and Stratex.  Specifically, Kelly alleges
that the Termination Agreement required Stratex to deliver to him a certain number of shares of our restricted
common stock and to pay him a total of approximately $300,000 over a period of thirty months.  Kelly claims
that Stratex has failed to deliver the shares of the company’s stock and to pay him the monthly payments. 
Kelly further claims that Stratex breached the non-disparaging provision of the Termination Agreement by
making derogatory statements about him to the public and/or third-persons.  Kelly is seeking a minimum of
$500,000 in damages, plus interest and 2,500,000 shares of the company’s restricted common stock.  Stratex
intends to vigorously defend itself against Kelly’s claims.
On April 10, 2014, Stratex accepted service of process from a group of seven plaintiffs who commenced
litigation against Kelly, for several of the same matters that are currently the subject of Stratex’s current
pending litigation against Kelly in Superior Court, Westchester County, discussed above. While the litigation
was brought for alleged theft, conversion and other malfeasance by Kelly, the plaintiffs also named Stratex as
a defendant in the Complaint, seeking monetary damages from Stratex under the theory of respondeat
superior. Stratex does not believe that it should be held responsible for Kelly’s alleged malfeasance and
intends to assert a cross claim against Kelly and to vigorously defend Stratex in this matter. The matter,
entitled Dana Klein, Gligor Tashkovich, Abraham Fischler, Neil Leve, Richard Scott Johnston, Jeff Shammah
and Donald Clark v. Timothy Kelly and Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc. was brought in the Circuit Court of the
Seventeenth Judicial Circuit in and for Broward Court, Florida (Case #CACE14006762). Stratex has filed a
motion to dismiss the Complaint on the grounds of a lack of personal jurisdiction.
Stratex is subject to legal proceedings and claims which arise in the normal course of business. Although
there can be no assurance as to the ultimate outcome, the company generally has denied, or believe it has a
meritorious defense and will deny, liability in all significant cases pending against the company. Based on
information currently available, Stratex believes the amount, or range, of reasonably possible losses in
connection with the actions against Stratex, in excess of established reserves, in the aggregate, not to be
material to the company’s consolidated financial condition or cash flows. However, losses may be material to
its operating results for any particular future period, depending on the level of the company’s income for such
period.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation
The following discussion is intended to assist in understanding Stratex’s results of operations and financial
condition. Stratex’s consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in
this proxy statement/prospectus contain additional information that should be referred to when reviewing this
material. Certain statements in this discussion may be forward-looking. These forward-looking statements
involve risks and uncertainties, which could cause actual results to differ from those expressed in this report.
Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this section to the “Company,””we,” “our,” and “us”
refer to Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Overview
Stratex is an independent oil and gas company focused on the acquisition and subsequent exploitation and
development of predominantly crude oil in Texas and Kansas as well as varied non-operated working
interests in North Dakota, Montana and Utah.  In Texas, we have an interest in a property located in Zavala
County. Our Zavala County acreage lies within the established oil rim of the prolific Eagle Ford Shale play,
one of the most actively drilled formations in the United States. Stratex intends to target multiple stacked pay
zones present on its Zavala County acreage, specifically the San Miguel, Austin Chalk and Buda formations,
which all produce locally. Stratex’s management presently views its Zavala County property as an integral
component of its current development program.
133
Table of Contents
On May 6, 2014, Stratex, Richfield, and Merger Sub, entered into the merger agreement, pursuant to which,
subject to the satisfaction or waiver of certain conditions, Merger Sub will merge with and into Richfield, with
Richfield surviving as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Stratex.  Concurrently with the entry into the merger
agreement, Stratex, Richfield, and certain of Richfield's subsidiaries entered into the loan agreement. Upon
entering into the merger agreement, Stratex also purchased from Richfield an undivided 3% of the 8/8ths
working interest in the Liberty # 1 well located in Juab County, Utah, along with certain leases covering
approximately 447 mineral acres for cash consideration of $500,000.  By virtue of this purchase, Stratex was
also granted a right of first refusal to acquire an undivided 3% of 8/8ths of Richfield's working interest in
certain deep rights pertaining to the Utah Overthrust Project near Fountain Green, Utah.
Upon the closing of the proposed merger, Stratex intends to focus its development budget both on Stratex’s
existing Zavala County property as well as Richfield’s low-risk, scalable Kansas properties.  Management also
intends to exploit, in conjunction with third-party partners, Richfield’s vast Utah resource potential.  Because
the merger is subject to certain terms and conditions, there can be no assurances that the merger will close
or, that if it does so, we will be able to successfully integrate Richfield’s assets with those of Stratex.
In addition to the foregoing, we continually review opportunities to acquire producing properties and
leasehold acreage, and to enter into joint development drilling arrangements primarily, but not limited to, our
core operating areas.  We intend to continue to transition our operations from small, passive, non-operated
working interests to assuming the role of operator with significant or majority ownership interests. This will
allow the Company to have substantial control over the timing of expenditures, drilling and completion costs,
and operating budgets.
We expect to continue to acquire oil and gas properties and to build our asset base.  As we continue to review
business opportunities, we believe that we will need to raise additional capital through equity sales and debt
financing to continue to acquire more properties, and business opportunities, such properties are expected
to generate cash flow from participation in the development of the drilling programs that each property is
designed to support.
Commodity Prices
Our results of operations are heavily influenced by commodity prices. Factors that may impact future
commodity prices, including the price of oil and natural gas, include:
●developments generally impacting the Middle East, including Iraq, Iran, Libya and Egypt;
 ●the extent to which members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and other oil exporting nations
are able to continue to manage oil supply through export quotas;
 ●the overall global demand for oil;
 ●overall North American natural gas supply and demand fundamentals;
 ●the impact of the condition of the United States economy;
 ●weather conditions; and
●liquefied natural gas deliveries to the United States.
Although we cannot predict the occurrence of events that may affect future commodity prices or the degree
to which these prices will be affected, the prices for any commodity that we produce will generally
approximate current market prices in the geographic region of the production. From time to time, we may
evaluate the benefits of hedging a portion of our commodity price risk to mitigate the impact of price volatility
on our business.
134
Table of Contents
Oil and natural gas prices have been subject to significant fluctuations during the past several years. In
general, average oil and natural gas prices were substantially higher during the comparable periods of 2013
measured against 2012. The following table sets forth the average New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX)
oil and natural gas prices for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, as well as the high and low
NYMEX price for the same periods:
Average NYMEX prices:
Oil (Bbl)
Natural gas (MMBtu)
High / Low NYMEX prices:  
Oil(Bbl):
  
 $ 105.22
High
 $ 85.20
Low
  
Natural Gas (MMBtu):
High
 $ 4.89
 $ 3.50
Low
Years Ended December 31, 
 
 2013
 
  
 $ 97.97
 
 
 $ 3.652
2012
   
  $ 94.71
  $ 2.79
   
   
  $ 109.77
  $ 77.69
   
  $ 3.70
  $ 2.04
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2013 compared to the year ended December 31, 2012
Revenues
We generated revenues of $847,257 for the year ended December 31, 2013 and $959,388 for the year ended
December 31, 2012. The decrease in revenue reflects a decrease in sales volumes as a result of the one of the
Company’s major wells being down for several months during the year ended December 31, 2013.
Operating Expenses
Production expense was $268,083 for the year ended December 31, 2013 and $235,845 for the year ended
Production expense was $268,083 for the year ended December 31, 2013 and $235,845 for the year ended
December 31, 2012.  The slight increase in expenses reflects an increase in the number of producing wells during
the year ended December 31, 2013.
●
General and administrative expense was $4,406,937 for the year ended December 31, 2013 and $5,461,053 for the
year ended December 31, 2012. The decrease in expense is primarily attributable to a decrease in professional
fees from the prior year in which the Company had increased G &A cost for the Company’s merger, and a decrease
in stock based compensation to consultants, the majority of which was related to the financing commitment for
Stratex’ss attempted acquisition of Magellan Petroleum.  In addition, the company engaged key consultants to
assist in the oil and gas efforts.
●
Depletion, depreciation and amortization expense was $150,101 for the year ended December 31, 2013 and
$484,853 for the year ended December 31, 2012. The decrease in expense reflects a decrease in total oil
production coupled with a decrease in the per barrel depletion rates as a result of the Company reserve reports as
compared to the year ended December 31, 2012.
●
●
Impairment of oil and gas assets was $753,865 for the year ended December 31, 2013 and $1,059,297 for the year
ended December 31, 2012. The impairment loss was recognized to reflect the annual reserve report obtained by the
company’s third party engineers. During the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012 the Company recorded
abandonment costs of $0 and $455,815, respectively.
Other Income (Expense)-net:
Other Income (Expense)-net: Other income (expenses) consist primarily of gains and losses on the change in
fair value of derivative liabilities, gains and losses on sale of oil and gas properties and interest expense all
primarily related to the Company’s convertible promissory notes, traditional notes and warrant issuances.
Other income (expenses) - net decreased by $419,963 to $(513,186) for the year ended December 31, 2013 as
compared to other income (expenses) - net of $(933,149) during the year ended December 31, 2012. For the
year ended December 31, 2013 other income (expenses) consisted of interest income of $25, $(1,318,051) in
interest expense, a gain on change in fair value of derivative liabilities of $516,880, a gain on sale of oil and
gas properties of $275,000, and other income of $12,960. For the year ended December 31, 2012 other income
(expenses) consisted of interest income of $700, $(675,001) in interest expense, a loss on change in fair value
of derivative liabilities of $(258,848).
135
Table of Contents
Six months ended June 30, 2014 as compared to the six months ended June 30, 2013:
Revenues:
Our oil revenues decreased by ($35,130), or (7.7%), from $454,180 for the six months ended June 30, 2013 to
$419,050 for the six months ended June 30, 2014. The decrease was attributable to reduced production as
one of the Company’s larger producing wells was shut-in for a portion first quarter of 2014. This was partially
offset by an increase in the weighted average price per barrel sold.  Overall, there was a decrease of 319
barrels of oil produced for the six months ended June 30, 2014 over the same period in 2013. This decrease
was offset by an increase of $2.77 in the weighted average price per barrel sold for the six months ended
June 30, 2014 from the same period in 2013.
Our net oil production for the six months ended June 30, 2014 averaged approximately 26 Bopd compared to
approximately 29 Bopd for the six months ended June 30, 2013. The decrease in production in 2014
compared to 2013 is due to the one of the Company’s larger producing wells in Montana being shut-in during
a portion of 2014.
Operating Expenses:
●
Production expense was $181,730 for the six months ended June 30, 2014 compared to $98,651 for the six months
ended June 30, 2013. The production expense increase of $83,079 or 84.3% was due to increased repair and
maintenance costs on our existing wells for the six months ended June 30, 2014 over the same period in 2013. This
majority of the increase was incurred to return one of the Company’s major wells to production during the six
months ended June 30, 2014.
●
Loss on Abandonment of oil and gas assets was ($318,800) for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and $0 for the
period ended June 30, 2013. The abandonment loss was recognized to reflect the Company’s termination of its
Callahan County Joint Development Agreement.
●
General and administrative expense was $3,666,396 for the six months ended June 30, 2014 compared to
$973,299 for the six months ended June 30, 2013. The overall $2,693,097 increase in operating expenses is
primarily attributable to the following approximate net increases (decreases) in operating expenses:
●
An increase in legal and professional fees of $935,000. In the current period the Company incurred higher legal
and consulting fees due to the Company negotiating and entering into multiple Joint Development Agreements,
the Company’s private offering and the potential merger with Richfield.
An increase in stock based compensation fees of $496,300. In the current period the Company incurred higher
stock based compensation due to increased consulting costs as part of the potential merger with Richfield,
potential future acquisitions and investor relations.
reimbursements, as well as additional travel required in connection with the above transactions.
●An increase in travel and travel related expenses of $90,100 due to an increase in Consultants travel
      
   ●An increase in royalty related expenses of $129,000 due to the Company having to pay it portion of the minimum
royalty on its Texas properties.
An increase of stock options and warrants issued of $1,068,000 for options as part of the employment agreement
with respect to the Company hiring a Director of Field Operations and Chairman during the current year. The
Company also issued warrants to three consultants during the six months ended June 30, 2014
We recorded depletion, depreciation, amortization and accretion of $41,107 during the six months ended June 30,
2014 compared to $105,933 during the six months ended June 30, 2013. The decrease of (60.6%) or ($64,226), in
expense reflects a decrease in the per barrel depletion rates as a result of the Company's reserve reports as
compared to the six months ended June 30, 2013. This was offset by an increase in depreciation expense of
$9,747 during the six months ended June 30, 2014 on our well equipment as a result of $182,145 in equipment
additions since June 30, 2013.
A decrease in accounting fees of ($33,500). The decrease was primarily due to additional services being provided
for the six months ended June 30, 2013 that were not provided during the six months ended June 30, 2014. This
was coupled by a reduction is the share price used to calculate accrued stock base compensation for the six
●
months ended June 30, 2014 from June 30, 2013.
136
Table of Contents
Other Income and (Expense):
Other Income (Expense)-net: Other income (expenses) consists primarily of gains and losses on the change
in fair value of derivative liabilities, gains and losses on sale of oil and gas properties/interests and interest
expense all primarily related to the Company’s convertible promissory notes, traditional notes and warrant
issuances.
Other income (expenses) - net increased by ($772,795) to ($1,593,596) for the six months ended June 30, 2014
as compared to other income (expenses) - net of ( $820,801) for the six months ended June 30, 2013. For the
six months ended June 30, 2014 other income (expenses) consisted of $8,071 in interest income, ($2,087,675)
in interest expense, a loss on change in fair value of derivative liabilities of ($72,094), warrant amendment
expense of ($14,755), a gain on sale of oil and gas interests of $450,000, a gain on settlement of liabilities of
$83,600 and other income of $39,257. For the six months ended June 30, 2013 other income (expenses)
consisted of ($845,006) in interest expense, a gain on change in fair value of derivative liabilities of $11,245
and other income of $12,960.
Liquidity and Capital Resources:
We have incurred net operating losses and operating cash flow deficits since inception, continuing through
the first six months of 2014. We are in the early stages of acquisition and development of oil and gas
leaseholds and properties, and we have been funded primarily by a combination of equity issuances and
debt, and to a lesser extent by operating cash flows, to execute on our business plan of acquiring working
interests in oil and gas properties and for working capital for production. At December 31, 2013, we had cash
and cash equivalents totaling $609,061.
Our ability to obtain financing may be impaired by many factors outside of our control, including the capital
markets (both generally and in the crude oil and natural gas industry in particular), our limited operating
history, the location of our crude oil and natural gas properties and prices of crude oil and natural gas on the
commodities markets (which will impact the amount of asset-based financing available to us) and other
factors. Further, if crude oil or natural gas prices on the commodities markets decline, our revenues will likely
decrease and such decreased revenues may increase our requirements for capital.
Any new debt or equity financing arrangements may not be available to us, or may be available only on
unfavorable terms. Additionally, these alternatives could be highly dilutive to our existing stockholders, and
may not provide us with sufficient funds to meet our long-term capital requirements. We have and may
continue to incur substantial costs in the future in connection with raising capital to fund our business,
including investment banking fees, legal fees, accounting fees, securities law compliance fees, printing and
distribution expenses and other costs. We may also be required to recognize non-cash expenses in
connection with certain securities we may issue, which may adversely impact our financial condition. If the
amount of capital we are able to raise from financing activities, together with our revenues from operations, is
not sufficient to satisfy our capital needs (even to the extent that we reduce our operations), we will be
required to reduce operating costs, which could jeopardize our future strategic initiatives and business plans,
and we may be required to sell some or all of our properties (which could be on unfavorable terms), seek joint
ventures with one or more strategic partners, strategic acquisitions and other strategic alternatives, cease our
operations, sell or merge our business, or file a petition for bankruptcy.
Our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2013 were prepared assuming we would continue
as a going concern, which contemplates that we will continue in operation for the foreseeable future and will
be able to realize assets and settle liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. These
financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability
and classification of assets or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that could result should we be
unable to continue as a going concern.
137
Table of Contents
Cash from Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities was $66,051 for the year ended December 31, 2013, as compared to cash
used in operating activities of $856,499 during the year ended December 31, 2012. The decrease in cash used
in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2013 as compared to December 31, 2012 is
primarily due to an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses partially offset by a decrease in
accounts receivable. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2013 as compared to the year ended
December 31, 2012 there was a decrease in legal and professional fees and a decrease in salaries and payroll
related expenses.
Cash from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2013 was $351,241 as compared to
$1,401,938 during the year ended December 31, 2012. The net decrease is due to the Company receiving
$815,000 in proceeds from the sale of oil and gas properties during 2013, as well as a slight decrease in
capital acquisition cost during 2013 as compared to the comparable period ended 2012.
Cash from Financing Activities
Total net cash provided by financing activities was $951,250 for the year ended December 31, 2013, from
various debt and equity offerings. Total net cash provided by financing activities during the period ended
December 31, 2012 was $1,747,735 from various debt and equity offerings. For more details about these debt
and equity financings, see Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the years ended December 31,
2013 and 2012, incorporated by reference herein.
Planned Capital Expenditures
Dependent on our ability to obtain sufficient financing, development plans for 2013 include identifying,
acquiring and operating properties as well continued development of our existing leases. We will also to
continue to participating in the ongoing Authorization for Expense (AFE) process for the existing properties.
The Company incurred approximately $1,163,927 in development costs related to the purchase of working
interest in wells during the calendar year 2013.  Unrelated to any potential acquisitions the Company expects
to incur maintenance and operating costs of approximately $45,000 to $60,000 per month for the next twelve
months to maintain these assets.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates:
Our discussion of our financial condition and results of operations is based on the information reported in
our financial statements. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make assumptions and
estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses as well as the
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of our financial statements. We base our
assumptions and estimates on historical experience and other sources that we believe to be reasonable at
the time. Actual results may vary from our estimates due to changes in circumstances, weather, politics,
global economics, mechanical problems, general business conditions and other factors. Our significant
accounting policies are described in Note 2 –Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated
financial statements. We have outlined below certain of these policies that have particular importance to the
reporting of our financial condition and results of operations and that require the application of significant
judgment by our management.
Key Definitions
Proved reserves, as defined by the SEC, are the estimated quantities of crude oil, condensate, natural gas
and natural gas liquids that geological and engineering data demonstrate with reasonable certainty are
recoverable in future years from known reservoirs under existing economic and operating conditions.
Valuations include consideration of changes in existing prices provided only by contractual arrangements,
but not on escalations based upon future conditions. Prices do not include the effect of derivative
instruments, if any, entered into by us.
138
Table of Contents
Proved developed reserves are those reserves expected to be recovered through existing equipment and
operating methods. Additional oil and gas volumes expected to be obtained through the application of fluid
injection or other improved recovery techniques for supplementing the natural forces and mechanisms of
primary recovery would be included as proved developed reserves only after testing of a pilot project or after
the operation of an installed program has confirmed through production response that increased recovery
will be achieved.
Proved undeveloped reserves are those reserves that are expected to be recovered from new wells on non-
drilled acreage, or from existing wells where a relatively major expenditure is required for recompletion.
Reserves on non-drilled acreage are limited to those drilling units offsetting productive units that are
reasonably certain of production when drilled. Proved reserves for other non-drilled units are claimed only
where it can be demonstrated with certainty that there is continuity of production from the existing productive
formation.
Estimation of Reserves
Volumes of reserves are estimates that, by their nature, are subject to revision. The estimates are made using
all available geological and reservoir data as well as production performance data. There are numerous
uncertainties in estimating crude oil and natural gas reserve quantities, projecting future production rates and
projecting the timing of future development expenditures. Natural gas and oil reserve engineering must be
recognized as a subjective process of estimating underground accumulations of natural gas and oil that
cannot be measured in an exact way. Estimates of independent engineers that we use may differ from those
of other engineers. The accuracy of any reserve estimate is a function of the quantity and quality of available
data and of engineering and geological interpretation and judgment. Accordingly, future estimates are
subject to change as additional information becomes available.
The most critical estimate we make is the engineering estimate of proved oil and gas reserves. This estimate
affects the application of the successful efforts method of accounting, the calculation of depletion,
depreciation and amortization of oil and gas properties and the estimate of any impairment of our oil and gas
properties. It also affects the estimated lives used to determine asset retirement obligations. In addition, the
estimates of proved oil and gas reserves are the basis for the annual year end disclosure of the related
standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows.
Revenues from the sale of oil and natural gas are recognized when the product is delivered at a fixed or
determinable price, title has transferred, and collectability is reasonably assured and evidenced by a contract.
We follow the “sales method” of accounting for oil and natural gas revenue, so we recognize revenue on all
natural gas or crude oil sold to purchasers, regardless of whether the sales are proportionate to our
ownership in the property. We recognize a receivable or liability only to the extent that we have an imbalance
on a specific property greater than our share of the expected remaining proved reserves. For oil sales, this
occurs when the customer's truck takes delivery of oil from the operators’ storage tanks
Successful Efforts Accounting
We utilize the successful efforts method to account for our natural gas and oil operations. Under this method,
all costs associated with natural gas and oil lease acquisitions, successful exploratory wells and all
development wells are capitalized. Development costs of producing properties are amortized on a units-of-
production basis over the remaining life of proved developed producing reserves, and leasehold costs
associated with producing properties are amortized on a units-of-production basis over the remaining life of
all proved reserves associated with the leases on which producing properties are drilled. Unproved leasehold
costs are capitalized pending the results of exploration efforts. Exploration costs, including geological and
geophysical expenses, exploratory dry holes and delay rentals, are expensed when incurred.
Impairment of Properties
We review our proved properties for potential impairment at the field level when management determines that
events or circumstances indicate that the recorded carrying value of any of the properties may not be
recoverable. Such events include a projection of future natural gas and oil reserves that will be produced
from a well, the timing of this future production, future costs to produce the natural gas and oil, and future
inflation levels. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds the sum of the discounted estimated future net
cash flows, we recognize impairment expense equal to the difference between the carrying value and the fair
market value of the asset, which is estimated to be the expected discounted value of future net cash flows
from reserves, without the application of any estimate of risk. We cannot predict the amount of impairment
charges that may be recorded in the future. Unproved leasehold costs are reviewed periodically and
impairment is recognized to the extent, if any, that the cost of the property has been impaired. We follow the
Accounting Standards Codification ASC 360 Property, Plant, and Equipment, for these evaluations.
Unamortized capital costs are reduced to fair value if the undiscounted future net cash flows from our interest
in the property’s estimated proved reserves are less than the asset’s net book value.
139
Table of Contents
Proved Reserves
Estimates of our proved reserves included in this report are prepared in accordance with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States of America and SEC guidelines. Our engineering estimates
of proved oil and natural gas reserves directly impact financial accounting estimates, including depletion,
depreciation and amortization expense and the impairment. Proved oil and natural gas reserves are the
estimated quantities of oil and natural gas reserves that geological and engineering data demonstrate with
reasonable certainty to be recoverable in future years from known reservoirs under period-end economic and
operating conditions. The process of estimating quantities of proved reserves is very complex, requiring
significant subjective decisions in the evaluation of all geological, engineering and economic data for each
reservoir. The accuracy of a reserve estimate is a function of: (i) the quality and quantity of available data; (ii)
the interpretation of that data; (iii) the accuracy of various mandated economic assumptions and (iv) the
judgment of the persons preparing the estimate. The data for a given reservoir may change substantially over
time as a result of numerous factors, including additional development activity, evolving production history
and continual reassessment of the viability of production under varying economic conditions. Changes in oil
and natural gas prices, operating costs and expected performance from a given reservoir also will result in
revisions to the amount of our estimated proved reserves. We engage independent reserve engineers to
estimate our proved reserves.
Share-Based Compensation
Generally, all forms of share-based payments, including stock option grants, warrants, restricted stock grants
and stock appreciation rights are measured at their fair value utilizing an option pricing model on the awards’
grant date, based on the estimated number of awards that are ultimately expected to vest. Share-based
compensation awards issued to non-employees for services rendered are recorded at either the fair value of
the services rendered or the fair value of the share-based payment, whichever is more readily determinable.
The expenses resulting from share-based payments are recorded in cost of goods sold or general and
administrative expense in the statement of operations, depending on the nature of the services provided.
Derivative Valuation
We estimate the fair value of financial assets and liabilities based on a three-level valuation hierarchy for
disclosures of fair value measurement and enhanced disclosure requirements for fair value measures.
The three levels are defined as follows:
Level 1 - inputs to the valuation methodology are quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical assets or liabilities in active
 
markets.
  
Level 2 - inputs to the valuation methodology include quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets,
 
and inputs that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the
financial instrument.
  
 Level 3 - inputs to the valuation methodology are unobservable and significant to the fair value measurement.
All derivative instruments are recorded on the balance sheet at their fair value. Changes in the fair value of
each derivative are recorded each period in current period earnings.
New Accounting Pronouncements
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
None
140
Table of Contents
INDEX TO HISTORICAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
 
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Consolidated Balance sheets as of December 31, 2013 and 2012
Consolidated Statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012
Consolidated Statements of stockholders’ equity for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012
Consolidated Statements of cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012
Notes to Financial Statements
 
UNAUDITED INTERIM FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Condensed consolidated balance sheets as of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013
Condensed consolidated statements of operations for the three and six months ended June 30, 2014 and
June 30, 2013
Condensed consolidated statements of cash flows for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and June 30, 2013
Notes to condensed financial statements
F-1
F-2
F-3
F-4
F-6
F-7
 
 
 
F-
37
F-
38
F-
39
F-
40
INDEX TO HISTORICAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF
STRATEX OIL & GAS HOLDINGS, INC.
AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF STRATEX OIL & GAS HOLDINGS, INC.
 
 
 
F-52
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
F-53
Consolidated Balance sheets as of December 31, 2013 and 2012
Consolidated Statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012
F-54
Consolidated Statements of stockholders’ equity for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012F-55
F-56
Consolidated Statements of cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012
Notes to financial statements
F-57
UNAUDITED INTERIM FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF STRATEX OIL & GAS HOLDINGS, INC.
Condensed consolidated balance sheets as of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013
Condensed consolidated statements of operations for the three and six months ended June 30, 2014 and
June 30, 2013
Condensed consolidated statements of cash flows for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and June 30, 2013
Notes to condensed financial statements
141
Table of Contents
HISTORICAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF RICHFIELD
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Stockholders and the Board of Directors
Richfield Oil & Gas Company
175 South Main Street, Suite 900
Salt Lake City, UT 84111
F-
81
F-
82
F-
83
F-
84
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Richfield Oil & Gas Company (“the
Company”) as of December 31, 2013 and 2012, and the related consolidated statements of operations,
stockholders’ equity, and cash flows for the years then ended. These consolidated financial statements are
the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these
consolidated financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. The Company has
determined that it is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over
financial reporting. Our audits included consideration of internal control over financial reporting as a basis for
designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing
an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we
express no such opinion. An audit also includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the
amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and
significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.
We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects,
the financial position of Richfield Oil & Gas Company as of December 31, 2013 and 2012, and the results of its
operations and its cash flows for the years then ended, in conformity with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will
continue as a going concern. As discussed in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company
has incurred substantial losses from operations causing negative working capital and negative operating
cash flows. These factors raise substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern.
Management’s plans in regards to these matters are also described in Note 2. The consolidated financial
statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Salt Lake City, UT
April 14, 2014
F-1
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Consolidated Balance Sheets
December 31, 2013 and December 31, 2012
ASSETS
Current assets
  Cash and cash equivalents
  Restricted Cash
  Accounts receivables
  Deposits and prepaid expenses
 Total current assets
December 31,
 2013
  
  
 $60,395
   153,348
   322,604
   77,475
   613,822
2012
 
   
 
   
 
  $286,013
 
    -
 
    387,803
    390,750
 
    1,064,566
Properties and equipment, at cost - successful efforts method:
  Proved properties
  Unproved properties
  Well and related equipment
  Accumulated depletion, depreciation and amortization
 
 
  Other properties and equipment
  Accumulated depreciation
 
 
 Total assets
 
 LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
 Current liabilities
  Accounts payable
  Accrued expenses and other payables
  Current portion of notes payable
  Convertible notes payable, net of discount of $120,264 and $0 at 12/31/13 and
12/31/12, respectively
  Capital lease obligations
  Current portion of asset retirement obligations
  Derivative liability
 Total current liabilities
 
 Long-term liabilities
  Notes payable, net of current portion
  Asset retirement obligations, net of current portion
 Total long-term liabilities
 
 Total liabilities
 
 Commitments and contingencies
 
 Stockholders' equity
  Common stock, par value $.001; 250,000,000 authorized; 39,906,770 shares and
32,518,192 shares issued and outstanding at 12/31/2013 and 12/31/2012, respectively
  Additional paid-in capital
  Accumulated deficit
 Total stockholders' equity
 
 Total liabilities and stockholders' equity
7,139,663     6,581,725  
   14,095,020     14,164,053  
   1,997,913     1,024,972  
   (1,224,523 )   (923,083
)
   22,008,073     20,847,667  
 
    
   219,231
 
)
   (203,743
 
   15,488
    
 
 $22,637,383   $21,960,034  
 
    
 
    
    
 
 $2,049,750   $1,578,510  
   3,104,485     1,368,276  
   1,338,524     1,487,419
236,212
)   (188,411
    47,801
1,861,386     1,352,560
15,748
    -
    -
135,311
 
   48,000
 
   310,156
   8,847,612     5,802,513  
 
    
     
     
    
 
   -
    1,674,691  
    482,157
   394,075
 
    2,156,848  
   394,075
    
     
 
   9,241,687     7,959,361
39,907
32,518
51,360,380     45,147,563  
   (38,004,591)   (31,179,408)
   13,395,696     14,000,673  
    
 
 $22,637,383   $21,960,034
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-2
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Consolidated Statements of Operations
For the Years Ended December 31, 2013 and 2012
Revenues
  Oil and natural gas sales       
     Total revenues   
 
Operating expenses         
  Production expenses       
  Production taxes         
  Exploration
2012
Year Ended
 December 31,
 2013
  
 $1,046,336   $952,566
   1,046,336     952,566
    
    
   900,129
   41,782
   136,431
764,457
    30,862
    167,212
-
25,293
    261,739
182,032
  Lease expiration         
   382,690
 
  Depletion, depreciation, amortization and accretion 
   4,571,642     7,383,227  
  General and administrative expenses     
   161,901
 
  Asset retirement obligation expenses     
   (105,106 )   (471,392 )
  Loss (gain) on sale of assets       
   6,271,501     8,161,398  
     Total expenses   
    
 
 
   (5,225,165 )   (7,208,832 )
 Loss from operations 
 
    
 
 
    
 Other income (expenses) 
 
   30,367
  Gain on settlement of liabilities     
   (1,103,702 )   -
 
  Loss on extinguishment of debt     
   756,776
 
    -
  Gain on derivative valuation 
   (1,257,143 )   (1,104,612 )
  Interest and finance expenses 
   850
 
  Interest income 
   (1,572,852 )   (783,964 )
     Total other income (expenses)
    
 
 
   (6,798,017 )   (7,992,796 )
 Loss before income taxes 
 
    
 
   (1,567
)
 Income tax provision 
    
 
 
 Net loss 
 $(6,799,584 ) $(7,993,196 )
    
 
 
)
 $(0.19
 Net loss per common share - basic and diluted     
 
    
 
 Weighted average shares outstanding – basic and diluted      36,393,603    28,873,656
20,769
) $(0.28
)   (400
299,879
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-3
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders' Equity
For the Years Ended December 31, 2013 and 2012
Balance - December 31, 2011
 
Issued 1,806,203 common stock for oil and gas
Common Stock
   
 
  
  Accumulated  Stockholders' 
  
 Shares
  Deficit
 
  27,088,744  $27,089  $31,232,334  $(22,551,466) $8,707,957
Additional
  Paid-In
  Capital
Par
Total
Equity
properties and JIBs (valued between $1.60 and
$2.50 per share)
 
Issued 282,511 common stock to a related party for
oil and gas properties (valued between $1.60 and
$2.50 per share)
 
Issued 1,443,378 common stock for directors',
employees and consultants' compensation
 
Sale of 1,335,277 common stock and 935,196
warrants for cash between $1.60 and $2.50 per
share
 
Issued 77,950 common stock as settlement of
accounts payables including accrued interest
 
Issued 403,651 common stock as settlement of
notes payable
 
Issued 7,193 common stock for related party
payment of interest and exercise of warrants
 
Return of 25,000 common stock for cancellation
from related party
 
Return of 229,000 common stock for cancellation
from unaffiliated investors related to the exchange
of oil and gas properties
 
Issued 184,072 common stock in exchange for
convertible preferred stock redemption (see NOTE
11 PREFERRED STOCK)
 
Exercised 143,213 common stock warrants
 
Issued 1,017,301 common stock warrants (see
NOTE 13 WARRANTS TO PURCHASE
COMMON STOCK)
 
Net loss for the year
 
Balance - December 31, 2012
1,806,203     1,806     4,392,342     -
4,394,148
282,511
283
566,717
-
567,000
1,443,378     1,443     3,608,001     -
3,609,444
1,335,277     1,335     3,125,917     -
3,127,252
77,950
78
194,797
403,651
404
949,528
7,193
7
(25,000
)   (25
11,502
)   -
-
-
-
194,875
949,932
11,509
(62,475
)   (62,500
(229,000 )   (229 )   -
(572,271
)   (572,500
184,072
184
389,331
-
389,515
143,213
143
228,998
-
229,141
-
-
448,096
-
448,096
)
)
-
    (7,993,196 )   (7,993,196 )
   
     
 
  32,518,192  $32,518  $45,147,563  $(31,179,408) $14,000,673
-
-
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-4
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders' Equity
Common Stock
   
 
  
  Accumulated  Stockholders' 
  
 Shares
  Deficit
 
  32,518,192  $32,518  $45,147,563  $(31,179,408) $14,000,673
Additional
  Paid-In
  Capital
Par
Total
Equity
1,166,750     1,167     1,067,833     -
1,069,000
10,000
10
8,490
1,102,064     1,102     888,730
561
345,031
561,307
(25,626
-
-
-
8,500
889,832
345,592
)   (25
)   -
(25,599
)   (25,624
)
For the Years Ended December 31, 2013 and 2012
Balance - December 31, 2012
 
Sale of 1,166,750 common stock and 765,375
warrants for cash
 
Issued 10,000 common stock as partial payment on
purchase of new leases
 
Issued 1,102,064 common stock and 21,250
warrants for creditors, consultants, directors,
officers, and other employees outstanding
payables
 
Issued 561,307 common stock for consultants and
directors compensation
 
Return of 25,626 common stock for cancellation
from unaffiliated investors related to the sale of oil
and gas properties
 
Issued 4,512,874 common stock for payment of
debt, interest, and extension and conversion
incentives.
 
Issued 59,644 common stock per ratchet provision
on agreement
 
Issued 525,000 warrants for consultants
compensation
 
Issued 3,139,853 warrants with debt as a debt
discount, for reduction of debt, and sale of ORRI
 
   
Record derivative liability for stock issued for cash    
 
   
Adjustment for repricing and modification of
warrants
-
4,512,874     4,513     2,604,263     -
61
56,600
61,209
-
-
49,475
557,481
(344,572 )
184,477
-
2,608,776
56,661
49,475
557,481
(344,572
184,477
)
Employee stock option amortization
 
Net loss for the year
 
Balance - December 31, 2013
(6,799,584 )   (6,799,584 )
  -
   
 
     
  39,906,770  $39,907  $51,360,380  $(38,004,591) $13,395,696
795,009
     
    -
795,009
-
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-5
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Condensed Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
For the Years Ended December 31, 2013 and 2012
Cash flows from operating activities:
Net loss
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash provided by (used in) operating activities:
 
Depletion, depreciation, amortization and accretion
Asset retirement obligation release on plugged wells
Gain on settlement of liabilities
Accrued interest income
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Gain on derivative liability
Capitalized interest on notes payable
Amortization of pre-paid interest
Lease expirations
Gain on sale of assets
Amortization of debt discounts
Issuance of common stock, options and warrants for services and other expenses
 
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
Decrease (increase) in accounts receivables
Decrease (increase) in deposits and prepaid expenses
Decrease (increase) in other assets
Increase (decrease) in accounts payable
Increase (decrease) in accrued expenses and other payables
Increase (decrease) in due to directors
Increase (decrease) in due to related parties
Net cash used in operating activities
 
Cash flows from investing activities:
Investment in oil and gas properties, including wells and related equipment
Investment in other properties and equipment
Proceeds from sale of assets
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
 
Cash flows from financing activities:
Proceeds from notes and convertible notes payable
Payments on notes and convertible notes payable
Restricted cash for settlement of note and litigation (see NOTE 15 LEGAL
PROCEEDINGS)
Proceeds from related party notes payable
Payments on related party notes payable
Payments on capital lease obligation
Proceeds from issuance of convertible preferred stock
Proceeds from issuance of warrants
Proceeds from issuance of common stock - net of issuance costs
Net cash provided by financing activities
2012
91,100
    115,256
    25,293
Years Ended
 
 December 31,
 
 2013
  
 
 $(6,799,584) $(7,993,196)
 
    
     
    
 
     
 
   382,690
    261,739
 
   (39,000
)   -
)   (20,769
   (30,367
)
   -
    (299,812 )
 
   1,103,702     -
 
   (756,776 )   -
 
   16,317
   6,164
 
   182,032
 
   (105,106 )   (471,392 )
   218,309
 
   1,627,611     3,694,628  
 
    
     
     
    
 
   128,649
    (249,065 )
    54,384
   273,906
 
    (119,421 )
   -
 
   51,701
    663,890
   2,745,718     571,218
 
)
    (27,934
   -
   -
    (43,307
)
   (994,034 )   (3,526,836)
    
 
    
 
   (1,478,594)   (2,202,128)
   -
)
    (38,597
    2,307,404  
   467,200
 
   (1,011,394)   66,679
 
    
    
 
   1,921,811     754,276
 
   (1,004,798)   (721,303 )
220,552
(153,348 )   -
111,319
 
   -
    (337,713 )
   -
)
)   (35,479
   (60,233
    285,000
 
   -
   7,378
 
    296,520
   1,069,000     3,356,393
1,779,810     3,709,013
Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
 
Cash and cash equivalents - beginning of period
 
Cash and cash equivalents - end of period
 
Supplemental disclosure of cash flow information:
Cash paid during the period for interest
Cash paid during the period for income taxes
 
Non-cash financing and investing activities:
Redemption of preferred stock and payment of preferred stock dividends through issuance
of common stock
Purchase of oil and gas properties and conversion of JIB receivables billed to working
interest holders through issuance of common stock and warrants
Capitalized oil and gas properties included in accounts payable
Purchase of properties through exchange of property and reduction of payables and notes
payable
Sale of oil and gas properties for return of common stock
Cancellation of lease in full satisfaction of accounts payable
Conversion of pre-paid expenses, payables, and notes payable through issuance of
common stock and warrants
Conversion of accounts payable through issuance of note payable
Capitalized accrued interest on notes payable
Derivative liability on common stock issued
Conversion of notes payable through issuance of convertible notes payable
Conversion of convertible notes payable through issuance of notes payable
Amortization of plugged wells
Capitalized Leased Equipment
Capitalized asset retirement obligations
Write down of asset retirement obligation on sold properties
(225,618 )   248,856
     
    
    37,157
   286,013
     
    
 $60,395
  $286,013
     
    
     
    
  $463,409
 $64,290
 $1,567
  $400
$-
$389,515
$8,500
$4,961,148
$951,700
$-
$71,332
$779,000
$45,625
 $-
$572,500
  $180,000
$3,351,610   $1,793,551
$21,000
 $-
 $344,572
 $-
 $-
 $41,766
 $179,796
 $57,021
 $67,115
$186,229
 
  $70,789
  $-
 
  $1,328,000  
  $1,117,500  
 
  $-
 
     
 
  $144,287
  $-
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-6
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
NOTE 1     ORGANIZATION AND NATURE OF BUSINESS
Richfield Oil & Gas Company (the “Company,” “Richfield” or “ROIL”) is a Nevada corporation headquartered
in Salt Lake City, Utah which was incorporated on April 8, 2011. The Company is engaged in the exploration,
development and production of oil and natural gas in the states of Kansas, Oklahoma, Utah and Wyoming.
The Company’s common stock trades on the OTCQX under the symbol “ROIL”.
Contemporaneously with ROIL’s incorporation, the Company merged (the “HPI Merger”) with its predecessor
company, Hewitt Petroleum, Inc., a Delaware corporation which was incorporated on May 17, 2008 (“HPI”). In
connection with the HPI Merger, HPI was merged out of existence and the Company assumed all of the assets
and liabilities of HPI and the Company became the parent company of HPI’s two wholly owned subsidiaries,
Hewitt Energy Group, Inc., a Texas corporation (“HEGINC”) and Hewitt Operating, Inc., a Utah corporation
(“HOPIN”). The Plan of Merger required that all HPI common stock be exchanged on a one-for-one basis for
ROIL common stock and that ROIL assume all of the liabilities of HPI as of the effective date of the HPI Merger.
As a result, the Company’s historical financial statements are a continuation of the financial statements of
HPI. In addition, effective March 31, 2011, HPI entered into a Stock Exchange Agreement with Freedom Oil &
Gas, Inc., a Nevada corporation (“Freedom”), which called for the exchange of stock in HPI for all of the
outstanding stock of Freedom (the “Freedom Acquisition”). Upon completion of the Freedom Acquisition, it
became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company from March 31, 2011 until June 20, 2011 when Freedom
was merged into ROIL with ROIL being the surviving entity.
On July 27, 2012 the Company formed a new wholly owned subsidiary, HR Land Group, LLC, a Utah Limited
Liability Company, (“HR Land”). HR Land’s purpose is to acquire oil and gas leases.
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned
subsidiaries, HEGINC, HOPIN and HR Land. All significant intercompany transactions and balances have
been eliminated in consolidation.
The Company has been involved in leasing, exploring and drilling in Kansas, Oklahoma, Utah and Wyoming
since its formation. The Company is participating in over 35,000 acres of leasehold, seismic surveys, and
numerous drilling projects in these states.  The Company uses proven technologies and drilling and
production methods that are both efficient and environmentally sound.
NOTE 2     GOING CONCERN
The Company’s consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis which
contemplates the realization of assets and the liquidation of liabilities in the ordinary course of business. The
Company has incurred substantial losses from operations causing negative working capital, in that current
liabilities exceed current assets, and the Company has negative operating cash flows, which raise substantial
doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company sustained a net loss for the
year ended December 31, 2013 of $6,799,584 and a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2012 of
$7,993,196, and has an accumulated deficit of $38,004,591 as of December 31, 2013.
The Company intends to make its planned capital expenditures in order to continue its drilling programs, but
does not have sufficient realized revenues or operating cash flows in order to finance these activities
internally. As a result, the Company intends to seek financing in order to fund its working capital and capital
expenditure needs.
The Company has been able to meet its short-term needs through loans from officers and third parties; sales
of working interest in its oil and gas properties; private placements of equity securities; and the settlement of
liabilities by issuing common stock.  The Company may seek additional funding through sales of working
interest in its oil and gas properties; the issuance of debt; preferred stock; common stock; or a combination
of these items. Any proceeds received from these items could provide the needed funds for continued
operations and drilling programs. The Company can provide no assurance that it will be able to obtain
sufficient additional financing that it needs to develop its properties and alleviate doubt about its ability to
continue as a going concern. If the Company is able to obtain sufficient additional financing proceeds, the
Company cannot be certain that this additional financing will be available on acceptable terms, if at all. To the
extent the Company raises additional funds by issuing equity securities, the Company’s stockholders may
experience significant dilution. Any debt financing, if available, may involve restrictive covenants that impact
the Company’s ability to conduct business. The consolidated financial statements do not include any
adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
F-7
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
NOTE 3     SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”).
Principles of Consolidation and Presentation
The Company was incorporated in Nevada on April 8, 2011. Contemporaneously with the incorporation, the
Company merged with its predecessor company, HPI. In connection with the HPI Merger, HPI was merged out
of existence and the Company assumed all of the assets and liabilities of HPI. As a result, the Company’s
historical financial statements are a continuation of the financial statements of HPI. The consolidated financial
statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned subsidiaries, HEGINC, HOPIN, HR
Land, HOI KS and HOI UT. All significant intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated in
consolidation.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers highly liquid investments with insignificant interest rate risk and original maturities
to the Company of three months or less to be cash equivalents. Cash equivalents consist primarily of cash on
hand, interest-bearing bank accounts and money market funds. The Company’s cash positions represent
assets held in checking and money market accounts. These assets are generally available on a daily or
weekly basis and are highly liquid in nature.  If the balances are greater than $250,000, the Company does not
have FDIC coverage on the entire amount of bank deposits.  The Company believes this risk is minimal.
Accounts Receivable
Trade accounts receivable are primarily from oil and natural gas sales and net amounts due from Joint
Interest Billings (“JIBs”) from working interest holders in the Company’s oil and gas properties in which we
are the operator. These trade accounts receivables are recorded at the invoiced amount, net of allowances for
doubtful amounts. The Company routinely reviews outstanding accounts receivable balances for estimated
uncollectible accounts and regularly reviews collectability and establishes or adjusts the allowances for
doubtful accounts receivables using the specific identification method and records a reserve for amounts not
expected to be fully recovered. Actual balances are not applied against the reserve until substantially all
collection efforts have been exhausted. At December 31, 2013 and 2012, the Company had no allowance for
doubtful accounts.
Oil and Gas Properties Accounting Policies
The Company accounts for oil and gas properties by the successful efforts method. Under this method of
accounting, costs relating to the acquisition and development of proved areas are capitalized when incurred.
The costs of development wells are capitalized whether productive or non-productive. Leasehold acquisition
costs are capitalized when incurred. If proved reserves are found on an unproved property, leasehold cost is
transferred to proved properties. Exploration dry holes are charged to expense when it is determined that no
commercial reserves exist. Other exploration costs, including personnel costs, geological and geophysical
expenses and delay rentals for oil and gas leases, are charged to expense when incurred. The costs of
acquiring or constructing support equipment and facilities used in oil and natural gas producing activities are
capitalized. Production costs are charged to expense as incurred and are those costs incurred to operate and
maintain the Company’s wells and related equipment and facilities.
Depletion of producing oil and gas properties is recorded based on units of production. Acquisition costs of
proved properties are depleted on the basis of all proved reserves, developed and undeveloped, and
capitalized development costs (wells and related equipment and facilities) are depleted on the basis of proved
developed reserves. As more fully described below, proved reserves are estimated by the Company’s
independent petroleum engineer and are subject to future revisions based on availability of additional
information.  As discussed in NOTE 10 ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATIONS, asset retirement costs are
recognized when the asset is placed in service, and are depleted over proved reserves using the units of
production method.
F-8
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
Oil and gas properties are reviewed for impairment when facts and circumstances indicate that their carrying
value may not be recoverable. The Company compares net capitalized costs of proved oil and gas properties
to estimated undiscounted future net cash flows using management’s expectations of future oil and natural
gas prices. These future price scenarios reflect the Company’s estimation of future price volatility. If net
capitalized costs exceed estimated undiscounted future net cash flows, the measurement of impairment is
based on estimated fair value, using estimated discounted future net cash flows based on management’s
expectations of future oil and natural gas prices. The Company did record an impairment allowance for
expiring leaseholds on proven properties for the year ended December 31, 2013. The Company recorded no
impairment allowance on proven properties for the year ended December 31, 2012.
Unproven properties that are individually significant are assessed for impairment and if considered impaired
are charged to expense when such impairment is deemed to have occurred. We perform periodic assessment
of individually significant unproved crude oil and gas properties for impairment on a quarterly basis and we
would recognize a loss at the time if there was an impairment by providing an impairment allowance. In
determining whether a significant unproved property is impaired we consider numerous factors including, but
not limited to, current exploration plans, favorable or unfavorable exploratory activity on adjacent leaseholds,
our management and geologists’ evaluation of the lease, and the remaining months in the lease term. As of
December 31, 2013 and 2012, the Company does not have unproved properties whose acquisition costs are
not significant. Thus, all unproven properties were assessed for impairment and the Company recorded an
impairment allowance for expiring leases for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012.
The sale of a partial interest in a proved oil and gas property is accounted for as normal retirement and no
gain or loss is recognized as long as this treatment does not significantly affect the units-of-production
depletion rate. If the units-of-production rate is significantly affected, then the sale shall be accounted for as
the sale of an asset, and a gain or loss shall be recognized. The unamortized cost of the property or group of
properties shall be apportioned to the interest sold and the interest retained on the basis of the fair values of
those interests. A gain or loss is recognized for all other sales of producing properties and is included in the
results of operations. The sale of a partial interest in an unproved property is accounted for as a recovery of
cost when substantial uncertainty exists as to recovery of the cost applicable to the interest retained. A gain
on the sale is recognized to the extent the sales price exceeds the carrying amount of the unproved property.
A gain or loss is recognized for all other sales of nonproducing properties and is included in the results of
operations.
Other Property and Equipment
Other property and equipment include property and equipment that are not oil and gas properties and are
recorded at cost and depreciated using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives of five to
seven years.  Expenditures for replacements, renewals, and betterments are capitalized. Maintenance and
repairs are charged to operations as incurred.  Long-lived assets, other than oil and gas properties, are
evaluated for impairment to determine if current circumstances and market conditions indicate the carrying
amount may not be recoverable.  The Company has not recognized any impairment losses on non-oil and
gas long-lived assets.
Asset Retirement Obligations
Asset retirement obligation relates to future costs associated with plugging and abandonment of crude oil
and natural gas wells, removal of equipment and facilities from leased acreage and returning the land to its
original condition. Estimates are based on historical experience of plugging and abandoning wells, estimated
remaining lives of those wells based on reserves estimates, external estimates to plug and abandon the wells
in the future and federal and state regulatory requirements. The Company records the fair value of a liability
for an asset retirement obligation in the period in which it is incurred and a corresponding increase in the
carrying amount of the related long-lived asset.  The liability is accreted to its present value each period, and
the capitalized cost is depreciated over the useful life of the related asset.  If the liability is settled for an
amount other than the recorded amount, a gain or loss is recognized.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue from the sale of crude oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids is recorded when the significant risks
and rewards of ownership of the product is transferred to the buyer, which is usually when legal title passes
to the external party. For crude oil and natural gas liquids delivery generally occurs upon pick up at the field
tank battery and for natural gas delivery occurs at the pipeline delivery point. Revenue is not recognized for
the production in tanks, or oil in pipelines that has not been delivered to the purchaser.  Revenue is measured
net of discounts and royalties. Royalties and severance taxes are incurred based upon the actual price
received from the sales. The Company uses the sales method of accounting for natural gas balancing of
natural gas production and would recognize a liability if the existing proven reserves were not adequate to
cover the current imbalance situation.  As of December 31, 2013 and 2012, the Company’s natural gas
production was in balance, meaning its cumulative portion of natural gas production taken and sold from
wells in which it has an interest equaled its entitled interest in natural gas production from those wells.
F-9
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company has accounted for stock-based compensation under the provisions of FASB ASC 718.   This
standard requires the Company to record an expense associated with the fair value of stock-based
compensation.  The Company uses the Black-Scholes option valuation model to calculate the value of
options and warrants at the date of grant.  Option and warrant pricing models require the input of highly
subjective assumptions, including the expected price volatility.  Changes in these assumptions can materially
affect the fair value estimate.
Stock Issuance
The Company records the stock-based awards issued to consultants and other external entities for goods
and services at either the fair market value of the goods received or services rendered or the instruments
issued in exchange for such services, whichever is more readily determinable, using the measurement date
guidelines enumerated in FASB ASC 505.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under FASB ASC 740.  Deferred income tax assets and liabilities
are determined based upon differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities
and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected
to reverse.  Accounting standards require the consideration of a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets if
it is “more likely than not” that some component or all of the benefits of deferred tax assets will not be
realized.
The tax effects from an uncertain tax position can be recognized in the consolidated financial statements only
if the position is more likely than not of being sustained if the position were to be challenged by a taxing
authority. The Company has examined the tax positions taken in its tax returns and determined that there are
no uncertain tax positions. As a result, the Company has recorded no uncertain tax liabilities in its
consolidated balance sheet.
Loss Per Common Share
Basic earnings per share (“EPS”) are computed by dividing net income (loss) (the numerator) by the weighted
average number of common shares outstanding for the period (the denominator).  Diluted EPS is computed
by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares and potential common
shares outstanding (if dilutive) during each period.  Potential common shares include stock options,
warrants, and restricted stock.  The number of potential common shares outstanding relating to stock
options, warrants, and restricted stock is computed using the treasury stock method.
As the Company has incurred losses for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, the potentially dilutive
shares are anti-dilutive and are thus not added into the loss per share calculations. As of December 31, 2013
and 2012, there were 11,937,087 and 2,707,898 potentially dilutive shares, respectively.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements under GAAP in the United States requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of
contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts
of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.  The most significant estimates relate to proved oil
and natural gas reserve volumes, certain depletion factors, future cash flows from oil and gas properties,
estimates relating to certain oil and natural gas revenues and expenses, valuation of share based
compensation, valuation of asset retirement obligations, estimates of future oil and natural gas commodity
pricing and the valuation of deferred income taxes.  Actual results may differ from those estimates.
Impairment
FASB ASC 360 requires long-lived assets to be held and used be reviewed for impairment whenever events
or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable.  There
was no impairment identified at December 31, 2013 and 2012.
New Accounting Pronouncements
From time to time, new accounting pronouncements are issued by FASB that are adopted by the Company as
of the specified effective date.  If not discussed, management believes that the impact of recently issued
standards, which are not yet effective, will not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements
upon adoption.
F-10
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
Reclassifications
Certain prior period balances have been reclassified to conform to the current period presentation. Such
reclassifications had no impact on net loss, statements of cash flows, working capital or equity previously
reported.
Reverse Stock Split
As more fully described in NOTE 12 COMMON STOCK, effective October 23, 2012, the Company implemented
a 1-for-10 reverse stock split of its issued and outstanding common stock. Under the guidance of FASB ASC
505, all common share and per common share information in the accompanying consolidated financial
statements and these notes to the financial statements have been retroactively restated to reflect the reverse
common stock split.
Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act (“JOBS Act”), adopted January 3, 2012
The Company qualifies as an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act of
1933 (the “Securities Act”) as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”).
As such, the Company is permitted to rely on exemptions from various reporting requirements including, but
not limited to, the requirement to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, and the requirement to submit certain executive compensation matters to
shareholder advisory votes such as “say on pay” and “say on frequency.”
In addition, Section 107 of the JOBS Act also provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage
of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or
revised accounting standards. In other words, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of
certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. The
Company has elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period. The Company’s
financial statements may therefore not be comparable to those of companies that comply with such new or
revised accounting standards.
The Company will remain an emerging growth company up to the fifth anniversary of its first registered sale of
common equity securities, or until the earliest of (a) the last day of the first fiscal year in which its annual
gross revenues exceed $1 billion, (b) the date that it becomes a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule
12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), which would occur if the
market value of its common stock held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of its
most recently completed second fiscal quarter, or (c) the date on which it has issued more than $1 billion in
non-convertible debt during the preceding three-year period.
NOTE 4     OIL AND NATURAL GAS PROPERTIES
Acquisitions for the year ended December 31, 2012
On January 1, 2012, the Company purchased a 1.00% working interest in the deep zones and 0.50% working
interest in the shallow zones in the HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect located in Sanpete County, Utah from two
unaffiliated investors for a value totaling $141,857 in exchange for the issuance of 50,000 shares of common
stock for a value of $125,000, or $2.50 per share plus the cancelation of $16,857 of JIBs accounts receivable
owed to the Company by the investors.
On January 1, 2012, the Company purchased a 0.25% working interest BPO and APO in the HPI Liberty #1
Well located in Juab County, Utah from an unaffiliated investor for a value totaling $22,307 in exchange for the
issuance of 4,853 shares of common stock for a value of $12,133, or $2.50 per share plus the cancelation of
$10,174 of JIBs accounts receivable owed to the Company by the investor.
On March 30, 2012, the Company acquired a 405 acre lease and lease extension of 1,416 acres for the HUOP
Freedom Trend Prospect located in Sanpete County, Utah from an unaffiliated investor, at that time, for a
value totaling $383,200 in exchange for the issuance of 153,280 shares of common stock for a value of
$383,200, or $2.50 per share. The Company capitalized $289,316 as a result of having a 75.50% working
interest and the remaining balance of $93,884 was billed to the other 24.50% HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect
working interest holders. On March 31, 2012, this unaffiliated investor, Joseph P. Tate, became a Director of
the Company.
F-11
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
On June 30, 2012, the Company acquired a 25.00% working interest in the Perth Field located in Sumner
County, Kansas from two unaffiliated investors in exchange for an agreement to provide the investors with an
aggregate 10.00% total carried interest in a certain $800,000 work plan in the Perth Field that includes drilling
one new well, three well recompletions, and work on a salt water disposal well. In conjunction with this
transaction, the Company sold 5.00% of the working interest received with a 5.00% carried interest in this
same work plan to another unaffiliated investor. These transactions resulted in the Company acquiring a net
10.00% working interest whereby the Company’s working interest increased from 75.00% to 85.00%. This work
plan commenced in December 2012.
On October 1, 2012, the Company purchased a 7.00% working interest in the Koelsch Field located in Stafford
County, Kansas, from two unaffiliated investors for a value totaling $367,500 in exchange for the issuance of
195,544 shares of common stock. Of these 195,544 shares of common stock, 60,700 shares were valued at
$151,750, or $2.50 per share and the remaining 134,844 shares of common stock were issued by exercising
warrants with an exercise price of $1.60 per warrant or $215,750.
On October 1, 2012, the Company purchased a 5.00% working interest in the Koelsch Field located in Stafford
County, Kansas, from MacKov Investments Limited, a related party, for a value totaling $262,500 in exchange
for the issuances of 160,711 shares of common stock. Of these 160,711 shares of common stock, 5,958
shares were valued at $14,895, or $2.50 per share and the remaining 154,753 shares of common stock were
issued by exercising warrants held by MacKov with an exercise price of $1.60 per warrant or $247,605. This
purchase was made on the same terms as other unaffiliated investor transactions completed in October 2012
(see NOTE 16 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS).
On October 1, 2012, the Company purchased a 21.00% working interest in the Prescott Lease located in
Stafford County, Kansas, from seven unaffiliated investors for a value totaling $643,125 in exchange for the
issuance of 257,250 shares of common stock valued at $643,125, or $2.50 per share.
On October 1, 2012, the Company purchased a 9.50% working interest BPO and a 6.50% working interest APO
in the HPI Liberty #1 Well located in Juab County, Utah, from four unaffiliated investors for a value totaling
$468,000 in exchange for the issuance of 179,887 shares of common stock valued at $449,718, or $2.50 per
share, plus the cancelation of $18,282 of JIBs accounts receivable owed to the Company by the investors.
On October 1, 2012, the Company purchased a 12.95% working interest BPO and an 8.75% working interest
APO in the HPI Liberty #1 Well, located in Juab County, Utah, from six unaffiliated investors for $630,000. In
addition, the Company sold a 3.0625% working interest BPO and a 2.1875% working interest APO in the HPI
Liberty #1 Well and Liberty Prospect to the six investors for $192,500. The net amount of $437,500 due to the
investors was paid by the issuance of 162,146 shares of common stock for a total value of $405,365, or $2.50
per share, plus the cancelation of $32,135 of JIBs accounts receivable owed to the Company by the investors.
On October 1, 2012, the Company purchased a 1.00% carried working interest to tanks BPO, 1.00% working
interest to tanks APO, 5.25% working interest BPO and 3.75% working interest APO in the HPI Liberty #1 Well
and 1.00% working interest BPO and 1.00% working interest APO in the Liberty Prospect located in Juab and
Sanpete Counties, Utah, from two unaffiliated investors for a value totaling $725,965, which was paid by the
issuance of 30,000 shares of common stock valued at $75,000, or $2.50 per share, the issuance of a $589,000
note payable, plus the cancelation of $61,965 of JIBs accounts receivable owed to the Company by the
investors.
On October 1, 2012, the Company purchased a 1.00% carried working interest to tanks, a 2.25% working
interest BPO and a 1.75% working interest APO in the HPI Liberty #1 Well and a 3.25% working interest BPO
and a 2.75% working interest APO in the Liberty Prospect located in Juab County, Utah, from MacKov
Investments Limited, a related party, for a value totaling $242,000 in exchange for the issuance of 96,800
shares of common stock valued at $242,000, or $2.50 per share. This purchase was made on the same terms
as other unaffiliated investor transactions completed in October 2012 (see NOTE 16 RELATED PARTY
TRANSACTIONS).
On October 1, 2012, the Company purchased from an unaffiliated investor a 14.50% working interest in the
deep zones and a 7.25% working interest in the shallow zones of the HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect located
in Sanpete County, Utah and a 2.80% working interest BPO and 2.00% working interest APO in the HPI Liberty
#1 Well located in Juab County, Utah for a total of $1,956,500 which was paid by issuing 609,243 shares of
common stock valued at $1,523,108, or $2.50 per share, plus the cancelation of $433,392 of JIBs and other
receivables owed to the Company by the investors.
F-12
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
On October 1, 2012, the Company purchased a 0.50% working interest in the deep zones and a 0.25% working
interest in the shallow zones of the HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect located in Sanpete County, Utah, from
MacKov Investments Limited, a related party, for a value totaling $62,500 in exchange for the issuance of
25,000 shares of common stock valued at $62,500, or $2.50 per share. This purchase was made on the same
terms as other Company unaffiliated investor transactions completed in October 2012 (see NOTE 16
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS).
On October 26 and November 5, 2012, the Company purchased three leases containing 1,511 net acres
located in the Hogback Ridge Prospect in Rich County, Utah for the sum of $17,730.
On December 1, 2012, the Company acquired 100% working interest in the Wasatch National Forest Well #16-
15 and the surrounding 640 acres in Uinta County, Wyoming from an unaffiliated and existing investor for
$610,000 that was paid as follows: (i) the Company paid $10,000 cash; (ii) the Company issued 164,000 shares
of common stock for a total value of $410,000, or $2.50 per share; and (iii) the Company issued a $190,000
note payable to the investor.
Acquisitions for the year ended December 31, 2013
In January 2013, the Company purchased two leases in the HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect: (i) a lease
totaling 111 net acres with a term of 10 years for a payment of $1,664 per year; and (ii) the City of Fountain
Green Lease totaling 206 net acres with a term of 10 years and includes the right to use surplus city water for
a one-time payment of $140,000.
In May 2013, the Company purchased two 5 year leases with a 5 year option to renew in the HUOP Freedom
Trend Project totaling 1,328 acres for $74,387. As part of the consideration for the leases the Company issued
10,000 shares of common stock valued at $8,000 or $0.80 per share with the balance of $66,387 paid in cash.
In May 2013, the Company purchased a 10 year lease in the HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect totaling 422
acres with annual payments of $6,329.
In June 2013, the Company purchased a 5 year lease with a 5 year option to renew in two new prospects in
the Central Utah Overthrust totaling 1,707 acres for $59,729 in cash.
Divestitures for the year ended December 31, 2012
On January 30, 2012, the Company sold a 1.00% working interest in the Moroni #1-AXZH Well and the 320
acres leasehold for cash of $77,561 to an unaffiliated investor.
On February 10, 2012, the Company sold a 0.50% working interest in the Moroni #1-AXZH Well and the 320
acres leasehold for cash of $38,781 to a related party, Zions Energy Corporation. This sale was made on the
same terms as the other unaffiliated investor transaction completed in January 2012 (see NOTE 16 RELATED
PARTY TRANSACTIONS).
On February 21, 2012, the Company sold a 0.25% working interest in the Moroni #1-AXZH Well and the 320
acres leasehold for cash of $19,390 to a related party, Zions Energy Corporation. This sale was made on the
same terms as the other unaffiliated investor party transaction completed in January 2012 (see NOTE 16
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS).
On February 22, 2012, the Company sold a 2.00% working interest in the Koelsch Field, including the
requirement to participate in the RFO Koelsch #25-1 Well, for cash of $6,060 to a related party, Zions Energy
Corporation. This sale was made on the same terms as other unaffiliated investor transactions completed in
December 2011 (see NOTE 16 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS).
On February 22, 2012 the Company sold a 1.50% working interest in the Koelsch Field, including the
requirement to participate in the RFO Koelsch #25-1 Well, for cash of $4,545 to a related party, MacKov
Investments Limited. This sale was made on the same terms as other unaffiliated investor transactions
completed in December 2011 (see NOTE 16 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS).
On February 29, 2012, the Company sold a 0.50% working interest in the Moroni #1-AXZH Well and the 320
acres leasehold for cash of $38,781 to a related party, MacKov Investments Limited. This sale was made on
the same terms as the other unaffiliated investor party transaction completed in January 2012 (see NOTE 16
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS).
F-13
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
On March 12, 2012, the Company sold a 1.00% working interest in the Koelsch Field, including the
requirement to participate in the RFO Koelsch #25-1 Well, for cash of $3,030 to a related party Zions Energy
Corporation. This sale was made on the same terms as other unaffiliated investor transactions completed in
January 2012 (see NOTE 16 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS).
On March 14, 2012, the Company sold a 0.25% working interest in the Moroni #1-AXZH Well and the 320 acres
leasehold for cash of $19,390 to a related party Zions Energy Corporation. This sale was made on the same
terms as the other unaffiliated investor party transaction completed in January 2012 (see NOTE 16 RELATED
PARTY TRANSACTIONS).
On March 15, 2012, the Company sold a 1.00% working interest in the Koelsch Field, including the
requirement to participate in the RFO Koelsch #25-1 Well, for cash of $3,030 to an unaffiliated investor.
On May 15, 2012, the Company sold a 3.00% carried interest in the first well to be drilled in the shallow zone on
the HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect in exchange for $100,000 in cash and a return of a 2.00% working interest
in the Moroni #1-AXZH Well and the 320 acre leasehold. There were two parties to this transaction, one was an
unaffiliated investor, the other was a related party, Zions Energy Corporation. The Zions Energy Corporation
transaction was completed on the same terms as the unaffiliated investor transaction (see NOTE 16
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS).
On May 16, 2012 and May 17, 2012, the Company sold a 21.00% working interest in the Prescott Lease,
including the requirement to participate in the RFO Prescott #25-6 Well located in the Koelsch Field and
229,800 warrants to purchase common stock at $2.50 per share for total cash of $619,500 to unaffiliated
investors.
On May 31, 2012, the Company determined that a lease in the HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect was not valid as
there were issues regarding the title of the property, no payments had been made and the lease term had
expired. As a result, the lessor agreed to cancel the original amount owing by the Company on this lease in
the amount of $180,000.
On June 28, 2012, the Company entered into an agreement (the “Skyline Oil Agreement”) with Skyline Oil, LLC
(“Skyline Oil”), whereby the Company gave Skyline Oil (i) all of its interest in the Chad Wood Lease located in
Central Utah; (ii) a 44.5% working interest in the Moroni #1-AXZH Well plus 320 surrounding acres; and (iii) a
15% working interest in 4,680 acres of the Independence Prospect, and in exchange Skyline Oil gave the
Company (i) $1.6 million in cash; (ii) 200,000 shares of the Company’s common stock valued at $500,000 or
$2.50 per share; and (iii) a 5% working interest in an additional 15,000 acres in a new Independence Prospect.
The $500,000 from the return of 200,000 shares of common stock was treated as a return of capital and the
remaining Independence Prospect unproved properties are now valued at $422,865. Following this
transaction, the Company now owns a 5% working interest in 19,680 acres in the new Independence Prospect
and a 5% working interest in the Moroni #1-AXZH Well plus 320 surrounding acres.
On June 30, 2012, the Company sold a 5.00% working interest with a 5.00% carried interest in a certain
$800,000 work plan in the Perth Field that includes drilling one new well, three well recompletions, and work
on a salt water disposal well to an unaffiliated investor for a value of $230,000. As consideration for this
transaction, the investor agreed to reduce his note payable by $80,000 and exchanged a 50.00% working
interest in a salt water disposal well that was valued at $150,000. This transaction was made in conjunction
with the Company’s acquisition of 25.00% working interest in the Perth Field.
On October 1, 2012, the Company sold a 3.0625% working interest BPO and a 2.1875% working interest APO
in the HPI Liberty #1 Well and Liberty Prospect from six unaffiliated investors for $192,500. In addition, the
Company purchased a 12.95% working interest BPO and an 8.75% working interest APO in the HPI Liberty #1
Well, located in Juab County, Utah, from six unaffiliated investors for $630,000 which was paid by the
issuance of 162,146 shares of common stock for a total value of $405,365, or $2.50 per share, plus the
cancelation of $32,135 of JIBs accounts receivable owed to the Company by the investors.
On October 22, 2012, the Company transferred a 1.50% ORRI in the South Haven Field valued at $32,000 to an
unaffiliated note holder, as consideration for prepaid interest on a $425,000 promissory note.
F-14
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
In December 2012, the Company sold a 1.00% working interest in the deep zones and a 1.00% working
interest in the shallow zones in the HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect to an unaffiliated investor for a total value
of $162,500. The purchase price was paid in $90,000 cash and a return to the Company of 29,000 shares of the
Company’s common stock valued at $72,500, or $2.50 per share. The shares were returned to the Company
and subsequently cancelled.
Divestitures for the year ended December 31, 2013
In March 2013, the Company sold a 20.0% working interest in the Wasatch National Forest #16-15 Well to two
unaffiliated investors for a total of $145,626 with payments of $120,000 in cash and $25,626 through the return
and cancelation of 25,626 shares of Common Stock valued at $1.00 per share.
In June 2013, the Company sold a 2.0% working interest in the Moroni #1 AXZH Well and in the surrounding
20,000 acres in the Independence Project for a total of $240,000, with payments of $220,000 in cash and
$20,000 through the return and cancelation of 27,778 shares of Common Stock valued at $0.72 per share.
In July 2013, the Company sold a 2.0% ORRI in the Pine Springs/Edwin Prospect in the Central Utah
Overthrust to an unaffiliated investor for $70,000 cash. As additional consideration for the sale, the Company
granted warrants to purchase up to 70,000 shares of Common Stock with an exercise price of $1.00 that
expire in July 2014.
In October 2013, the Company sold 51.25% working interest in the Wasatch National Forest #16-15 Well and
the surrounding 640 acres to two unaffiliated investors for a total of $512,500 with payments of $112,500 in
cash and $400,000 through the extinguishment of Notes Payable.
F-15
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
NOTE 5     NOTES PAYABLE
Notes Payable consists of the following:
Note Payable, interest at 12.0% per annum, monthly payments of $7,500, due October
2013, secured by a 5.00% working interest in certain HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect
leases.
 
Note Payable, interest at 10.0% per annum, monthly payments of $3,200, secured by a
1.00% working interest in certain HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect leases.
 
Note Payable, interest at 7.5% per annum, monthly payments of $1,949, due January
December 31,  December 31, 
 2013
2012
$-
-
$750,000
366,709
8,496
24,759
581,327
716,327
-
-
87,056
7,380
94,701
115,879
-
250,000
389,000
589,000
-
    
   15,000
-
50,000
100,000
100,000
190,000
     
    -
65,000
-
-
-
3,162,110
1,338,524
 
   (1,338,524 )   (1,487,419 )
 $-
$1,674,691
2014, secured by vehicle.
 
Note Payable, interest at 10.0% per annum, monthly payments of $15,000, due June
2014, secured by a 10.00% working interest in certain HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect
leases.
 
Note Payable, interest at 10.0% per annum, monthly payments of $5,000, secured by a
1.00% working interest in certain HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect leases.
 
Note Payable, interest at 0.0% per annum, monthly payments of $1,500, due on
demand, unsecured.
 
Note Payable, interest at 8.0% per annum, monthly payments of $10,000, due on
demand, unsecured.
 
Note Payable, interest at 10.0% per annum, secured by certain new leases, rights, and
interests in the Central Utah Overthrust Project.
 
Note Payable, interest at 6.0% per annum, quarterly payments of $50,000, due
January 2014, secured by a 10.00% working interest in the Liberty Prospect.
 
Note Payable, interest at 0.0% per annum, unsecured.
 
Note Payable, interest at 0.0% per annum, due on demand, unsecured
 
Note Payable, interest at 10.0% per annum, secured by a 1.00% working interest     in
certain HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect leases.
 
Note Payable, interest at 12.0% per annum, due on demand, secured by a 10.00%
working interest in the Liberty Prospect.
 
Note Payable, interest at 8.0% per annum, due on demand, secured by a working
interest in certain Kansas leases.
 
Note Payable, interest at 8.0% per annum, due on demand, secured by a working
interest in certain Kansas leases.
 
Total Notes Payable
Less: Current Portion (includes demand notes)
Long-Term Portion
Estimated annual future maturities of Notes Payables are as follows:
Years Ended December 31,  Amount
  2014
$1,338,524
-
 
  $1,338,524
Thereafter  
  Total
F-16
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
NOTE 6     CONVERTIBLE NOTES PAYABLE
Convertible Notes Payable consists of the following:
Note Payable, interest at 12.0% per annum, due on demand, convertible into common
shares of the Company at a conversion rate of $2.50 per common share, unsecured.
 
Note Payable, interest at 10.0% per annum, due on demand, convertible into common
shares of the Company at a conversion rate of $2.50 per common share, secured by
certain Kansas Leases and 10.00% working interest in certain Fountain Green Project
Leases (see NOTE 15 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS).
 
Note Payable, interest at 10.0% per annum, due March 2014, convertible into common
shares of the Company at a conversion rate of $0.60 per common share subject to a
ratchet adjustment provision (see NOTE 10 COMMON STOCK), secured by a working
interest in certain Kansas and Wyoming leases.
 
Note Payable, interest at 10.0% per annum, due March 2014, convertible into common
shares of the Company at a conversion rate of $0.60 per common share subject to a
ratchet adjustment provision (see NOTE 10 COMMON STOCK), unsecured.
 
Note Payable, interest at 12.0% per annum, due on demand, convertible into common
shares of the Company at a conversion rate determined by 50% of the weighted
average price of the stock during the five trading days immediately preceding the
conversion date, secured by a 10.0% working interest in the Liberty Prospect.
 
Note Payable, interest at 12.0% per annum, due on demand, convertible into common
shares of the Company at a conversion rate determined by 50% of the weighted
average price of the stock during the five trading days immediately preceding the
conversion date, secured by a 10.0% working interest in the Liberty Prospect.
 
Total Convertible Notes Payable
Less: Unamortized Debt Discount
Less: Current Portion (includes demand notes)
Long-Term Portion
Estimated annual future maturities of Convertible Notes Payables are as follows:
Years Ended December 31,  Amount
  2014
  Thereafter  
  Total
$1,981,650 
    -
 
  $1,981,650
December 31,  December 31, 
 2013
2012
52,560
52,560
369,090
1,300,000
1,310,000
-
150,000
50,000
50,000
-
-
-
1,352,560
)   -
1,981,650
   (120,264
 
   (1,861,386 )   (1,352,560 )
 $-
$-
NOTE 7    CAPITAL LEASE OBLIGATION
The Company leases certain well equipment under two capital lease agreements.  The term of the first capital
lease was for 5 years with monthly payments in the amount of $3,200. The final payment on this lease was
made in April 2013. The second lease is for a term of 10 months with monthly payments of $21,000. The final
payment on this lease is due in June 2014.  As of December 31, 2013 and 2012, the remaining capital lease
obligations were $135,311 and $15,748, respectively.
As of December 31, 2013 and 2012, total well equipment acquired under capital leases was $333,951 and
$154,155 and accumulated depreciation was $139,165 and $106,440, respectively.
F-17
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
Estimated annual future maturities of capital leases are as follows:
Years Ended December 31, Amount
2014
Thereafter
Total
$135,311 
   -
 
 $135,311
NOTE 8    OPERATING LEASES
The Company leases office space in Salt Lake City, Utah (“Premises Lease”) which consists of approximately
5,482 square feet.  The Company entered into a five year and five month lease agreement effective September
1, 2013. The annualized lease obligations for the 12 month period September 1, 2013 to August 31, 2014 is
$67,155 with annualized lease obligations for the subsequent 4 years in the amount of $115,122. The
Company has a prepaid security deposit of $11,122.  For the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, the
Premises Lease payments were $116,708 and $121,401, respectively.
The Company leases a printer, copier and fax machine. The original lease term was for 37 months beginning
in March 2010 with month lease payments of $255. The Company entered into a new 36 month lease with new
equipment commencing January 2013 with monthly payments of $654. For the years ended December 31,
2013 and 2012 the lease payments were $8,250 and $3,060, respectively.
NOTE 9OIL AND GAS PROPERTY LEASES
The following table sets forth the oil and gas property lease acreage with an expiration date within the next
three years (December 31, 2016). The Company intends to renew or place into production all of these oil and
gas property leases prior to their expiration.
Acreage Expirations
Years Ended December 31, Gross (1)
2014
2015
2016
    Total
5,820
  2,903
  80
  8,803
Net (2)
  5,192
  2,354
  72
  7,618
1-“Gross” means the total number of acres in which we have a working interest.
2-“Net” means the aggregate of the percentage working interests of the Company.
NOTE 10ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATIONS
FASB ASC 410 requires that an asset retirement obligation (“ARO”) associated with the retirement of a
tangible long-lived asset be recognized as a liability in the period in which it is incurred and becomes
determinable. Under this method, when liabilities for dismantlement and abandonment costs, excluding
salvage values, are initially recorded, the carrying amount of the related oil and gas properties is increased.
The fair value of the ARO asset and liability is measured using expected future cash outflows discounted at
the Company’s credit-adjusted risk-free interest rate. Accretion of the liability is recognized each period using
the interest method of allocation, and the capitalized cost is depleted using the units of production method.
Should either the estimated life or the estimated abandonment costs of a property change materially upon the
Company’s periodic review, a new calculation is performed using the same methodology of taking the
abandonment cost and inflating it forward to its abandonment date and then discounting it back to the
present using the Company’s credit-adjusted-risk-free rate. The carrying value of the asset retirement
obligation is adjusted to the newly calculated value, with a corresponding offsetting adjustment to the asset
retirement cost.
F-18
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
The following table summarizes the Company’s asset retirement obligation transactions recorded in
accordance with the provisions of FASB ASC 410 during the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012:
Beginning asset retirement obligation
December 31,
 
 2013
 
 $482,157   $350,243
2012
Liabilities incurred for new wells placed into production   17,294     140,876 
   (106,115)   (14,409 )
Liabilities decreased for wells sold or plugged
 
   9,012
Accretion of discount on asset retirement obligations
   39,727     -
Revisions of previous estimates
 
Ending asset retirement obligations
 $442,075   $482,157
5,447
NOTE 11PREFERRED STOCK
As of December 31, 2013 and 2012, the Company had 50,000,000 shares of preferred stock authorized at a par
value of $0.001 per share and had no shares of preferred stock issued or outstanding. The Company has
5,000,000 of the 50,000,000 shares of preferred stock authorized at a par value of $0.001 per share designated
as “Series A Preferred Stock”.
On August 31, 2012, the Company filed a Certificate of Designation with the Nevada Secretary of State,
designating 5,000,000 shares of the Company’s authorized shares of preferred stock as Series A Preferred
Stock. All shares of common stock rank junior to the Series A Preferred Stock in regards to payment of
dividends, liquidation, dissolution, and winding up of the Company.
The Series A Preferred Stock is convertible, at the option of the holders, into shares of common stock of the
Company, at a per share conversion price determined by dividing the stated value of each share of Series A
Preferred Stock by the average price at which shares of the Company’s common stock were sold over the 30-
day period prior to the conversion, minus a 25.0% discount to such 30-day average price (the “Conversion
Price”). Notwithstanding the foregoing, at no time shall the Conversion Price be less than $1.00 or greater
than $3.70 per share.
The Company may redeem all or any portion of the Series A Preferred Stock at any time after August 31, 2014,
or at any time if the Company’s common stock has traded at a rate of more than 10,000 shares per day for at
least 30 consecutive days and the average trading price of the common stock (based on a 30-day moving
average) is greater than $5.00 per share. The Series A Preferred Stock shall be redeemed by conversion into
common stock of the Company. The Series A Preferred Stock redeemed shall be converted into shares of
common stock of the Company at a per share conversion price determined by dividing the stated value of
each share of Series A Preferred Stock by the Conversion Price. Notwithstanding the foregoing, at no time
shall the Conversion Price used to determine the rate at which the Series A Preferred Stock shall be
redeemed be less than $1.00 or greater than $3.70 per share. The holders of the Series A Preferred Stock shall
have no voting rights, except as provided by Nevada law.
The holders of the Series A Preferred Stock shall be entitled to receive cumulative dividends on the Series A
Preferred Stock at the rate of ten percent (10.0%) of the stated value per share per annum, payable quarterly.
As of September 30, 2012, the Company completed the sale of 285,000 units (the “Units”), each unit
consisting of one share of Series A Preferred Stock, with a stated value of $1.00 per share and one warrant
exercisable to acquire one-tenth of a share of the Company’s common stock at a price of $3.70 per share for a
period of 3 years from the closing date, in exchange for gross proceeds of $285,000. The convertible
preferred stock was recorded as a liability at the fair value of $380,000 in accordance with FASB ASC 480.
On December 19, 2012, the Company entered into letter agreements with the five unaffiliated holders of all
285,000 shares of the Company’s issued and outstanding Series A Preferred Stock (the “Preferred
Shareholders”), each with a face value of $1.00 per share. Pursuant to the Letter Agreements, the Company
and the Preferred Shareholders agreed to the conversion of all of the issued and outstanding Preferred
Shares, along with all accrued dividends on the Preferred Shares through December 31, 2012, into shares of
the Company’s common stock. The total amount of accrued dividends on the Preferred Shares through
December 31, 2012 equals $9,515 (the “Dividends”) (see also NOTE 12 COMMON STOCK).
F-19
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
Notwithstanding the terms contained in the Company’s Certificate of Designation, filed on August 31, 2012
with the Nevada Secretary of State, relating to the conversion of the Preferred Shares, the Company and the
Preferred Shareholders agreed to a conversion rate of $1.60 per share applicable to the conversion of the
Series A Preferred Stock and the Dividends. The Series A Preferred Stock and the Dividends were converted
at the $1.60 per share rate into 184,072 shares of the common stock. According to FASB ASC 480, upon
issuance of the shares to settle the obligation of $380,000, equity is increased by the amount of the liability.
Therefore, the value of the 184,072 shares issued was recorded at the fair value plus accrued interest amount
for a total of $389,515 or $2.12 per share.
In consideration of the Preferred Shareholders’ conversion of the Series A Preferred Stock and the Dividends
into the 184,072 shares of common stock, the Company agreed to use its commercially reasonable efforts to
include the Conversion Shares in any registration by the Company of any of its securities, other than a
registration relating solely to employee benefit plans, a registration relating to the offer and sale of debt
securities, a registration relating to a corporate reorganization or other Rule 145 transaction, or a registration
on any registration form that does not permit secondary sales.
NOTE 12COMMON STOCK
Common Stock Issued During the Year Ended December 31, 2012
The Company issued 1,806,203 shares of common stock to unaffiliated investors for a value of $4,394,148 at a
price between $1.60 and $2.50 per share. The issuance of these shares related to purchases of various
working interests in oil and gas properties and cancelation of JIBs receivables.
The Company issued 282,511 shares of common stock to a related party for a value of $567,000 at a price
between $1.60 and $2.50 per share. The issuance of these shares related to purchases of various working
interests in oil and gas properties. (SEE NOTE 16 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS).
The Company issued 1,443,378 shares of common stock to directors, employees, and consultants as
compensation for services valued at $3,609,444 at a price between $1.50 and $2.50 per share. The shares
issued were fully vested and the value of services was expensed on the day of grant. In addition, the
Company granted warrants to purchase up to 650,000 shares of common stock to certain consultants. The
warrants have an exercise price between $2.50 and $12.50 that vest over two years from April 2012 and June
2012 and expire between March 2015 and June 2015. The warrants were valued under the Black-Scholes
valuation model based on factors that were present at the time the warrants were granted (see NOTE 13
WARRANTS TO PURCHASE COMMON STOCK). These warrants are being expensed over the two year
vesting periods.
The Company issued 1,335,277 shares of common stock to unaffiliated investors for cash of $3,127,252 at a
price between $1.60 and $2.50 per share. In addition, the company granted warrants to purchase up to
935,196 shares of common stock with an exercise price between $2.50 and $5.00 per share and expire
between January 2013 and July 2015.
The Company issued 77,950 shares of common stock to an unaffiliated investor and a creditor for a value of
$194,875 or $2.50 per share. These shares were issued as negotiated payments for settlement of outstanding
obligations including accrued interest.
The Company issued 403,650 shares of common stock valued at $949,932 at a price between $1.60 and $2.50
per share to various noteholders pursuant to the exercising of their rights to convert certain notes payable
and the prepayment of interest on a note payable.
The Company issued 7,193 shares of common stock to a related party, related to the exercise of warrants in
settlement of interest outstanding on a note payable. The exercise price was $11,509 or $1.60 per share (see
NOTE 16 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS).
A former officer and director of the Company, voluntarily agreed to return to the Company, 25,000 shares of
the Company’s common stock valued at $62,500 or $2.50 per share, to offset a portion of the independent
audit fees recently incurred by the Company to complete the 2010 audit of Freedom, which was required by
Rule 8-04 of Regulation S-X of the Exchange Act.
F-20
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
The Company received 229,000 shares of common stock from an entity and one of our shareholders valued
at $572,500 or $2.50 as partial payment for the sale of certain working interests in oil and gas properties. The
shares were returned to the Company and subsequently cancelled.
The Company issued 184,072 shares of common stock valued at $389,515 or $2.12 per share to five
unaffiliated investors, relating to our redemption and conversion of all 285,000 shares of preferred stock that
were outstanding, together with accrued preferred stock dividends totaling $9,515, at a conversion rate of
$1.60 per share.
Unaffiliated investors and a related party assigned warrants to purchase 143,213 shares of our common stock
to several unaffiliated investors and a related party for a total cash consideration of $28,642 or $0.20 per
warrant. These warrants were then exercised to purchase 143,213 shares of our common stock for a total
cash consideration of $229,141 or $1.60 per share (see NOTE 16 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS).
Common Stock Issued During the Year Ended December 31, 2013
The Company issued 1,166,750 shares of common stock to unaffiliated investors and one director for cash of
$1,069,000 at a price between $0.80 and $2.50 per share. In addition, the Company granted warrants to
purchase up to 765,375 shares of common stock with an exercise price between $0.50 and $2.50 per share
that expire between April 2013 and June 2014. Subsequent to the original issuance, warrants that were
granted with an exercise price of $2.50 per share were repriced to $1.00 per share and warrants that expired in
April 2013 were extended to December 2013 (see NOTE 13 WARRANTS TO PURCHASE COMMON STOCK
and NOTE 16 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS).
The Company issued 4,512,874 shares of common stock to unaffiliated debt holders at a negotiated and
contract price between $0.12 and $2.50 per share for the extinguishment, reduction or settlement of notes
payable, accrued interest, extension and conversion incentives, and issuance of new debt. The fair value of
these shares at the time of issuance was $2,633,407. In addition, the Company granted warrants to purchase
up to 3,044,853 shares of common stock with an exercise price at $1.00 that expire between April 2014 and
December 2014.
The Company issued 10,000 shares of common stock at a negotiated price of $0.80 per share as partial
consideration for the purchase of two leases in the HUOP Freedom Trend Project. The fair value of these
shares at the time of purchase was $8,500.
The Company issued 1,102,064 shares of common stock at a negotiated settlement price between $0.80 and
$2.50 per share to creditors, consultants, directors, officers and other employees as payment for outstanding
payables. The fair value of the shares at the time of conversion was $888,807. In addition, the Company
granted warrants to certain consultants to purchase up to 21,250 shares of common stock with an exercise
price of $1.00 that expire in June 2014.
The Company issued 561,307 shares of common stock at a negotiated price between $0.25 and $2.50 per
share to consultants and directors as compensation for services. The shares issued were fully vested and the
fair value of the shares issued in the amount of $345,592 was expensed on the date of grant.
The Company issued 61,209 shares of common stock to two unaffiliated investors as the result of a ratchet
provision on stock that was purchased for $5.00 per share that required the Company to issue additional
shares of stock at no cost to the investor to make the effective price per share $2.50.
Two unaffiliated investors returned 25,626 shares of common stock, valued at $25,626, or $1.00 per share, and
paid us $120,000 in cash to purchase a 20.00% working interest in our Wasatch National Forest #16-15 Well
for a total value of $145,626. The shares were returned to the Company and subsequently cancelled.
The Company has 5,039,758 shares of common stock outstanding which were issued pursuant to written
subscription agreements. As part of the agreements, a ratchet provision was included that in the event the
Company sells shares of common stock or convertible securities at any time prior to December 31, 2013 at a
price per share less than the respective subscription price of $0.60 to $0.80 per share, the Company
contractually agrees to issue an additional amount of shares of common stock to make the effective price of
the shares of common stock equal to the price per share of common stock that were sold for less than the
subscription price.
F-21
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
These ratchet provisions are accounted for under the provisions of FASB ASC 815 which dictate the
provisions to be accounted as embedded derivatives. These standards require the Company to determine the
fair value of the ratchet provision and record a corresponding derivative liability in the financial statements.
(See NOTE 17 FAIR VALUE). As of December 31, 2013, the Company is required to issue 816,200 shares of
common stock under the terms of the ratchet provision. The Company issued shares of common stock
pursuant to the ratchet provision in January 2014 (See NOTE 20 SUBSEQUENT EVENTS).
Treasury Stock
As of December 31, 2013 the Company had no shares of common stock held as treasury stock. During the
year ended December 31, 2013 the Company acquired 25,626 shares of common stock valued at $25,626 or
$1.00 per share. The Company retired all 25,626 shares during the year ended December 31 2013. During the
year ended December 31, 2012 the Company acquired 254,000 shares of common stock valued at $635,000 or
$2.50 per share. The Company retired all 254,000 shares during the year ended December 31, 2012. The
Company accounts for treasury stock using the cost method.
NOTE 13WARRANTS TO PURCHASE COMMON STOCK
As of December 31, 2013 and December 31, 2012, there were 5,361,587 and 2,166,874 warrants to purchase
shares of common stock outstanding and fully vested, respectively. During the years ended December 31,
2013 and 2012, warrants totaling 4,451,478 and 2,037,497 for shares of common stock were granted.
During the year ended December 31, 2013, certain previously issued warrants with an exercise price between
$1.00 and $5.00 and an expiration date between April 2013 and January 2014 were modified to an exercise
price between $0.50 and $1.00 and an expiration date of June 2014. The fair value of the modification in the
amount of $184,477 was expensed.
Of the total warrants granted during the year ended December 31, 2013, 765,375 warrants were granted in
conjunction with private placements of common stock for cash proceeds (see NOTE 12 COMMON STOCK)
that have an exercise price of between $0.50 and $2.50 per share and expire between December 2013 and
June 2014.
Of the total warrants granted during the year ended December 31, 2012, 935,196 warrants were granted in
conjunction with private placements of common stock for cash proceeds (see NOTE 12 COMMON STOCK)
that have an exercise price between $2.50 and $5.00 per share and expire one to three years from the date of
grant and 85,000 warrants were granted in conjunction with a debt settlement that have an exercise price of
$2.50 per share and will expire one year from the date of grant.
The remaining 3,686,103 and 1,017,301 warrants granted during the years ended December 31, 2013 and
2012, respectively, were issued in conjunction with issuance and extinguishment of certain debt, payment for
services, property purchased from the Company and issuance of preferred stock. These transactions are
accounted for by the Company under the provisions of FASB ASC 470 and FASB ASC 505. These standards
require the Company to record an expense associated with the fair value of stock-based payments.  The
Company uses the Black-Scholes option valuation model to calculate the fair value of stock-based payments
at the date of grant.  Warrant pricing models require the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the
expected price volatility.  For warrants granted, the Company used a variety of comparable and peer
companies as well as its own stock trading history to determine the expected volatility.  The Company
believes that when its own stock trading history did not exist, the use of peer company data fairly represented
the expected volatility it would experience if the Company were actively publicly traded in the oil and gas
industry over the contractual term of the warrants. Changes in these assumptions can materially affect the fair
value estimate.
During the year ended December 31, 2013, the Company has determined the fair value of the 3,686,103
warrants granted to be $632,651, of which $617,276 has been expensed as of December 31, 2013. The
remaining $15,375 will be expensed in future periods.
During the year ended December 31, 2012, the Company has determined the fair value of the 1,071,301
warrants granted to be $752,503, of which $448,096 has been expensed as of December 31, 2012. The
remaining $304,407 is attributable to forfeited warrants and will not be expensed in future periods.
F-22
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
The following is the weighted average of the assumptions used in calculating the fair value of the warrants
granted during the year using the Black-Scholes model:
Years Ended
December 31,
 
 
 2013
 
Fair market value  $0.63
 
Exercise price
 $1.00
 
    
 
%   0.36
   0.12
Risk free rates
%   0.00
Dividend yield
   0.00
Expected volatility   112.51 %   72.96
Contractual term    1.00 Year
%
%
%
   2.89 Years
2012
 $2.46
 $5.83
F-23
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
The weighted-average fair market value at the date of grant for warrants granted are as follows:
$0.1716
 
Fair value per warrant
Total warrants granted
   3,686,103    1,017,301 
Total fair value of warrants granted $632,651   $752,503
$0.7397
Warrants
 
  
 
  
As of December 31, 2012:
  1,269,693   $ 2.22
Warrants outstanding as of January 1, 2012
  2,037,497   $ 4.84
Granted
  (440,003 ) $ (1.60
Exercised
Expired/Forfeited
  (700,313 ) $ (7.14
Warrants outstanding as of December 31, 2012  2,166,874   $ 3.22
   
 
   
As of December 31, 2013:
  2,166,874   $ 3.22
Warrants outstanding as of January 1, 2013
  4,451,478   $ 1.00
Granted
  -
Exercised
Expired
  (1,256,765) $ (2.13
Warrants outstanding as of December 31, 2013  5,361,587   $ 1.27
$ -
Weighted-
Weighted-  Average
  Average   Remainder
  Exercise   Contractual
  Price
Term in Year 
 
   
 
   
 
    1.38
    1.90
 
 
)   -
 
)   -
 
    1.32
     
 
 
     
 
    1.32
    1.00
 
 
    -
 
)   -
    0.63
NOTE 14EMPLOYEE STOCK OPTIONS
In May 2013, the Company announced the appointment of Alan D. Gaines as Chairman of the Board of
Directors and as part of his compensation package, the Company awarded Mr. Gaines 3,500,000 common
stock options with an exercise price of $1.00 and which expire in May 2020. The options vest 50% upon the
earlier of six months or the Company obtaining funding in excess of $3 million, 25% after one year and 25%
after two years. The Company accounts for employee stock options according to FASB ASC 718 which
requires the Company to calculate the fair value of the stock option on the date of grant and amortize over the
vesting period of the options.
The following are the assumptions used in calculating the fair value of the options granted on May 6, 2013
using the Black-Scholes model:
Fair market value  $0.90
 $1.00
Exercise price
   0.11
Risk free rate
Dividend yield
   0.00
Expected volatility   71.29
Expected life
%
%
%
   4.08 Years
The Company used a variety of comparable and peer companies to determine the expected volatility.  The
Company believes the use of peer company data fairly represents the expected volatility it would experience
if the Company was more actively publicly traded in the oil and gas industry over the expected life of the
options. The Company has no historical data regarding the expected life of the options and therefore used
the simplified method of calculating the expected life. The risk free rate was calculated using the U.S.
Treasury constant maturity rates similar to the expected life of the options, as published by the Federal
Reserve. The Company has no plans to declare any future dividends.
F-24
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
The following table summarizes the Company’s total option activity for the year ended December 31, 2013:
Options outstanding as of December 31, 2012  -
Granted
Exercised
Forfeited/Expired
Options outstanding as of December 31, 2013  3,500,000  $ 1.00
3,500,000  $ 1.00
  -
  -
Options
-
-
-
-
Exercise Price  Remaining Term in Years
7.00
   
   
    6.35
-
-
Outstanding and exercisable stock options as of December 31, 2013 are as follows:
Options Outstanding
Number of Options
Outstanding
3,500,000
Remaining Life
  
(Years)
  6.35
Exercise Price
$1.00
Options Exercisable
Number of Options
  
Exercisable
  1,750,000
$1.00
Exercise Price
The estimated fair value of the Company stock options, less expected forfeitures, is amortized over the
options vesting period on the straight-line basis. The Company recognized the following equity-based
compensation expenses during the year ended December 31, 2013:
Year Ended
 
 December 31, 2013
Stock based compensation expense
Income tax benefit recognized related to stock-based compensation   
Income tax benefit realized from the exercising and vesting of options
-
-
$ 795,009
As of December 31, 2013, there was $795,009 of total unrecognized compensation cost with a remaining
vesting period of 1.42 years.
As of December 31, 2013, the intrinsic value of outstanding and vested stock options was as follows:
December 31,
 
 
2013
Intrinsic value – options outstanding  
Intrinsic value – options exercisable  
Intrinsic value – options exercised
-
-
-
NOTE 15     INCOME TAXES
The Company utilizes the asset and liability approach to measuring deferred tax assets and liabilities based
on temporary differences existing at each balance sheet date using currently enacted tax rates in accordance
with FASB ASC 740. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of
management, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted for the effects of changes in tax laws and rates on the date of
enactment.
The income tax expense for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012 consists of the following:
2013   2012 
 
 $1,567  $400 
Current income taxes
Deferred income taxes
   -
 
     Provision for income taxes $1,567  $400
-
F-25
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
The following is a reconciliation of the reported amount of income tax expense (benefit) for the years ended
December 31, 2013 and 2012 to the amount of income tax expenses that would result from applying the
statutory rate to pretax income.
Reconciliation of reported amount of income tax expense for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012
consists of the following:
2012
2013
 
 
 $(6,798,017)  $(7,992,796)
Income (Loss) before taxes and net operating loss
Federal statutory rate
   @34
%
      Taxes (benefit) computed at federal statutory rates   (2,311,326)    (2,717,550)
      State taxes (benefit), net of federal taxes
   (224,334 )    (263,362 )
 
    
    
      Effects of:
 
 
   4,683,347  
   314,993
      Share-based compensation
 
      Other permanent differences
   585,496
   126,844
 
   567,707
   -
      Freedom acquisition
 
 
   (2,396,586)
   1,636,738  
      Increase (decrease) in valuation allowance
 
    
 
    
 
      Reported Expense  
 $1,567
 
 $400
%   @34
At December 31, 2013 and 2012, the Company has net operating loss carry forwards for Federal income tax
purposes of $28,725,339 and $22,546,058, respectively, which expire in varying amounts during the tax years
2017 through 2033. As a result of the Freedom acquisition in 2011 and the corresponding change in
ownership, approximately $7,439,758 of the Company’s federal NOL’s are subject to a Section 382 limitation
resulting in possible limitations on the future use of these net operating loss carry forwards.
The components of the Company’s deferred tax assets for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012 are
as follows:
Deferred tax assets
 
Current:
 
Accrued payroll
 
Current
 
 
Non-current:
 
Net operating loss carry forwards (NOLs)   10,714,551    8,409,680  
   (257,081 )   (125,479 )
Fixed assets
Oil & gas properties
   (3,229,857 )   (2,939,716)
 
   7,624
Other
2012
   
   
  $256,057
    256,057
2013
  
  
 $138,825
   138,825
136,781
Non-current
 
Total deferred tax assets
Less: valuation allowance
Net deferred tax asset
7,235,237     5,481,266  
    
 
   7,374,062     5,737,323  
   (7,374,062 )   (5,737,323)
 $-
$-
To date, the Company has generated operating losses. As a result the Company has recorded a full valuation
allowance against its net deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2013 and 2012. The change in the valuation
allowance for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012 was $1,636,739 and ($2,396,586), respectively.
Under FASB ASC 740, tax benefits are recognized only for tax positions that are more likely than not to be
sustained upon examination by tax authorities.  The amount recognized is measured as the largest amount of
benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement.  Unrecognized tax
benefits are tax benefits claimed in the Company’s tax returns that do not meet these recognition and
measurement standards. As of December 31, 2013 and 2012, the Company has no liabilities for unrecognized
tax benefits.
The Company’s policy is to recognize potential interest and penalties accrued related to unrecognized tax
benefits within income tax expense.  For the years ended December 31, 2013, and 2012, the Company did not
recognize any interest or penalties in its consolidated statement of operations, nor did it have any interest or
penalties accrued in its consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2013 and 2012 relating to unrecognized
tax benefits.
F-26
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
The tax years 2013, 2012, 2011, 2010, 2009 and 2008 remain open to examination for federal income tax
purposes and by the other major taxing jurisdictions to which the Company is subject. In addition, due to the
fact the Company merged with Freedom, Freedom’s tax returns, prior to the merger, for years 2004 to 2011
also remain open.
NOTE 16 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions
Each of the related-party transactions described below were reviewed and approved by a majority vote of the
Board of Directors and were completed on the same terms as other independent third-party transactions at or
around the time of the transaction. With respect to transactions in which the related party is also a member of
the Board of Directors, such director abstained from voting to approve the transaction.
A.Douglas C. Hewitt, Sr., President, Chief Executive Officer and Director
Affiliates of Douglas C. Hewitt, Sr., our President and Chief Executive Officer and one of our Directors, have
entered into a variety of transactions with Richfield as described below.
The D. Mack Trust
Mr. Hewitt is the sole beneficiary of The D. Mack Trust, an irrevocable trust established by Mr. Hewitt on May
15, 2009.
●
As of March 31, 2014, the D. Mack Trust had ORRIs ranging from 0.50% to 3.625% in 1,636 net acres leased by
Richfield in Kansas and Oklahoma, all of which were in place prior to January 1, 2012 or were purchased from
MacKov in November 2012 (as described in further detail below).
The D. Mack Trust received $23,284 and $12,489 in royalties in 2013 and 2012, respectively, from the
overriding royalty interests described above.
Mountain Home Petroleum Business Trust
Mr. Hewitt was a 33.4% beneficiary of, and a trustee of, the Mountain Home Petroleum Business Trust, a Utah
business trust (“Mountain Home”) during the period beginning January 1, 2011 and ending December 31,
2012. On December 19, 2012, Mr. Hewitt resigned as a Trustee of Mountain Home and as of December 31,
2012, Mr. Hewitt was no longer a beneficiary of Mountain Home.
Prior to January 1, 2012, Mountain Home obtained the overriding royalty interests in conjunction with the
establishment of the Utah Overthrust Agreement and the Liberty Prospect Agreement. No oil or natural gas
has been extracted from the HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect or the HPI Liberty #1 Well and Liberty Prospect
and therefore no royalties have been paid on those prospects.
Zions Energy Corporation
Zions Energy Corporation, a Utah corporation (“Zions”), is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Mountain Home and
was affiliated with Mr. Hewitt by virtue of his beneficial interest in Mountain Home. Mr. Hewitt’s beneficial
interest in Zions terminated concurrently with the termination of his affiliation with Mountain Home.
Richfield participated in the following transactions with Zions in 2012:
In three transactions in February and March 2012, Richfield sold an aggregate of 1.00% working interest in the
●
●Moroni #1-AXZH Well and the 320 acres leasehold for total cash consideration of $77,561 to Zions. This purchase
was made on the same terms as other third-party transactions that were completed in December 2011 and January
2012;
In two transactions in February and March 2012, Richfield sold an aggregate of 3.00% working interest in the
Koelsch Field, including the requirement to participate in the RFO Koelsch #25-1 Well, for total cash consideration
of $9,090 to Zions. This purchase was made on the same terms as other third-party transactions that were
completed in December 2011 and March 2012;
In May 2012, Richfield received $50,000 in cash plus it acquired a 1.00% working interest in the Moroni #1-AXZH
Well and the 320 acres leasehold from Zions in exchange for a 1.50% carried interest in the first well to be drilled in
the shallow zone on the HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect. This exchange was made on the same terms as another
third-party transaction that was completed in May 2012; and
In August 2012, Zions loaned us $50,000 and we issued a Note Payable to Zions at 6.0% per annum, due
September 30, 2012. In conjunction with the loan, we granted warrants to purchase 15,000 shares of our common
stock, exercisable at $5.00 per share and expiring on September 29, 2013. The warrants were valued at $3.68 using
the Black-Scholes option valuation model and were expensed on the date of grant. We repaid the note in September
2012, including $247 in interest.
●
●
During 2012, Zions received $4,662 in revenues from oil sales from our Koelsch Field.
F-27
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
B.Glenn G. MacNeil, Chief Financial Officer and  Director
Glenn G MacNeil, our Chief Financial Officer and one of our Directors, along with his spouse, owns 100% of
the ownership interests in MacKov Investments Limited, an Ontario, Canada incorporated private company
(“MacKov”).
Richfield participated in the following transactions with MacKov between January 1, 2012 and March 31, 2014:
●
●In November 2012, MacKov sold ORRIs ranging from 0.25% to 2.25% in 1,127 net acres of oil and natural gas
properties located in Kansas to the D. Mack Trust and one unaffiliated investor;
In February 2012, MacKov purchased a 1.50% working interest in the Koelsch Field from Richfield for cash of
$4,545. In October 2012, MacKov sold all of its 5.00% working interest in the Koelsch Field to Richfield for $262,500.
The consideration consisted of MacKov exercising 154,753 outstanding warrants to purchase 154,753 shares of our
common stock valued at $247,605 or $1.60 per share and our issuance of 5,958 shares of our common stock valued
at $14,895 or $2.50 per share. Each of these transactions were completed on the same terms as other independent
third-party transactions in the Koelsch Field at or around the time of the transaction;
In October 2012, MacKov sold all of its 1.00% carried working interest BPO and APO in the HPI Liberty #1 Well, its
1.00% working interest BPO and APO in the Liberty Prospect, its 2.25% working interest BPO and 1.75% working
interest APO in the HPI Liberty #1 Well and Liberty Prospect to Richfield in exchange for 96,800 shares of common
stock, valued at $242,000 or $2.50 per share. Each of these transactions were completed on the same terms as our
●
other independent third-party transactions at or around the time of the transactions;
In October 2012, MacKov sold all of its 0.50% working interest in the deep zones and its 0.25% working interest in
the shallow zones of the HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect to Richfield in exchange for 25,000 shares of common
stock, valued at $62,500 or $2.50 per share. Each of these transactions were completed on the same terms as our
other independent third-party transactions at or around the time of the transaction;
In February 2012, MacKov purchased a 0.50% working interest in the Moroni #1-AXZH Well and the 320 acre
leasehold from Richfield for cash of $38,781. This purchase was made on the same terms as other independent
third-party transactions in the Independence Field that were completed at or around the time of the transaction. On
June 30, 2012, in connection with our sale to Skyline Oil, MacKov sold its 0.50% working interest in the Moroni #1-
AXZH Well and the surrounding 320 acres to Skyline Oil;
On June 30, 2012, MacKov settled a short term loan in the amount of $217,050 along with $82,172 of interest for a
total of $299,222 for consideration consisting of a payment from Richfield to MacKov of $287,713 in cash and
MacKov’s election to exercise warrants to purchase 7,193 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $11,509
or $1.60 per share. Each of these transactions were completed on the same terms as our other independent third-
party loan transactions at or around the time of the transaction;
In November 2012, MacKov granted a demand loan to Richfield in the amount of $65,000 with interest accruing at
10.0% per annum, secured by a 1% working interest in certain HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect leases (the “MacKov
Demand Note”). On December 31, 2012, the Company paid all accrued interest under the MacKov Demand Note, in
the amount of $727 and the principle was transferred to an independent third party.
●
●
●
●
As of December 31, 2013, MacKov has no working interests or ORRIs in oil or natural gas properties that we
control or in which we own an interest and MacKov has no warrants outstanding to purchase our common
stock.
For the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, MacKov received $0 and $12,642, respectively, in royalties
relating to ORRIs and oil sales from working interest from Kansas leases including the Koelsch Field that
were previously owned by MacKov.
F-28
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
C.Joseph P. Tate, a Director
Joseph P. Tate became one of our directors effective March 31, 2012. Mr. Tate has entered into the following
transactions with Richfield between January 1, 2012 and December 31, 2013:
Mr. Tate is a beneficial owner of land within the HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect. The Company has entered into
two oil and natural gas leases with Mr. Tate totaling 1,816 acres (the “Tate Leases”). The Tate Leases consist of i) a
new lease the Company entered into in March 2012 relating to 400 acres, for $100,000; and ii) the renewal of an
existing lease the Company entered into on March 2012 for a five-year term relating to 1,416 acres, for $283,200.
The total amount of $383,200 was paid to Mr. Tate through the issuance of 153,280 shares of common stock, valued
at $2.50 per share. Pursuant to the terms of each Tate Lease, Mr. Tate is entitled to 12.50% landowner royalty-
●
●
interest revenues relating to hydrocarbons produced by Richfield relating to each of the Tate Leases (See NOTE 20
SUBSEQUENT EVENTS for new lease agreement). No oil or natural gas has been extracted from the HUOP
Freedom Trend Prospect and therefore the Company has not paid Mr. Tate any landowner royalties with respect to
the Tate Leases;
●In March 2012, Mr. Tate and Richfield agreed to the repayment of a $100,000 outstanding payable, including interest
of $18,000, through the issuance of 47,200 shares of common stock, valued at $118,000, or $2.50 per share.
In October 2012, MacKov assigned warrants to purchase 88,057 shares of common stock to Joseph P. Tate and
several unaffiliated investors for total cash consideration of $17,611, or $0.20 per warrant. Mr. Tate and the other
unaffiliated investors then exercised the warrants to purchase 88,057 shares of common stock for total cash
consideration of $140,889, or $1.60 per share.
In May 2013, Mr. Tate purchased 250,000 shares of common stock of the Company for cash in the amount of
$200,000, or $0.80 per share. The shares are subject to a ratchet provision that in the event the Company sells
shares of common stock or convertible securities at any time prior to December 31, 2013 at a price per share less
than $0.80, the Company shall issue an additional amount of shares of common stock to make the effective price of
the shares of common stock equal to the price per share of common stock that were sold for less than $0.80. In
addition, the Company granted warrants to Mr. Tate to purchase up to 125,000 shares of common stock with an
exercise price of $1.00 that expire in May 2014. In January 2014, 262,821 shares of common stock were issued
pursuant to the terms of this provision.
●
D.Alan G. Gaines, Chairman of the Board
Alan D. Gaines, Chairman of the Board of Directors, is a party to the following transaction with the Company
between January 1, 2012 and December 31, 2014:
●
In May 2013, the Company announced the appointment of Alan D. Gaines as Chairman of the Board of Directors
and as part of his compensation package, the Company awarded Mr. Gaines 3,500,000 common stock options with
an exercise price of $1.00 and expire in May 2020. The options vest 50% upon the earlier of six months or the
Company obtaining funding in excess of $3 million, 25% after one year and 25% after two years. In January 2014,
the options were cancelled and 4,908,532 shares of common stock were issued at value of $1,472,560 or $0.30 per
share (See NOTE 20 SUBSEQUENT EVENTS).
NOTE 17FAIR VALUE
FASB ASC 820 defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value under U.S. generally
accepted accounting principles and enhances disclosures about fair value measurements.  Fair value is
defined under FASB ASC 820 as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a
liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly
transaction between market participants on the measurement date.  Valuation techniques used to measure
fair value under FASB ASC 820 must maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of
unobservable inputs.  The standard describes a fair value hierarchy based on three levels of inputs, with the
first two inputs considered observable and the last input considered unobservable, that may be used to
measure fair value as follows:
●Level one — Quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities;
●Level two — Inputs other than level one inputs that are either directly or indirectly observable; and
●Level three — Unobservable inputs developed using estimates and assumptions, which are developed by the
reporting entity and reflect those assumptions that a market participant would use.
F-29
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
Determining which category an asset or liability falls within the hierarchy requires significant judgment. The
Company evaluates its hierarchy disclosures each quarter. The Company has two liabilities measured at fair
value, the Company’s asset retirement obligation (See NOTE 10 ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATIONS) and a
derivative liability in connection with a ratchet provision on certain issuances of the Company’s common
stock (see NOTE 12 COMMON STOCK). The Company has no assets that are measured at fair value.
The fair value of the Company’s asset retirement obligations are determined using discounted cash flow
methodologies based on inputs that are not readily available in public markets. These estimates are derived
from historical costs as well as management’s expectation of future costs environments. As there is no
corroborating market activity to support the assumptions used, the Company has designated these liabilities
as Level 3. A reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of the Company’s asset retirement
obligation is presented in NOTE 10 ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATIONS.
The fair value of the Company’s derivative liability was determined using estimates and assumptions that are
not readily available in public markets and has designated this liability as Level 3. As of December 31, 2013
the derivative liability had an estimated fair value of $310,156. The following table presents a reconciliation of
the beginning and ending balances of our derivative liability, as of December 31, 2013:
$-
 
Balance at December 31, 2012
   1,066,932 
New Derivative Liability
   -
 
Transfers to (from) Level 3
Total (gains)/losses included in earnings   (756,776 )
 
Issuances
   -
    
 
 
Balance at December 31, 2013
 $310,156
NOTE 18FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND CONCENTRATION RISKS
The Company’s financial instruments include cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable and accounts
payable. The carrying amount of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, and accounts payable
approximate fair value because of their immediate or short-term maturities.
Substantially all of the Company’s accounts receivable result from oil and natural gas sales or joint interest
billings to third parties in the oil and gas industry.  This concentration of customers and joint interest owners
may impact the Company’s overall credit risk in that these entities may be similarly affected by changes in
economic and other conditions. As of December 31, 2013, 70% of the accounts receivable balance resulted
from three entities.  As of December 31, 2012, 71% of the accounts receivable balances were resulted from
two entities.  Historically, the Company has not experienced significant credit losses on such
receivables.  There was no bad debt recorded against accounts receivable for the years ended December 31,
2013 and 2012.  The Company cannot ensure that such losses will not be realized in the future.  For the years
ended December 31, 2013 and 2012 the percentage of revenues resulting from producing wells in Kansas
was 99% and 100%, respectively.
NOTE 19LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
On February 1, 2012, Nostra Terra Oil & Gas Company (“NTOG”) filed an action against Richfield, Hewitt
Petroleum, Inc., Hewitt Energy Group, Inc., and Hewitt Energy Group, LLC in the Twenty-Third Judicial District
Court of Russell County, Kansas. The complaint alleges that we defaulted on our repayment obligations
under a note and security agreement, dated April 13, 2011, in the principal amount of $1,300,000 and accrued
interest at 10% per annum. During 2013 the Company made substantial payments towards the payment of the
obligation. On February 14, 2014 the Court entered a final judgment in favor of Nostra Terra Oil and Gas
Company and against Richfield Oil & Gas Company and Hewitt Energy Group, Inc. in the sum of $220,849.
The Company is in the process of paying the judgment.
F-30
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
On September 30, 2013 Roger Buller filed an action against Richfield Oil & Gas Company in the Twentieth
Judicial District Court of Russell County, Kansas. The case was filed based on a claimed failure to pay a Note
in full. Richfield contends that the Note has been paid in full by the issuance of Richfield Common Stock
which was accepted by Mr. Buller for the payment of the Note. The action requests the sum of $50,386 plus
interest. The Company believes that this claim was paid in full in September 2011 and plans on vigorously
defending the action.
In February 2014, the Company became aware that on June 6, 2012, United States Fidelity and Guaranty
Company filed an action against Douglas C. Hewitt based upon a liability as a guarantor of a plugging bond
posted with the Oklahoma Corporation Commission. The Oklahoma Corporation Commission claimed the
Bond for plugging a well previously owned by HEGCO Canada and Hewitt Energy Group LLC. Hewitt
Petroleum, Inc., the predecessor in interest to Richfield Oil & Gas Company, purchased the assets of Hewitt
Energy in January 2009. Pursuant to that purchase Hewitt Petroleum agreed to indemnify Douglas C. Hewitt.
The Bond was guaranteed by HEGCO Canada Inc., which has been discharged in Bankruptcy, Douglas C.
Hewitt, J. David Gowdy, Rodney Babb, and Nemaha Services. The Company is seeking contribution towards
the judgment from Rodney Babb and Nemaha Services. As of March 17, 2014 the Company has paid $1,500
towards the obligation. The total obligation is $30,754.
At a hearing with the Kansas Corporation Commission (“KCC”) on November 21, 2013 the KCC imposed a
$10,000 fine against Hewitt Energy Group, Inc., for the failure to bring certain wells into KCC compliance
pursuant to an order issued in August 2012. The Company had brought 16 of 23 wells into KCC compliance
as of November 21, 2013. At the November 21, 2013 KCC hearing Hewitt Energy Group, Inc., was provided
three weeks per well to finalize the last seven wells to be brought into compliance. In February 2014 Hewitt
Energy Group, Inc. was granted an additional three weeks due to local weather conditions. As of March 31,
2014 Hewitt Energy Group Inc. has brought four of the last seven wells into compliance. The remaining three
wells are required to be completed by May 23, 2014. If the wells are not in compliance by May 23, 2014, Hewitt
Energy Group’s operating license may be suspended until the wells are in compliance and Hewitt Energy
Group may be fined. The Company is currently working to bring the last three wells into KCC compliance.
Litigation in the Ordinary Course
We have become involved in litigation from time to time relating to claims arising in the ordinary course of our
business. We do not believe that the ultimate resolution of such claims would have a material effect on our
business, results of operations, financial condition or cash flows. However, the results of these matters
cannot be predicted with certainty, and an unfavorable resolution of one or more of these matters could have
a material effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
F-31
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
NOTE 20 SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
In January 2014, The Company issued 3,969,408 shares of common stock to unaffiliated investors and one
director pursuant to a ratchet provision on stock that was previously issued with written subscription
agreements (see NOTE 12 COMMON STOCK).The ratchet provision expired on December 31, 2013 with the
terms of the provision requiring 816,200 shares of common stock be issued to make the effective price of the
original issuances of stock equal to $0.60 per share. However, in January 2014, the Company determined to
issue 3,153,208 additional shares to make the effective price of the original issuances of stock equal to $0.39
per share.
In January 2014, The Board of Directors approved the cancellation of 3,500,000 outstanding employee stock
options issued to Mr. Alan G. Gaines, our Executive Chairman of the Board of Directors (see NOTE 14
EMPLOYEE STOCK OPTIONS) and the issuance to him of 4,908,532 restricted Company common stock
representing 9.9% of the Company’s common shares at the time. The stock was fully vested and the fair value
of the shares issued in the amount of $1,472,560 or $0.30 per share was expensed on the date of grant.
In January 2014, the Company issued 200,000 shares of common stock to a director for cash of $50,000 at a
price of $0.25 per share. In addition, the Company granted warrants to purchase up to 200,000 shares of
common stock with an exercise price of $0.25 per share that expire in July 2014.
In January 2014, The Company consolidated notes payable and other short term advances from and
unaffiliated investor in the amount of $2,665,747 into a convertible line of credit with interest at 12% per annum
and due on June 30, 2014. Since January 2014, additional advances in the amount of $314,744 have been
received.
In January and March 2014, the Company issued 888,598 shares of common stock to unaffiliated debt
holders at a contract price between $0.12 and $0.13 per share for the conversion of notes payable, accrued
interest, and conversion incentives. The fair value of these shares at the time of issuance was $196,614 or
between $0.21 and $0.25 per share.
In February and March 2014, the Company issued 669,167 shares of common stock to consultants as
compensation for services. The shares issued were fully vested and the fair value of the shares issued in the
amount of $166,799 or between $0.22 and $0.26 per share was expensed on the date of grant.
In March 2014, the Company issued 1,300,000 shares of common stock to unaffiliated investors pursuant to a
joint venture agreement to finish the completion of the HPI Liberty #1 Well in the Liberty Prospect. The shares
issued were fully vested and the fair value of the shares at the time of issuance was $276,380 or $0.21 per
share. In addition, the Company granted warrants to purchase up to 1,300,000 shares of common stock with
an exercise price of $0.25 that expire in August 2014.
In March 2014, the Company issued 280,000 shares of common stock to a consultant for a value of $64,400 or
$0.23 per share. These shares were issued as a negotiated payment for settlement of an outstanding payable.
In March 2014, the Company issued warrants to purchase up to 600,000 shares of common stock to an
existing debt holder as consideration to extend the due date of a note payable to December 31, 2014. The
exercise price of the warrants is $0.25 and they expire in March 2015.
In March 2014, the Company consolidated and replaced two expiring oil and gas leases with Joseph P. Tate, a
director, and Jenifer M. Tate as Joint Tenants (see NOTE 16 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS), covering a
combined 1,823 gross acres in the HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect. The initial bonus for the new lease totals
$182,308 and represents a prepayment of all delay rentals for the 10 year primary term commencing April 15,
2014. The initial bonus amount is similar to third party 10 year primary term leases obtained by the company
in the HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect during 2013.
F-32
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
NOTE 21  SUPPLEMENTAL OIL AND NATURAL GAS INFORMATION (UNAUDITED)
Oil and Natural Gas Reserves and Related Financial Data
Information with respect to the Company's crude oil and natural gas producing activities is presented in the
following tables. Reserve quantities, as well as certain information regarding future production and
discounted cash flows, were determined by Pinnacle Energy Services L.L.C. as of December 31, 2013 and
2012, an independent petroleum consultant based on information provided by the Company.
The following table sets forth the aggregate capitalized costs related to oil and natural gas producing
activities at December 31, 2013 and 2012.
2013
 
 
 $14,095,020  $14,164,053 
Unproved Oil and Gas Properties
 $7,139,663   $6,581,725  
Proved Oil and Gas Properties
Well and Related Equipment
 $1,997,913   $1,024,972  
Accumulated Depreciation, Depletion, and Amortization, and Valuation Allowances $(1,224,523 ) $(923,083 )
Net Capitalized Costs
 $22,008,073  $20,847,667
2012
The following table sets forth the costs incurred in oil and gas property acquisition, exploration and
development activities for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012.
2013
2012
 
   
 
Acquisition of Properties  
 $-
     Proved
  $2,033,125 
 $297,773   $4,368,860 
     Unproved
 $200,244   $764,417  
Exploration Costs
Development Costs
 $2,149,872  $1,849,445
The following tables present the Company's independent petroleum consultant’s estimates of our proved oil
and natural gas reserves, as of December 31, 2013 and 2012. The Company emphasizes that reserves are
approximations and are expected to change as additional information becomes available. Reservoir
engineering is a subjective process of estimating underground accumulations of crude oil and natural gas
that cannot be measured in an exact way and the accuracy of any reserve estimate is a function of the quality
of available data and of engineering and geological interpretation and judgment.
Net Proved Developed and Undeveloped Reserves at December 31, 2011  675,630     267,400
  572,988     207,369
Revisions of Previous Estimates
  -
Improved Recovery
  254,691     15,760
Purchase of Reserves in Place
Extensions, Discoveries and Other Additions
  96,440
    46,771
  (10,931 )   -
Net Production
Sale of Reserves in Place
  (20,628 )   (9,990
Net Proved Developed and Undeveloped Reserves at December 31, 2012  1,568,190    527,310
  (50,222 )   (2,310
Revisions of Previous Estimates
Natural Gas (Mcf) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
)
)
Oil (Bbl)
-
Improved Recovery
Purchase of Reserves in Place
Extensions, Discoveries and Other Additions
Net Production
Sale of Reserves in Place
Net Proved Developed and Undeveloped Reserves at December 31, 2013  1,341,000    525,000
-
  -
    -
  -
  57,508
    -
  (11,331 )   -
  (223,145 )   -
F-33
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
During 2013, several factors impacted our total Net Proved Developed and Undeveloped Reserves by the
following:
●
We modified the adjusted economic prices from $2.068/MCF for natural gas and $91.05/Bbl for oil in the Perth and
South Haven Fields, $88.45/Bbl for oil in all other Kansas properties, and $84.90/Bbl for oil in the Wyoming
properties used in our Reserves and Engineering Evaluation, dated January 18, 2013 (our “2012 Pinnacle Reserve
Report”), to $2.75/MCF for natural gas and $93.28/Bbl for oil in the Perth and South Haven Fields, $90.68/Bbl for oil
in all other Kansas properties, and $87.13/Bbl for oil in the Wyoming properties used in the 2013 Pinnacle Reserve
Report. The pricing revisions caused our Net Proved Developed and Undeveloped Reserves to increase by 47 oil
MBbls and to increase by 143 natural gas MMcf.
●
We increased the lease operating expenses for our development plan to reflect our historical cost levels which
resulted in our Net Proved Developed and Undeveloped Reserves to decrease by 51 oil MBbls and a decrease by
145 natural gas MMcf.
●
We made changes to our two-year development plan, including adding seven new well locations which increased
our Net Proved Developed and Undeveloped Reserves by 92 oil MBbls and 33 natural gas MMcf; removing four
well locations from our new two-year development plan which decreased our reserves by 51 oil MBbls and 18
natural gas MMcf; and three well locations being moved to probable which decreased our reserves by 88 oil MBbls
and 15 natural gas MMcf for a total net decrease of 47 oil MBbls and an decrease of 0 natural gas MMcf.
●
We sold a 60% working interest in the Graham Reservoir Field in Uinta County, Wyoming, which had reserves in
place. This sale caused our Net Proved Developed and Undeveloped Reserves to decrease by 233 oil MBbls and
by 0 natural gas MMcf.
●
We did recompletion work on an existing wellbore in the South Haven Field to increase Net Proved Developed and
Undeveloped Reserves by 57 oil MBbls and 0 natural gas MMcf, through conversion of Probable Reserves into Net
Proved Developed and Undeveloped Reserves.
Our actual production resulted in a decrease in our total Net Proved Developed and Undeveloped Reserves of 11
●oil MBbls. There was no natural gas production.
Proved Developed Reserves
   Beginning of year 2012
   End of year 2012
Natural Gas (MCF) 
 Oil (Bbl)
 
  
   
 
  106,060     -
 
  546,560     118,620
546,560     118,620
   Beginning of year 2013
  472,000     103,000
   End of year 2013
 
   
Proved Undeveloped Reserves   
   Beginning of year 2012
   End of year 2012
 
   Beginning of year 2013
   End of year 2013
569,570     267,400
  1,021,630    408,690
   
  1,021,630    408,690
  869,000     421,000
Proved reserves are estimated quantities of oil and natural gas, which geological and engineering data
indicate with reasonable certainty to be recoverable in future years from known reservoirs under existing
economic and operating conditions. Proved developed reserves are proved reserves that can be expected to
be recovered through existing wells with existing equipment and operating methods. Proved undeveloped
reserves are included for reserves for which there is a high degree of confidence in their recoverability and
they are scheduled to be drilled within the next five years.
F-34
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net Cash Inflows and Changes Therein
The following table presents a standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to proved
oil and natural gas reserves and the changes in standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows
relating to proved oil and natural gas were prepared in accordance with the provisions of ASC 932-235-50.
Future cash inflows were computed by applying oil and natural gas prices that were calculated by using the
unweighted arithmetic average of the first-day-of-the-month price for each month of the 12-month period prior
to the ending date of the period, to estimated future production. Future production and development costs
were computed by estimating the expenditures to be incurred in developing and producing the proved oil and
natural gas reserves at the end of the year, based on year-end costs and assuming continuation of existing
economic conditions. Future income tax expenses were calculated by applying appropriate year-end tax
rates to future pretax cash flows relating to proved oil and natural gas reserves, less the tax basis of
properties involved and tax credits and loss carry forwards relating to oil and natural gas producing activities.
Future net cash flows are discounted at the rate of 10% annually to derive the standardized measure of
discounted future cash flows. Actual future cash inflows may vary considerably, and the standardized
measure does not necessarily represent the fair value of the Company's oil and natural gas reserves.
Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net Cash Flows at December 31, 2013 and 2012
2013
 
 
 $124,095,840  $140,043,710 
Future Cash Inflows
   (22,309,810 )   (26,062,540 )
Future Development Costs
   (56,390,950 )   (59,329,510 )
Future Production Costs
   (16,932,365 )   (20,385,069 )
Future Income Tax Expenses
 $28,462.715   $34,266,591  
Future Net Cash Flows
10% Annual Discount for Estimated Timing of Cash Flows
   (10,356,209 )   (12,994,274 )
Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net Cash Flows $18,106,506   $21,272,317
2012
The following table presents the aggregate change in the standardized measure of discounted future net
cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012.
Changes in the Standardized Measure of Discounted Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2013 and
2012
Net Change in Sales and Transfer Prices and in Production (Lifting) Costs Related to
Future Production
Changes in Estimated Future Development Costs
Sales and Transfers of Oil and Gas Produced During the Period
Net Change Due to Extensions, Discoveries, and Improved Recovery
Net Change Due to Purchases and Sales of Reserves in Place
Net Change Due to Revisions in Quantity Estimates
Previously Estimated Development Costs Incurred During the Period
Accretion of Discount
Other – Unspecified
Net Change in Income Taxes
Aggregate Change in the Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net Cash Flows
for the Year
2013
2012
$(4,699,746) $15,115,402
3,752,730     (13,914,960)
   (774,426 )   (952,566
)
   1,565,304     3,104,457  
   (5,935,737)   5,341,555  
   (2,164,844)   11,736,779  
   2,042,378     1,730,765  
)
   (404,174 )   (186,278
   -
 
   3,452,704     (10,506,966)
-
$(3,165,811) $11,468,188
During 2013, there were several factors that affected our Aggregate Change in the Standardized Measure of
the Discounted Future Net Cash Flows for the Year. Net Change in Sales and Transfer Prices and in
Production (Lifting) Costs Related to Future Production from December 31, 2013 and 2012 are represented by
the change in the economic prices and lease operating expenses used in our engineering reports. We
modified the adjusted economic prices from $2.068/MCF for natural gas and $91.05/Bbl for oil in the Perth and
South Haven Fields, $88.45/Bbl for oil in all other Kansas properties, and $84.90/Bbl for oil in the Wyoming
properties used in our Reserves and Engineering Evaluation, dated January 18, 2013 (our “2012 Pinnacle
Reserve Report”), to $2.75/MCF for natural gas and $93.28/Bbl for oil in the Perth and South Haven Fields,
$90.68/Bbl for oil in all other Kansas properties, and $87.13/Bbl for oil in the Wyoming properties used in the
2013 Pinnacle Reserve Report. In addition, we increased the lease operating expenses to reflect our historical
cost levels. Net Change Due to Revisions in Quantity Estimates, and Changes in Estimated Future
Development Costs, were affected by a change in our work plan. We made changes to our two-year
development plan, including adding seven new well locations, removing four well locations and moved three
well locations from proved to probable. Net Change Due to Purchases and Sales of Reserves in Place was
affected by the sale of working interest in one property. In addition to these, there were changes in our
Standardized Measure of the Discounted Future Net Cash Flow because of our actual development costs and
production for the year and associated changes in Income Taxes, Accretion of Discount.
F-35
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
DECEMBER 31, 2013 AND 2012
Oil and natural gas prices were calculated by using the unweighted arithmetic average of the first-day-of-the-
month price for each month of the 12-month period prior to the ending date of the period, and were adjusted
to reflect applicable transportation and quality differentials on a well-by-well basis to arrive at realized sales
prices used to estimate the Company's reserves. The prices for the Company's reserve estimates were as
follows:
December 31, 2012:
    South Haven, Perth and Oklahoma Properties $ 2.068
 $ 2.068
    All Other Kansas Properties
 $ 2.068
    Wyoming Properties
December 31, 2013:
  
 $ 2.75
    South Haven and Perth Properties
 $ 2.75
    All Other Kansas Properties
    Wyoming Properties
 $ 2.75
Natural Gas MCF  Oil Bbl 
  
 
   
  $91.05 
  $88.45 
  $84.90 
     
 
  $93.28 
  $90.68 
  $87.13
F-36
Table of Contents
HISTORICAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF RICHFIELD
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheets
June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013
(Unaudited)
ASSETS
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents
Restricted Cash
Accounts receivables, net
Deposits and prepaid expenses
Total current assets
June 30,
 2014
    
    
 $93,363
   -
   516,560
   111,342
   721,265
December 31, 
 
  2013
     
 
 
     
 
  $60,395
 
    153,348
    322,604
 
 
    77,475
    613,822
Properties and equipment, at cost - successful efforts method:
Proved properties
Unproved properties
Well and related equipment
Accumulated depletion, depreciation and amortization
 
 
Other properties and equipment
Accumulated depreciation
 
 
Total assets
 
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
Current liabilities
Accounts payable
Accrued expenses and other payables
Notes Payable
Current portion of convertible notes payable, net of discount of $49,525 and $120,264
at 6/30/14 and 12/31/13, respectively
Capital lease obligations
Current portion of asset retirement obligations
Derivative liability
Total current liabilities
 
Long-term liabilities
Convertible notes payable, net of current portion
Asset retirement obligations, net of current portion
Total long-term liabilities
 
Total liabilities
 
Commitments and contingencies
 
Stockholders' equity
Common stock, par value $.001; 250,000,000 authorized;  60,616,448 shares and
39,906,770 shares issued and outstanding at 6/30/2014 and 12/31/2013, respectively
Additional paid-in capital
Accumulated deficit
Total stockholders' equity
 
Total liabilities and stockholders' equity
7,100,949     7,139,663
 
   13,876,990     14,095,020  
   2,061,848     1,997,913
 
   (1,234,307 )   (1,224,523 )
   21,805,480     22,008,073  
    
 
 
   204,627
)
   (191,229
   13,398
 
    
 
 $22,540,143   $22,637,383  
 
    
 
    
    
 
 
 $1,151,655   $2,049,750
 
   1,177,303     3,104,485
   2,171,340     1,338,524
219,231
)   (203,743
    15,488
451,217
1,861,386
135,311
    48,000
    310,156
27,564
   -
   -
   4,979,079     8,847,612
    
     
    
     
   3,194,972     -
   366,199
    394,075
   3,561,171     394,075
    
   8,540,250     9,241,687
60,616
39,907
56,819,911     51,360,380  
   (42,880,634)   (38,004,591 )
   13,999,893     13,395,696  
    
 
 $22,540,143   $22,637,383
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-37
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations
For the Three Months and Six Months Ended June 30, 2014 and 2013
(Unaudited)
2013
     
  $517,840
    517,840
     
     
    448,446
    19,216
    71,551
    46,937
    183,150
Six Months Ended
  June 30,
  2014
     
  $419,260
    419,260
     
     
    486,454
    16,565
    133,729
    113,933
    210,847
Three Months Ended
 
 
 June 30,
 
 
 2014
 
  2013
 
    
 
     
Revenues
 $231,711
 
  $305,673
Oil and natural gas sales
   231,711
 
    305,673
Total revenues
    
 
     
 
    
 
     
Operating expenses
   347,925
 
    229,281
Production expenses
   8,682
 
    11,649
Production taxes
   99,558
 
    32,340
Exploration
   113,933
 
    -
Lease expiration
   108,994
    103,104
 
Depletion, depreciation, amortization and accretion
   729,630
    1,177,755     2,947,996     2,187,528  
General and administrative expenses
   4,380
 
    893
Asset retirement obligation expenses
   (29,875
)   16,130
 
Loss (gain) on sale of assets
   1,383,227     1,571,152     3,884,029     3,109,465  
Total expenses
    
 
 
   (1,151,516 )   (1,265,479 )   (3,464,769 )   (2,591,625 )
Loss from operations
 
    
 
 
    
Other income (expenses)
   388,882
 
Gain on settlement of liabilities
   (530,218 )   (631,353 )   (530,218 )   (631,353 )
Loss on extinguishment of debt
   -
 
Loss on share issuance
   (190,243 )   (326,191 )   (659,882 )   (542,623 )
Interest and finance expenses
   (331,579 )   (957,018 )   (1,410,627 )   (1,143,609 )
Total other income (expenses)
    
 
 
   (1,483,095 )   (2,222,497 )   (4,875,396 )   (3,735,234 )
Loss before income taxes
 
    
 
   (647
)
Income tax provision
    
 
 
Net loss
 $(1,483,742 ) $(2,222,897 ) $(4,876,043 ) $(3,736,801 )
 
    
 
 $(0.03
)
Net loss per common share – basic and diluted
 
 
    
Weighted average shares outstanding – basic and diluted   57,690,147    35,116,520    52,438,114    33,856,388
421,975
4,380
    (29,875
136,507
)   16,130
526
)   (400
) $(0.06
)   (647
) $(0.09
30,367
(642,502 )   -
)   (1,567
) $(0.11
-
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-38
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Condensed Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
For the Six Months Ended June 30, 2014 and 2013
(Unaudited)
Cash flows from operating activities:       
  Net loss       
  Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash provided by (used in)
    operating activities:
 
   Depletion, depreciation, amortization and accretion
   Asset retirement obligation release on plugged wells     
   Gain on settlement of liabilities
   Loss on extinguishment of debt
   Loss on share issuance
   Capitalized interest on notes payable
   Amortization of pre-paid interest
   Lease expirations   
   Transfer of property for services
   Loss on sale of assets   
   Amortization of debt discounts
   Issuance of common stock, options and warrants for services and other expenses
 
   Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
     Decrease (increase) in accounts receivables
     Decrease (increase) in deposits and prepaid expenses
     Decrease in asset retirement obligation
     Increase (decrease) in accounts payable
     Increase in accrued expenses and other payables
     Net cash used in operating activities
 
 Cash flows from investing activities:       
  Investment in oil and gas properties, including wells and related equipment
  Proceeds from sale of assets   
     Net cash used in investing activities
 
 Cash flows from financing activities:   
  Proceeds from notes and convertible notes payable
  Payments on notes and convertible notes payable
  Restricted cash for settlement of note and litigation (see NOTE 15 LEGAL
PROCEEDINGS)
  Proceeds from related party notes payable
  Payments on related party notes payable
  Payments on capital lease obligation
  Proceeds from issuance of convertible preferred stock
  Proceeds from issuance of warrants
  Proceeds from issuance of common stock - net of issuance costs
     Net cash provided by financing activities
 
 Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
 
 Cash and cash equivalents - beginning of period
 
 Cash and cash equivalents - end of period   
 
 Supplemental disclosure of cash flow information:
  Cash paid during the period for interest
  Cash paid during the period for income taxes
Non-cash financing and investing activities:
2013
Six Months Ended
 
 June 30,
 
 2014
 
    
 $(4,876,043) $(3,736,801)
     
 
    
     
 
    
     
    
 
 
    183,150
   210,847
)
   -
    (39,000
)
   (421,975 )   (30,367
   530,218
    631,353
 
 
    -
   642,502
 
    16,317
   -
 
    6,164
   -
   113,933
    46,937
 
 
    -
   35,000
 
)   16,130
   (29,875
   120,278
    7,379
 
 
   1,829,828     794,146
 
    
 
    
   (163,896 )   182,668
 
 
)   260,779
   (33,867
 
   (65,146
)   -
   (408,544 )   184,953
 
   560,270
    650,357
 
   (1,956,470)   (825,835 )
 
    
    
 
   (880,734 )   (920,964 )
    284,700
   835,434
 
)   (636,264 )
   (45,300
    
     
 
 
    
     
 
   2,121,723     261,796
   (507,586 )   (65,055
)
153,348
-
-
    -
-
 
   -
)
   (107,747 )   (15,748
 
    -
   -
    7,378
 
   -
    1,069,000  
   375,000
   2,034,738     1,257,371  
     
    
 
    (204,728 )
   32,968
    
     
 
 
    286,013
   60,395
 
     
    
 
  $81,285
 $93,363
    
     
 
 
     
    
 
  $14,366
 $93,447
 
  $1,167
 $647
Purchase of oil and gas properties and conversion of JIB receivables billed to
    working interest holders through issuance of common stock and warrants
   Capitalized oil and gas properties included in accounts payable
   Return of stock for payment of receivable
   Sale of oil and gas properties for return of common stock
   Conversion of pre-paid expenses, payables, and notes payable through issuance
   of common stock and warrants
   Conversion of payables through issuance of note payable
   Disposal of well and related equipment
   Derivative liability on common stock issued
   Amortization of plugged wells
   Capitalized asset retirement obligations
   Write down of asset retirement obligation on sold properties
$8,500
  $907,722
  $-
  $25,625
$165,711
 $-
 $45,000
 $-
    
 $1,322,653   $889,647
 $1,326,404   $21,000
 $62,735
  $-
 $(310,156 ) $-
  $-
 $121,942
 $-
  $30,892
  $18,839
 $14,742
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-39
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
(Unaudited)
NOTE 1ORGANIZATION AND NATURE OF BUSINESS
Richfield Oil & Gas Company (the “Company,” “Richfield” or “ROIL”) is a Nevada corporation headquartered
in Salt Lake City, Utah which was incorporated on April 8, 2011. The Company is engaged in the exploration,
development and production of oil and natural gas in the states of Kansas, Oklahoma, Utah and Wyoming.
The Company’s common stock trades on the OTCQX under the symbol “ROIL”.
Contemporaneously with ROIL’s incorporation, the Company merged (the “HPI Merger”) with its predecessor
company, Hewitt Petroleum, Inc., a Delaware corporation which was incorporated on May 17, 2008 (“HPI”). In
connection with the HPI Merger, HPI was merged out of existence and the Company assumed all of the assets
and liabilities of HPI and the Company became the parent company of HPI’s two wholly owned subsidiaries,
Hewitt Energy Group, Inc., a Texas corporation (“HEGINC”) and Hewitt Operating, Inc., a Utah corporation
(“HOPIN”). The Plan of Merger required that all HPI common stock be exchanged on a one-for-one basis for
ROIL common stock and that ROIL assume all of the liabilities of HPI as of the effective date of the HPI Merger.
As a result, the Company’s historical financial statements are a continuation of the financial statements of
HPI. In addition, effective March 31, 2011, HPI entered into a Stock Exchange Agreement with Freedom Oil &
Gas, Inc., a Nevada corporation (“Freedom”), which called for the exchange of stock in HPI for all of the
outstanding stock of Freedom (the “Freedom Acquisition”). Upon completion of the Freedom Acquisition, it
became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company from March 31, 2011 until June 20, 2011 when Freedom
was merged into ROIL with ROIL being the surviving entity.
HEGINC is licensed and bonded as a Kansas operator. HOPIN is licensed and bonded as a Utah operator and
as a Wyoming operator HEGINC and its subsidiary HOPIN were acquired by Hewitt Petroleum, Inc. from Hewitt
Energy Group, LLC effective on January 1, 2009. On June 25, 2013 HOI Kansas Property Series, LLC, a
Kansas series limited liability company (“HOIK”), was organized to hold the oil and gas leases within the State
of Kansas. On August 5, 2013 HOI Utah Property Series, LLC, a Utah series limited liability company (“HOIU”),
was organized to hold the oil and gas leases within the State of Utah.
The condensed consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned
subsidiaries, HEGINC, HOPIN, HOIK and HOIU. All significant intercompany transactions and balances have
been eliminated in our consolidation.
The Company is involved in leasing, exploring and drilling in Kansas, Utah and Wyoming. The Company is
participating in over 38,000 acres of leaseholds (including leases from our lease option agreement with LT
Land), seismic surveys, and numerous drilling projects in these states.  The Company uses proven
technologies and drilling and production methods it believes are efficient and environmentally sound.
NOTE 2  GOING CONCERN
The Company’s condensed consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis
which contemplates the realization of assets and the liquidation of liabilities in the ordinary course of
business. The Company has incurred substantial losses from operations causing negative working capital, in
that current liabilities exceed current assets, and the Company has negative operating cash flows, which
raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company sustained
a net loss for the six months ended June 30, 2014 of $4,876,043 and a net loss for the year ended December
31, 2013 of $6,799,584, and has an accumulated deficit of $42,880,634 as of June 30, 2014.
The Company intends to make its planned capital expenditures in order to continue its drilling programs, but
does not have sufficient realized revenues or operating cash flows in order to finance these activities
internally. As a result, the Company has obtained financing in order to fund its working capital and capital
expenditure needs. On May 6, 2014 the Company entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger with Stratex
Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc. a Colorado corporation (“Stratex Merger”). Upon the execution of the Stratex Merger
agreement the Company entered into a $3,000,000 loan agreement with Stratex which was amended in July
2014 to increase the loan amount to $4,000,000 and extend the due date from November 2014 to January 2015
(see NOTE 16 SUBSEQUENT EVENTS).
F-40
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
(Unaudited)
The Company is unable to determine if the funds obtained will be sufficient to meet its short-term needs.  The
Company may seek additional funding through sales of working interest in its oil and gas properties; the
issuance of debt; preferred stock; common stock; or a combination of these items. Any proceeds received
from these items could provide the needed funds for continued operations and drilling programs. The
Company can provide no assurance that it will be able to obtain sufficient additional financing that it needs to
develop its properties and alleviate doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern. If the Company is
able to obtain sufficient additional financing proceeds, the Company cannot be certain that this additional
financing will be available on acceptable terms, if at all. To the extent the Company raises additional funds by
issuing equity securities; the Company’s stockholders may experience significant dilution. Any debt
financing, if available, may involve restrictive covenants that impact the Company’s ability to conduct
business. The condensed consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result
from the outcome of this uncertainty.
NOTE 3 SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
These unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The financial statements
included herein were prepared from the records of the Company in accordance with GAAP for interim
financial information and the instructions to Form 10-Q and Regulation S-X and S-K. In the opinion of
management, all adjustments, of a normal recurring nature that are considered necessary for a fair
presentation of the interim financial information, have been included. However, operating results for the
periods presented are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for a full year. The
Company’s annual report on Form 10-K includes certain definitions and a summary of significant accounting
policies and should be read in conjunction with this Form 10-Q. There have been no material changes to the
information disclosed in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in the Company’s annual
report on Form 10-K.
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates
and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of oil and gas reserves, assets and liabilities and
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements and the reported
amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Although management believes these
estimates are reasonable, actual results could differ from these estimates. The Company evaluates its
estimates on an on-going basis and bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other
assumptions the Company believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Although actual results may
differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, the Company believes that its
estimates are reasonable. The Company’s activities are accounted for under the successful efforts method.
Loss Per Common Share
Basic earnings per share (“EPS”) is computed by dividing net income (loss) (the numerator) by the weighted-
average number of common shares outstanding for the period (the denominator).  Diluted EPS is computed
by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted-average number of common shares and potential common
shares outstanding (if dilutive) during each period.  Potential common shares include common shares to be
issued related to warrants outstanding, convertible debentures, stock options, and stock pending issue
under the ratchet provision.  The number of potential common shares outstanding is computed using the
treasury stock method.
As the Company has incurred losses for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013, the potentially dilutive
shares are anti-dilutive and are thus not added into the loss per share calculations. As of June 30, 2014 and
2013, there were 22,803,730 and 9,404,469 potentially dilutive shares, respectively.
Reclassifications
Certain prior period balances have been reclassified to conform to the current period presentation. Such
reclassifications had no impact on net loss, statements of cash flows, working capital or equity previously
reported.
F-41
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
(Unaudited)
Financial Instruments and Concentration of Risks
The Company’s financial instruments include cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable and accounts
payable. The carrying amount of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, and accounts payable
approximate fair value because of their immediate or short-term maturities.
Substantially all of the Company’s accounts receivable result from oil and gas sales and joint interest billings
(“JIBs”) to third parties in the oil and gas industry.  This concentration of customers and joint interest owners
may impact the Company’s overall credit risk in that these entities may be similarly affected by changes in
economic and other conditions. As of June 30, 2014, 37% of the accounts receivable balance resulted from
two entities. For the six months ended June 30, 2014, all of the revenues resulted from producing wells in
Kansas.
NOTE 4 OIL AND NATURAL GAS PROPERTIES
Divestitures for the six months ended June 30, 2014
In March 2014, the Company sold a 9.5% before and after payout working interest in the Liberty #1 Well and
the Nephi Prospect for total net proceeds of $335,434 in cash.
In May 2014, the Company sold a 3.0% working interest in the Liberty # 1 well located in Juab County, Utah,
along with certain leases covering approximately 447 mineral acres for total net proceeds of $500,000 in cash.
Included in the sale was a right of first refusal to acquire from the Company, or its affiliate HOI Utah Property
Series, L.L.C. - HUOP Freedom Trend Series, an undivided three percent (3.0%) of 8/8ths out of its working
interest in certain deep rights pertaining to the HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect near Fountain Green, Utah.
Acquisitions for the six months ended June 30, 2014
In April 2014, the Company replaced two oil and gas leases with Joseph P. Tate, a director, and his spouse
covering a combined 1,823 gross acres in the HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect with a new lease. The new
lease is for a 10 year primary term commencing April 15, 2014 totaling $182,308 and was paid by the issuance
of 729,232 shares of common stock valued at $0.25 per share. This amount is similar to third party 10 year
primary term leases obtained by the Company in the HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect during 2013 (see NOTE
14 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS).
In April 2014, the Company entered into a lease option agreement with LT Land Group, L.L.C. (LT Land) for
the Company to purchase all oil and gas leases acquired by LT Land in Utah. From inception to June 21,
2014, Joseph P. Tate, a director of the Company, was also a member of LT Land. The premium paid for the
option agreement which expires in June 2015, was $21,919 and was paid by $16,639 in cash and $5,280 paid
by the issuance of 24,000 shares of common stock valued at $0.22 per share. The 24,000 shares of common
stock were issued to Joseph P. Tate, a director of the Company (see NOTE 14 RELATED PARTY
TRANSACTIONS). The exercise price to be paid by the Company to acquire the leases is the cost of the
leases to LT Land plus 35%. No partial exercises of the leases are allowed. At the time of exercise, if the
Company’s, or its successor by merger, 10 trading day average stock price is $0.30 or more per share, then
the payment shall be in shares of common stock of the Company, or its successor by merger, at a value of
$0.30 per share. If the Company’s, or its successor by merger, 10 trading day average stock price is below
$0.30 or more per share, then the exercise price shall be paid in cash. As of June 30, 2014, leases covering
2,888 acres at a cost of $41,730 have been acquired by LT Land pursuant to this lease option agreement.
F-42
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
(Unaudited)
NOTE 5    NOTES PAYABLE
Notes Payable consists of the following:
Note Payable, interest at 7.5% per annum, monthly payments of $1,949, due April 2014,
secured by vehicle.
 
Note Payable, interest at 10.0% per annum, monthly payments of $15,000, due June
2015, secured by a 10.00% working interest in certain HUOP Freedom Trend Prospect
leases.
 
Note Payable, interest at 8.0% per annum, due on demand, unsecured.
 
Note Payable, interest at 12.0% per annum, due on demand, secured by a 10.00%
working interest in the Liberty Prospect.
 
Note Payable, interest at 0.0% per annum, due on demand, unsecured
June 30,
 2014
December 31, 
 
  2013
$-
$8,496
614,402
581,327
-
-
94,701
389,000
15,000
15,000
-
-
-
150,000
50,000
100,000
100,000
-
1,391,938     -
2,171,340     1,338,524
 
   (2,171,340)   (1,338,524 )
 $-
$-
Note Payable, interest at 12.0% per annum, due on demand, secured by a 10.00%
working interest in the Liberty Prospect.
 
Note Payable, interest at 8.0% per annum, due on demand, secured by a working
interest in certain Kansas leases.
 
Note Payable, interest at 8.0% per annum, due on demand, secured by a working
interest in certain Kansas leases.
 
Note Payable, interest at 12.0% per annum, due December 2014, secured by
receivables from working interest investors on Liberty #1 Well.
 
Note Payable, interest at 6.0% per annum, due January 2015, secured by a first lien
position on all oil and gas leases.
 
Total Notes Payable
Less: Current Portion (includes demand notes)
Long-Term Portion
F-43
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
(Unaudited)
NOTE 6 CONVERTIBLE NOTES PAYABLE
Convertible Notes Payable consists of the following:
Note Payable, interest at 12.0% per annum, due on demand, convertible into common
shares of the Company at a conversion rate of $2.50 per common share, unsecured.
 
Note Payable, interest at 10.0% per annum, due on demand, convertible into common
shares of the Company at a conversion rate of $2.50 per common share, secured by
certain Kansas Leases and 10.00% working interest in certain Fountain Green Project
Leases (see NOTE 15 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS).
 
Note Payable, interest at 12.0% per annum, due June 2016, convertible into common
shares of the Company at a conversion rate of $0.25 per common share, secured by a
subordinated second lien position on all oil and gas leases.
 
Note Payable, interest at 12.0% per annum, due December 2014, convertible into
common shares of the Company at a conversion rate of $0.60 per common share,
unsecured.
June 30,
 2014
December 31, 
  2013
$52,560
$52,560
-
369,090
3,194,972    1,310,000
150,000     150,000
Note Payable, interest at 12.0% per annum, due on demand, convertible into common
shares of the Company at a conversion rate determined by 50% of the weighted average
price of the stock during the five trading days immediately preceding the conversion date,
secured by a 10.0% working interest in the Liberty Prospect.
 
Note Payable, interest at 12.0% per annum, due on demand, convertible into common
shares of the Company at a conversion rate determined by 50% of the weighted average
price of the stock during the five trading days immediately preceding the conversion date,
secured by a 10.0% working interest in the Liberty Prospect.
 
Note Payable, interest at 12% per annum, due May 2015, convertible into common
shares of the Company at a conversion rate of $0.25 per common share, unsecured.
 
Total Convertible Notes Payable
Less: Unamortized Debt Discount
Less: Current Portion (includes demand notes)
Long-Term Portion
-
-
50,000
50,000
298,182     -
3,695,714    1,981,650
   (49,525 )   (120,264
)
   (451,217 )   (1,861,386 )
 
 $3,194,972  $-
NOTE 7    CAPITAL LEASE OBLIGATION
The Company currently leases certain well equipment under a capital lease agreement. The term of the capital
lease is for 10 months with monthly payments of $21,000. The final payment on this lease is due in August
2014.  A previous capital lease agreement was paid off in April 2013. As of June 30, 2014 and December 31,
2013, the remaining capital lease obligation was $27,564 and $135,311, respectively.
As of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013, total well equipment acquired under capital leases was $264,143
and $333,951 respectively, and accumulated depreciation was $99,859 and $139,165, respectively.
Estimated annual future maturities of capital leases are as follows:
Years Ended December 31,  Amount  
  $27,564 
  2014
  Thereafter
    -
 
  $27,564 
  Total
F-44
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
(Unaudited)
NOTE 8     OPERATING LEASES
The Company leases office space in Salt Lake City, Utah (“Premises Lease”) which consists of approximately
5,482 square feet.  The Company entered into a five year and five month lease agreement effective September
1, 2013. The annualized lease obligations for the 12 month period September 1, 2013 to August 31, 2014 is
$67,155 with annualized lease obligations for the subsequent 4 years in the amount of $115,122. The
Company has a prepaid security deposit of $11,122.  For the six month periods ended June 30, 2014 and
2013, the Premises Lease payments were $58,005 and $54,987, respectively.
The Company leases a printer, copier and fax machine. The original lease term was for 37 months beginning
in March 2010 with month lease payments of $255. The Company entered into a new 36 month lease with new
equipment commencing January 2013 with monthly payments of $654. For the six month period ended June
30, 2014 and 2013 the lease payments were $4,564 and $3,270, respectively.
NOTE 9      ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATIONS
FASB ASC 410 requires that an asset retirement obligation (“ARO”) associated with the retirement of a
tangible long-lived asset be recognized as a liability in the period in which it is incurred and becomes
determinable. Under this method, when liabilities for dismantlement and abandonment costs, excluding
salvage values, are initially recorded, the carrying amount of the related oil and gas properties is increased.
The fair value of the ARO asset and liability is measured using expected future cash outflows discounted at
the Company’s credit-adjusted risk-free interest rate. Accretion of the liability is recognized each period using
the interest method of allocation, and the capitalized cost is depleted using the units of production method.
Should either the estimated life or the estimated abandonment costs of a property change materially upon the
Company’s periodic review, a new calculation is performed using the same methodology of taking the
abandonment cost and inflating it forward to its abandonment date and then discounting it back to the
present using the Company’s credit-adjusted-risk-free rate. The carrying value of the asset retirement
obligation is adjusted to the newly calculated value, with a corresponding offsetting adjustment to the
carrying cost of the related asset.
The following table summarizes the Company’s asset retirement obligation transactions recorded in
accordance with the provisions of FASB ASC 410 during the six months ended June 30, 2014:
June 30,  
 
 
 2014
 
Beginning asset retirement obligation, as of December 31, 2013 $442,157 
Liabilities decreased for wells sold or plugged
   (79,888 )
   4,012
Accretion of discount on asset retirement obligations
 
Ending asset retirement obligations, as of June 30, 2014
 $366,199
F-45
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
(Unaudited)
NOTE 10     PREFERRED STOCK
As of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013, the Company had 50,000,000 shares of preferred stock
authorized at a par value of $0.001 per share and had no shares of preferred stock issued or outstanding.
NOTE 11     COMMON STOCK
In January 2014, the Company issued 3,969,408 shares of common stock to unaffiliated investors and one
director, Mr. Joseph P. Tate, pursuant to a ratchet provision under the terms of common stock subscription
agreements. The fair value of these shares at the time of issuance was $952,658 or $0.24 per share of which
$310,156 eliminated the derivative liability resulting in a loss of $642,502 on the date of issuance.
In January 2014, The Board of Directors approved the cancellation of 3,500,000 outstanding employee stock
options issued to Mr. Alan D. Gaines, our Executive Chairman of the Board of Directors and the issuance to
him of 4,908,532 restricted Company common stock representing 9.9% of the Company’s common shares at
the time. The stock was fully vested and the fair value of the shares issued in the amount of $1,225,660 or
$0.25 per share was expensed on the date of grant.
In January and March 2014, the Company issued 1,500,000 shares of common stock to unaffiliated investors
for cash of $375,000 at a price of $0.25 per share. In addition, the Company granted warrants to purchase up
to 1,500,000 shares of common stock with an exercise price of $0.25 per share that expire in July and
September 2014.
In January and March 2014, the Company issued 2,311,670 shares of common stock to unaffiliated debt
holders at a contract price between $0.12 and $0.25 per share for the conversions of notes payable, accrued
interest, and settlement conversion incentives. The fair value of these shares at the time of issuance was
$555,904, or between $0.20 and $0.25 per share of which $115,477 was expensed as finance charges and
$215,385 resulted in a net loss on settlement of debt on the date of issuance.
During the six months ended June 30, 2014, the Company issued 1,493,219 shares of common stock to
consultants as compensation for services in the amount of $166,799 and reduction of an outstanding payable
in the amount of $198,967. The shares issued were fully vested and the fair value of the shares issued in the
amount of $362,153 or between $0.18 and $0.26 per share of which $166,799 was expensed on the date of
grant and $3,613 resulted in a gain on settlement of debt.
In March 2014, a consultant returned 62,500 shares of the Company’s common stock as settlement of a
receivable pursuant to 2013 agreements at a price of $45,000 or $0.72 per share which was the fair market
value of the shares at the time of the agreements.
In April 2014, the Company issued 753,232 shares of common stock valued at $187,588 or between $0.22 and
$0.25 per share to Joseph P. Tate, a director and his spouse related to a new lease in the HUOP Freedom
Trend Prospect for a 10 year primary term commencing April 15, 2014 and a lease option agreement. The new
lease terms are similar to third party 10 year primary term leases obtained by the Company in the HUOP
Freedom Trend Prospect during 2013.
In May 2014, the Company issued 5,836,117 shares of common stock to directors, officers and independent
consultants at a conversion price of $0.25 per share for the settlement of $1,459,029 of outstanding
compensation and services performed. The stock was valued at $1,063,509 or $0.18 per share on the date of
grant resulting in a $218,593 gain on settlement of debt and a $176,927 contribution to capital.
NOTE 12     WARRANTS TO PURCHASE COMMON STOCK
As of June 30, 2014, there were 8,559,061 warrants to purchase shares of common stock outstanding and
fully vested. These warrants have an exercise price between $0.25 and $5.00 per share and expire at various
times between July 2014 and May 2017.
During the six months ended June 30, 2014, warrants totaling 5,980,000 for shares of common stock were
granted.
F-46
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
(Unaudited)
Of the total warrants granted during the six months ended June 30, 2014, 1,500,000 warrants were granted in
conjunction with private placements of common stock for cash proceeds (see NOTE 11 COMMON STOCK)
that have an exercise price of $0.25 per share and expire between July and September 2014.
The remaining 4,480,000 warrants granted during the six months ended June 30, 2014, were issued in
conjunction with the issuance of a new note payable, the extension of an existing note payable and in
conjunction with the reduction of an outstanding payable. These transactions are accounted for by the
Company under the provisions of FASB ASC 470 and 505. These standards require the Company to
determine the fair value of the warrants.  The Company uses the Black-Scholes option valuation model to
calculate the fair value of stock-based payments at the date of grant.  Warrant pricing models require the input
of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected price volatility.  For warrants granted, the Company
used its own stock trading history to determine the expected volatility.  Changes in these assumptions can
materially affect the fair value estimate.
During the six months ended June 30, 2014, the Company has determined the fair value of the 4,480,000
warrants granted to be $665,516 of which $634,876 has been expensed in the period.
The following is the weighted average of the assumptions used in calculating the fair value of the warrants
granted during the period using the Black-Scholes model:
Six Months Ended
June 30, 2014
Fair market value  $ 0.19
 $ 0.27
Exercise price
 
    
   0.74
Risk free rates
Dividend yield
   0.00
Expected volatility   171.25
Contractual term    2.67 Years
%
%
%
The weighted-average fair market value at the date of grant for warrants granted are as follows:
$0.14855  
Fair value per warrant
Total warrants granted
   4,480,000 
Total fair value of warrants granted $665,516
The following table summarizes the Company’s total warrant activity for the six months ended June 30, 2014:
Weighted-
Warrants outstanding as of December 31, 2013  5,361,587   $ 1.27
  5,980,000   $ 0.26
Granted
  -
Exercised
   
  (2,782,526)  
Expired/Canceled
Warrants outstanding as of June 30, 2014
  8,559,061   $ 0.67
Average
  Exercise Price  Years
    0.63
    2.13
    -
    -
    1.45
Warrants
Weighted-
  
Average
Remainder
  
Contractual
  Term in
-
-
F-47
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
(Unaudited)
NOTE 13     FAIR VALUE
FASB ASC 820 defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value under U.S. generally
accepted accounting principles and enhances disclosures about fair value measurements.  Fair value is
defined under FASB ASC 820 as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a
liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly
transaction between market participants on the measurement date.  Valuation techniques used to measure
fair value under FASB ASC 820 must maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of
unobservable inputs.  The standard describes a fair value hierarchy based on three levels of inputs, with the
first two inputs considered observable and the last input considered unobservable, that may be used to
measure fair value as follows:

Certain Relationships and Related Transactions
A.Douglas C. Hewitt, Sr., President, Chief Executive Officer and Interim Chairman of the Board
An affiliate of Douglas C. Hewitt, Sr., President and Chief Executive Officer, who became our Interim Chairman
of the Board on May 6, 2014, is a party to the following transaction with the Company for the six months
ended June 30, 2014 as described below.
The D. Mack Trust
●
Mr. Hewitt is the sole beneficiary of The D. Mack Trust, an irrevocable trust established by Mr. Hewitt on May 15,
2009. As of March 31, 2014, the D. Mack Trust had overriding royalty interests (“ORRIs”) ranging from 0.50% to
3.625% in 1,636 net acres leased by the Company in Kansas. The D. Mack Trust received $8,609 and $12,608 in
royalties for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013, respectively, from the ORRIs.
B.Joseph P. Tate, a Director
Joseph P. Tate became one of our directors effective March 31, 2012. Mr. Tate has entered into the following
transaction with the Company for the six months ended June 30, 2014 as described below.
●
In January 2014, Mr. Tate received 262,821 shares of the Company’s common stock pursuant to a ratchet provision
under the terms of common stock subscription agreements that were similar to unaffiliated investors (see NOTE 11
COMMON STOCK). The fair value of these shares at the time of issuance was $63,077 or $0.24 per share.
●
Mr. Tate is a beneficial owner of land within the HUOP. In April 2014, the Company replaced two oil and gas leases
with Joseph P. Tate, a director, and his spouse covering a combined 1,823 gross acres in the HUOP Freedom
Trend Prospect with a new lease. The new lease is for a 10 year primary term commencing April 15, 2014 totaling
$182,308 and was paid by the issuance of 729,232 shares of common stock valued at $0.25 per share. The lease
terms are similar to third party 10 year primary term leases obtained by the Company in the HUOP Freedom Trend
Prospect during 2013. Pursuant to the terms of the new Tate lease, Tate is entitled to 12.50% landowner royalty-
interest revenues relating to hydrocarbons produced by Richfield. No oil or natural gas has been extracted from the
leased land and therefore no landowner royalties have been paid to Tate.
●
Mr. Tate was a member of LT Land until June 21, 2014. Pursuant to his interest in LT Land, he was issued 24,000
shares of common stock valued at $5,280 or $0.22 per share. (see NOTE 4 OIL AND NATURAL GAS
PROPERTIES).
C.Alan D. Gaines, Former Chairman of the Board
Alan D. Gaines became one of our directors and Chairman of the Board effective May 6, 2013. On May 6, 2014
Mr. Gaines resigned from this position and as a director. Mr. Gaines entered into the following transaction with
the Company for the six months ended June 30, 2014 as described below.
●
In January 2014, The Board of Directors approved the cancellation of 3,500,000 outstanding employee stock options
issued to Mr. Alan D. Gaines, who at the time was our Executive Chairman of the Board of Directors and the
issuance to him of 4,908,532 restricted Company common stock representing 9.9% of the Company’s common
shares at the time. The stock was fully vested and the fair value of the shares issued in the amount of $1,225,660 or
$0.25 per share was expensed on the date of grant. (see NOTE 11 COMMON STOCK).
F-49
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
(Unaudited)
NOTE 15     LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
On February 1, 2012, Nostra Terra Oil & Gas Company (“NTOG”) filed an action against Richfield Oil & Gas
Company, Hewitt Petroleum, Inc., Hewitt Energy Group, Inc., and Hewitt Energy Group, LLC in the Twenty-
Third Judicial District Court of Russell County, Kansas. The complaint alleged that the Company defaulted on
repayment obligations under a note and security agreement, dated April 13, 2011, in the principal amount of
$1,300,000 and accrued interest at 10% per annum. During 2013 the Company made substantial payments
towards the payment of the obligation. On February 14, 2014 the Court entered a final judgment in favor of
Nostra Terra Oil and Gas Company and against Richfield Oil & Gas Company and Hewitt Energy Group, Inc. in
the sum of $220,849. On May 2, 2014 the Company paid the judgment in full.
On September 30, 2013 Roger Buller filed an action against Richfield Oil & Gas Company in the Twentieth
Judicial District Court of Russell County, Kansas. The case was filed based on a claimed failure to pay a Note
in full. Richfield contends that the Note has been paid in full by the issuance of Richfield Common Stock
which was accepted by Mr. Buller for the payment of the Note. The action requests the sum of $50,386 plus
interest. The Company believes that this claim was paid in full in September 2011 and plans on vigorously
defending the action.
Litigation in the Ordinary Course
We may become involved in litigation from time to time relating to claims arising in the ordinary course of our
business. We do not believe that the ultimate resolution of such claims would have a material effect on our
business, results of operations, financial condition or cash flows. However, the results of these matters
cannot be predicted with certainty, and an unfavorable resolution of one or more of these matters could have
a material effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
NOTE 16     SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
In July 2014 the Company entered into Amendment No. 1 (the “Amendment”) to that certain Agreement and
Plan of Merger dated as of May 6, 2014 (the “Merger Agreement”) with Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
(“Stratex”) and amended and restated that certain Note and Security Agreement dated as of May 6, 2014 (the
“Note and Security Agreement” and, as so amended, the “Amended and Restated Note and Security
Agreement”).
Pursuant to the Amendment, certain conditions to the obligations of the parties to consummate the Merger
were amended as follows: (i) the condition that Stratex have no less than $5,000,000 in cash on hand at the
time of the Merger was reduced to no less than $2,000,000 in cash on hand; (ii) the condition that not more
than 5% of Richfield’s stockholders shall have taken the steps required by the Appraisal Provisions of the
NRS to obtain payment for the value of their shares in connection with the Merger was increased to not more
than 10% and (iii) the condition that Richfield’s liabilities (excluding certain permitted exceptions) not exceed
$6,500,000 was increased to $6,650,000. In addition, the right of each party to terminate the Merger Agreement
if the Merger has not been consummated by the “end date” of September 30, 2014 was extended to
November 30, 2014 (and until January 30, 2015 if all closing conditions (other than receipt of Richfield’s
shareholder approval or the failure of the Form S-4 registration statement to be declared effective) have been
satisfied by November 30, 2014).
Pursuant to the Amended and Restated Note and Security Agreement, the amount which Stratex has agreed
to advance to Richfield and its subsidiaries, has been increased by $1,000,000 to a total of $4,000,000. Of the
additional $1,000,000, $200,000 may be used by Richfield for general corporate purposes and $800,000 is to
be used solely in connection with the Kansas Work Program. As of the date of the Amended and Restated
Note and Security Agreement, approximately $717,000 had been advanced by Stratex to Richfield to develop
Richfield’s Kansas properties and $1,000,000 had been advanced for general corporate purposes. The
determination to advance additional funds prior to the Merger in order to further develop Richfield’s Kansas
properties was made by Stratex’ management as a direct result of the early production success in Kansas
since signing the Merger Agreement.
In July 2014 the Company sold a Company vehicle to Douglas C. Hewitt, Sr., President, Chief Executive
Officer and Interim Chairman of the Board at a price of $5,400 as valued by an independent vehicle appraiser.
The amount was paid by the return of 30,000 shares of common stock valued at $0.18 per share. The shares
were returned to treasury for cancellation.
F-50
Table of Contents
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
(Unaudited)
In July 2014 the Company issued 30,000 shares of common stock to certain employees as compensation for
services at a value of $7,500 or $0.25 per share. The $7,500 was expensed on the date of issuance.
In July 2014 the Company paid the remaining principal balance of a note to an unaffiliated investor in the
amount of $70,000 plus accrued interest $2,466 for a total cash payment of $72,466.
As of August 14, 2014, leases covering 4,196 acres at a cost of $182,272 have been acquired by LT Land
pursuant to the lease option agreement (see NOTE 4 OIL AND NATURAL GAS PROPERTIES).
F-51
Table of Contents
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and
Stockholders of
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc. and Subsidiary
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc. and
Subsidiary as of December 31, 2013 and 2012, and the related consolidated statements of operations,
stockholders’ equity and cash flows for each of the years in the two-year period ended December 31, 2013.
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc. and Subsidiary’s management is responsible for these consolidated financial
statements. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on
our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement. The
company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over
financial reporting. Our audits included consideration of internal control over financial reporting as a basis for
designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing
an opinion on the effectiveness of the company’s internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we
express no such opinion. An audit also includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the
amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and
significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.
We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects,
the financial position of Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc. and Subsidiary as of December 31, 2013 and 2012,
and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the years in the two-year period ended
December 31, 2013 in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a
going concern. As discussed in Note 3 to the financial statements, the Company has suffered losses from
operations and has an accumulated deficit, which raises substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a
going concern. Management's plans regarding those matters also are described in Note 3. The financial
statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Glastonbury, Connecticut
March 27, 2014
F-52
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Consolidated Balance Sheets
December 31,
December 31,
 
  
 
2012
2013
 
   
  
 
 
    
     
Assets
 
     
    
 
 
     
    
Current Assets:
 
  $75,103
 $609,061
  Cash
 
   18,220
    108,586
  Accounts receivable
 
    24,067
   -  
  Inventory
 
    38,832
   2,800
  Prepaid expenses
 
    246,588
   630,081
    Total Current Assets
 
    
     
 
 
    10,000
   10,025
Deposits
 
     
    
Oil and gas property, plant and equipment:
 
   893,763
    586,654
 Proven property – net
 
    2,055,090
   1,520,870
 Unproven property
 
    994
   2,380
Furniture and equipment – net
 
  $2,899,326
 $3,057,119
Total Assets
 
    
     
 
 
     
    
Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity (Deficit)
 
     
    
 
 
     
    
Current Liabilities:
 
 $904,615
  $419,658
  Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
 
    -  
   9,000
  Liability to be issued in stock
 
    -  
   715,000
  Due to former officer - current
 
    180,000
   216,000
  Demand notes payable
 
   -  
    148,734
  Notes payable - net of debt discount
 
    593,555
   76,675
  Derivative liability - warrants
 
    1,341,947
   1,921,290
    Total Current Liabilities
 
    
     
 
 
     
    
Long-term Liabilities:
 
    -  
   84,000
 Due to former officer
 
    -  
   34,000
 Asset retirement obligations
 
   790,528
    -  
 Notes payable - net of debt discount
 
     
    
 
 
    -  
   908,528
Total Long-Term Liabilities
 
    1,341,947
   2,829,818
Total Liabilities
 
    
     
 
 
     
    
Commitments and Contingencies
 
     
    
 
 
     
Stockholders' Equity (Deficit):
    
 
   Series A, convertible preferred stock, $0.0001 par value; 400 shares authorized;    
     
 
    1
   1
     and 100 shares issued; and 60 and 100 shares outstanding, respectively
 
     
    
  Common stock, $0.01 par value; 750,000,000 shares authorized;
 
    and 46,692,376 and 44,281,127 shares issued and outstanding
   466,924
    442,811
   13,680,474     9,769,750
  Additional paid in capital
 
   (13,900,098 )   (8,655,183 )
  Accumulated deficit
 
   (20,000
  Less: Treasury stock, 40 shares Series A, convertible preferred stock, at cost
    Total Stockholders' Equity (Deficit)
   227,301
 
 
    
 
Total Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity (Deficit)
 $3,057,119
)   -  
    1,557,379
     
  $2,899,326
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
F-53
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Operations
2012
   
  $959,388
     
     
    235,845
    484,853
    5,461,053
    1,059,297
    455,815
    7,696,863
For The Years Ended
 
 
 December 31,  December 31, 
 
 
 2013
 
 
  
Revenue
 $847,257
 
 
 
    
Operating Expenses:
 
    
  Production expenses
 
   268,083
  Depletion, depreciation and amortization
   150,101
 
  General and administrative
 
   4,406,937
  Impairment of oil and gas assets
 
   753,865
  Loss on abandonment of oil and gas assets
 
   -
Total Operating Expenses
   5,578,986
 
 
    
 
Loss From Operations
   (4,731,729 )   (6,737,475 )
 
 
    
Other Income and (Expense):
    
 
  Interest income
 
   25
  Interest expense
)
   (1,318,051 )   (675,001
  Change in fair value - derivative liabilities
   516,880
    (258,848
)
  Gain on sale of oil and gas properties
 
    -
   275,000
  Other income
 
    -
   12,960
Total Other Income and (Expense)
)
)   (933,149
   (513,186
 
    
     
 
Net Loss
 $(5,244,915 ) $(7,670,624 )
 
 
    
)
Net Loss Per Common Share  - Basic and Diluted
 $(0.12
 
    
 
Weighted Average Number of Common Shares Outstanding    
 
   44,787,051     34,741,473  
      - Basic and Diluted
) $(0.22
700
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
F-54
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders' Equity
For the Period from January 01, 2012 to December 31, 2013
Balance,
January 1,
Common Stock
Series "A"
Preferred Stock
 Shares Amount Shares
Additional
Paid-In
 Amount  Capital
Accumulated'  Treasury Stock  Stockholders
Deficit
Shares Amount  Equity
-
$ -
26,476,293  $264,763  $2,673,443   $(984,559
)  -
$-
$1,953,647
2012
 
Series "A"
Preferred
stock issued
for services
($83/share)
 
Common
stock issued
for cash
($0.014/share
- $0.70/share)
 
Conversion of
notes payable
and interest to
common
stock
 
Stock issued
with
promissory
note
 
Stock issued
to acquire oil
and gas
assets
 
Stock issued
for services
 
Stock
issuance
costs
 
Share based
compensation
 
Stock issued
in reverse
merger
100      1
-
-
8,291
-
-
-
8,292
-
-
6,182,500     61,825     1,435,510     -
-
-
1,497,335
-
-
1,692,334     16,923     1,157,242     -
-
-
1,174,165
-
-
1,000,000     10,000     490,000
-
-
-
500,000
-
-
250,000
2,500
447,500
-
-
-
450,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2,570,000     25,700     1,259,300     -
-
-
1,285,000
-
-
-
-
(210,000 )   -
-
-
(210,000
2,569,564     -
-
-
2,569,564
-
6,110,000     61,100     (61,100
)   -
-
-
-
)
-
-
-
-
-
(7,670,624 )  -
-
(7,670,624 )
100      1
44,281,127    442,811    9,769,750     (8,655,183 )  -
-
1,557,379
Net loss, For
the Year
ended
December 31,
2012
 
Balance,
December
31, 2012
 
Common
stock issued
for cash
($0.50/share)
-
-
70,000
700
34,300
-
-
-
35,000
Conversion of
notes payable
and interest to
common
stock
 
Common
stock issued
for services
 
Share based
compensation
 
Warrants
issued with
promissory
notes
 
Purchase of
50 shares of
Treasury
stock under
termination
agreement
 
10 preferred
shares issued
from treasury
for services
 
Stock issued
with
promissory
note
-
-
51,249
512
35,488
-
-
-
36,000
-
-
-
-
140,000
1,400
33,600
-
-
-
35,000
-
-
2,344,221     -
-
-
2,344,221
-
-
-
-
1,180,786     -
-
-
1,180,786
-
-
-
-
-
-
(50 )    (25,000)   (25,000
-
-
-
-
(4,170
)   -
10
5,000     830
-
-
2,000,000     20,000     270,000
-
-
-
290,000
-
-
150,000
1,501
16,499
-
-
-
18,000
Stock issued
to acquire oil
and gas
assets
 
Net loss, For
the Year
ended
December 31,
2013
 
Balance,
December
31, 2013
)
-
-
-
-
-
(5,244,915 )  -
-
(5,244,915 )
100    $ 1
46,692,376  $466,924  $13,680,474  $(13,900,098 )  (40 )  $(20,000) $227,301
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
F-55
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
 
 
 
 
 
Cash Flows From Operating Activities:
  Net loss
  Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash provided by (used in)
  operating activities:
    Depletion, depreciation and amortization
    Stock based compensation
    Amortization of debt issue costs
    Accretion of debt discount
    Impairment of oil and gas assets
    Loss on abandonment of oil and gas assets
    Gain on sale of oil and gas properties
    Change in fair value of derivative liabilities
  Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
  (Increase) decrease in:
    Accounts receivable
    Prepaid expenses
    Inventory
    Deposits
  Increase (decrease) in:
    Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
    Due to former officer
  Net Cash Provided By (Used In) Operating Activities
 
Cash Flows From Investing Activities:
  Purchase of oil and gas properties
  Proceeds from sale of oil and gas properties
  Purchase of furniture and equipment
  Net Cash Provided By (Used In) Investing Activities
 
Cash Flows From Financing Activities:
  Proceeds from notes payable
  Repayments on notes payable
  Sale of common stock for cash
  Purchase of treasury stock
  Net Cash Provided By (Used In) Financing Activities
 
Net change  in cash
 
Cash at beginning of year
 
Cash at end of year
 
Supplemental disclosures of cash flow information:
Cash paid for interest
Cash paid for taxes
 
Supplemental disclosure of non-cash investing and financing activities:
2012
484,853
    3,877,856
    24,458
    423,077
    1,059,297
    455,815
)   -
)   258,848
     
     
    (80,250
    (37,032
    19,122
)   -
     
    328,081
    -
)   (856,499
For The Years Ended
 
 December 31,  December 31, 
 2013
 
 
  
    
 
 $(5,244,915 ) $(7,670,624 )
    
 
 
    
 
   150,101
 
   2,380,051
   -
 
 
   1,252,330
 
   753,865
   -
 
 
   (275,000
 
   (516,880
 
    
    
 
)
   90,366
)
   36,032
 
   24,067
   (25
 
 
    
 
   484,957
 
   799,000
   (66,051
)
 
    
    
 
   (1,163,927 )   (1,401,938 )
 
   815,000
    -
)   -
   (2,314
 
)   (1,401,938 )
   (351,241
    
     
 
 
     
    
 
    335,000
   1,630,000
)
)   (100,000
   (688,750
   35,000
    1,512,735
 
 
)   -
   (25,000
 
    1,747,735
   951,250
 
     
    
   533,958
    (510,702
)
 
     
    
 
    585,805
   75,103
    
     
 
 
  $75,103
 $609,061
 
     
    
 
     
    
 $65,217
  $3,918
 
 
  $-
 $-
Conversion of notes payable and accrued interest to common stock
$36,000
$1,174,165
Issuance of common stock for a subscription receivable
Purchase of property for common stock
Original issue discount on notes payable
Derivative liability recorded to debt discount at issuance of notes payable $-
Reclass convertible note to demand note
$-
 $18,000
 $904,000
$36,000
$15,400
  $450,000
  $288,750
  $17,783
  $180,000
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
F-56
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
Note 1 Nature of Operations and Basis of Presentation:
Nature of Operations
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc. (the “Company”) (“Pubco”) was incorporated on August 15, 2003 as Poway
Muffler and Brake Inc. in California to enter the muffler and brake business.  On December 15, 2008, a merger
was effected with Ross Investments Inc., a Colorado shell corporation.    Ross Investments was the acquirer
and the surviving corporation.  Ross Investments Inc. then changed its name to Poway Muffler and Brake, Inc.
On May 25, 2012, we filed an Amendment to our Certificate of Incorporation by which we changed our name
from Poway Muffler and Brake, Inc., a Colorado corporation, to Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc., with the
Secretary of the State of Colorado.
On July 6, 2012, Stratex Acquisition Corp., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
merged with and into Stratex Oil & Gas, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Stratex”) (“SOG”). Stratex was the
surviving corporation of that Merger. As a result of the merger, we acquired the business of Stratex, and
continue the business operations of Stratex as a wholly-owned subsidiary.
The Company is engaged in the sale of oil and gas and the exploration for and development of oil and gas
reserves in the Bakken, Three Forks, Heath and Tyler Formations in North Dakota, Montana, Kansas,
Nebraska, Texas and Colorado.
The Company’s major assets are an oil well in Roosevelt County, Montana and leaseholds affording drilling
rights in North Dakota, Montana, Kansas, Nebraska, Texas and Colorado.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements and related notes have been prepared in accordance
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”) and include the
accounts of the Company and its wholly-owned subsidiaries. All material intercompany balances and
transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
Note 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies:
Principles of Consolidation
All significant intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to
make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements
and accompanying notes. Such estimates and assumptions impact, among others, the following: allowance
for bad debt, inventory obsolescence,  the fair value of share-based payments, fair value of derivative
liabilities, estimates of the probability and potential magnitude of contingent liabilities and the valuation
allowance for deferred tax assets due to continuing operating losses.
Making estimates requires management to exercise significant judgment. It is at least reasonably possible
that the estimate of the effect of a condition, situation or set of circumstances that existed at the date of the
consolidated financial statements, which management considered in formulating its estimate could change in
the near term due to one or more future confirming events. Accordingly, the actual results could differ
significantly from our estimates.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements contain estimates of the Company’s proved reserves
and the estimated future net revenues from the proved reserves.  These estimates are based on various
assumptions, including assumptions required by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission
(“SEC”) relating to oil and gas prices, drilling and operating expenses, capital expenditures, taxes and
availability of funds.
F-57
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
The process of estimating oil and gas reserves is complex and involves significant decisions and
assumptions in the evaluation of available geological, geophysical, engineering and economic data for each
reservoir.  Actual future production, oil and gas prices, revenues, taxes, development expenditures, operating
expenses and quantities of recoverable oil and gas reserves most likely will vary from these estimates.  Such
variations may be significant and could materially affect the estimated quantities and present value of our
proved reserves.  In addition, the Company’s management may adjust estimates of proved reserves to reflect
production history, results of exploration and development drilling, prevailing oil and gas prices and other
factors, many of which are beyond the Company’s control.  The Company’s properties may also be
susceptible to hydrocarbon drainage from production by operators on adjacent properties.
The present value of future net cash flows from the Company’s proved reserves is not necessarily the same
as the current market value of the Company’s estimated oil and natural gas reserves.  The estimated
discounted future net cash flows from the Company’s proved reserves is based on the average, first-day-of-
the-month price during the 12-month period preceding the measurement date.  Actual future net cash flows
from oil and natural gas properties also will be affected by factors such as actual prices received for oil and
gas, actual development and production costs, the amount and timing of actual production, the supply of and
demand for oil and gas, and changes in governmental regulations or taxes.
The timing of the Company’s production and incurrence of expenses in connection with the development and
production of oil and natural gas properties will affect the timing of actual future net cash flows from proved
reserves, and thus their actual present value. In addition, the 10% discount factor used when calculating
discounted future net cash flows for financial statement disclosure may not be the most appropriate discount
factor based on interest rates in effect from time to time and risks associated with the Company or the oil and
natural gas industry in general.
Risks and Uncertainties
The Company operates in an industry that is subject to intense competition and change in consumer
demand. The Company's operations are subject to significant risk and uncertainties including financial and
operational risks including the potential risk of business failure.
The Company’s future success depends largely on its ability to find and develop or acquire additional oil and
gas reserves that are economically recoverable.  Unless the Company replaces the reserves produced
through successful development, exploration or acquisition activities, proved reserves will decline over
time.  Recovery of any additional reserves will require significant capital expenditures and successful drilling
operations.  The Company may not be able to successfully find and produce reserves economically in the
future.  In addition, the Company may not be able to acquire proved reserves at acceptable costs.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid instruments purchased with an original maturity of three months or
less to be cash equivalents.  There were no cash equivalents at December 31, 2013 and 2012.
The Company minimizes its credit risk associated with cash by periodically evaluating the credit quality of its
primary financial institution. The balance at times may exceed federally insured limits.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Accounts receivable consist primarily of oil and gas receivables, net of a valuation allowance for doubtful
accounts.  As of December 31, 2013 and 2012, the allowance for doubtful accounts was $0.
F-58
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market using the first-in, first-out (FIFO) valuation method.
-
December 31,
December 31,
  
 
 
2013
2012
   
 
  
  $ 24,067
Finished goods $
   
  
Reserve
 
 $
  $ 24,067
-
-
-
Oil and Gas Properties, Successful Efforts Method
The Company uses the successful efforts method of accounting for oil and gas producing activities. Under
the successful efforts method, costs to acquire mineral interests in oil and gas properties, to drill and equip
exploratory wells that find proved reserves, and to drill and equip development wells are capitalized. Costs to
drill exploratory wells that do not find proved reserves, geological and geophysical costs, and costs of
carrying and retaining unproved properties are expensed as incurred.  The Company evaluates its proved oil
and gas properties for impairment on a field-by-field basis whenever events or changes in circumstances
indicate that an asset’s carrying value may not be recoverable. The Company follows FASB ASC 360 -
Property, Plant, and Equipment, for these evaluations. Unamortized capital costs are reduced to fair value if
the undiscounted future net cash flows from our interest in the property’s estimated proved reserves are less
than the asset’s net book value.  During the year ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, the Company recorded
impairments on oil and gas assets of $753,865 and $1,059,297, respectively.  In addition, during the year
ended December 31, 2012, the Company recorded a loss on abandonment of oil and gas assets of $455,815.
Support Facilities and Equipment
Our support facilities and equipment are generally located in proximity to certain of our principal fields.
Depreciation of these support facilities is provided on the straight-line method based on estimated useful
lives of 7 to 10 years.
Maintenance and repair costs that do not extend the useful lives of property and equipment are charged to
expense as incurred.
Proved Reserves
Estimates of the Company’s proved reserves included in this report are prepared in accordance with U.S.
GAAP and guidelines from the SEC. The Company’s engineering estimates of proved oil and natural gas
reserves directly impact financial accounting estimates, including depreciation, depletion and amortization
expense and impairment. Proved oil and natural gas reserves are the estimated quantities of oil and natural
gas reserves that geological and engineering data demonstrate with reasonable certainty to be recoverable in
future years from known reservoirs under period-end economic and operating conditions. The process of
estimating quantities of proved reserves is very complex, requiring significant subjective decisions in the
evaluation of all geological, engineering and economic data for each reservoir. The accuracy of a reserve
estimate is a function of: (i) the quality and quantity of available data; (ii) the interpretation of that data; (iii) the
accuracy of various mandated economic assumptions; and (iv) the judgment of the persons preparing the
estimate. The data for a given reservoir may change substantially over time as a result of numerous factors,
including additional development activity, evolving production history and continual reassessment of the
viability of production under varying economic conditions. Changes in oil and natural gas prices, operating
costs and expected performance from a given reservoir also will result in revisions to the amount of the
Company’s estimated proved reserves. The Company engages independent reserve engineers to estimate its
proved reserves.
F-59
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
Asset Retirement Obligations
The Company follows the provisions of the FASB ASC 410 - Asset Retirement and Environmental
Obligations. The fair value of an asset retirement obligation is recognized in the period in which it is incurred if
a reasonable estimate of fair value can be made.  As of December 31, 2013 and 2012, the Company’s
obligations were $34,000 and $0, respectively.  The present value of the estimated asset retirement costs is
capitalized as part of the carrying amount of the long-lived asset. The Company’s asset retirement obligations
relate to the abandonment of oil and gas producing facilities. The amounts recognized are based upon
numerous estimates and assumptions, including future retirement costs, future recoverable quantities of oil
and gas, future inflation rates and the credit-adjusted risk-free interest rate. Accretion of asset retirement
costs were immaterial for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012.
Debt Issue Costs and Debt Discount
The Company may pay debt issue costs, and record debt discounts in connection with raising funds through
the issuance of convertible debt. These costs are amortized over the life of the debt to interest expense. If a
conversion of the underlying debt occurs, a proportionate share of the unamortized amounts is immediately
expensed.
Original Issue Discount
For certain debt issued in 2013 and 2012, the Company provided the debt holder with an original issue
discount.  The original issue discount was equal to simple interest at 10% -20% of the proceeds raised.  The
original issue discount was recorded to debt discount reducing the face amount of the note and is being
amortized to interest expense over the maturity period of the debt. For certain debt the original issue discount
exceeded face value bringing the carrying value to $0 and the remainder charged to interest expense.
Derivative Financial Instruments
Fair value accounting requires bifurcation of embedded derivative instruments such as ratchet provisions or
conversion features in convertible debt or equity instruments, and measurement of their fair value for
accounting purposes. In determining the appropriate fair value, the Company utilized an option pricing model.
In assessing the Company’s convertible debt instruments, management determines if the convertible debt
host instrument is conventional convertible debt and further if there is a beneficial conversion feature
requiring measurement. If the instrument is not considered conventional convertible debt, the Company will
continue its evaluation process of these instruments as derivative financial instruments.
Once determined, the derivative liabilities are adjusted to reflect fair value at each reporting period end, with
any increase or decrease in the fair value being recorded in results of operations as an adjustment to fair
value of derivatives. In addition, the fair value of freestanding derivative instruments such as warrants, are
also valued using the option pricing model.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues from the sale of oil and natural gas are recognized when the product is delivered at a fixed or
determinable price, title has transferred, and collectability is reasonably assured and evidenced by a contract.
The Company follows the “sales method” of accounting for oil and natural gas revenue, so it recognizes
revenue on all natural gas or crude oil sold to purchasers, regardless of whether the sales are proportionate
to its ownership in the property. A receivable or liability is recognized only to the extent that the Company has
an imbalance on a specific property greater than its share of the expected remaining proved reserves.
Share-Based Payments
Generally, all forms of share-based payments, including stock option grants, warrants, restricted stock grants
and stock appreciation rights are measured at their fair value utilizing an option pricing model on the awards’
grant date, based on the estimated number of awards that are ultimately expected to vest. Share-based
compensation awards issued to non-employees for services rendered are recorded at either the fair value of
the services rendered or the fair value of the share-based payment, whichever is more readily determinable.
The expenses resulting from share-based payments are recorded in cost of goods sold or general and
administrative expense in the statement of operations, depending on the nature of the services provided.
F-60
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
Income Taxes
The Company is a taxable entity and recognizes deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax
consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets
and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted
tax rates expected to be in effect when the temporary differences reverse. The effect on the deferred tax
assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the year that includes the enactment
date of the rate change. A valuation allowance is used to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is
more likely than not to be realized. Interest and penalties associated with income taxes are included in selling,
general and administrative expense.
The Company follows ASC 740 “Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes” which prescribes a
comprehensive model of how a company should recognize, measure, present, and disclose in its
consolidated financial statements uncertain tax positions that the Company has taken or expects to take on a
tax return. ASC 740 states that a tax benefit from an uncertain position may be recognized if it is "more likely
than not" that the position is sustainable, based upon its technical merits. The tax benefit of a qualifying
position is the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon
ultimate settlement with a taxing authority having full knowledge of all relevant information.
Earnings Per Share
Basic earnings (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of
shares of common stock outstanding during each period.  Diluted earnings (loss) per share is computed by
dividing net income (loss), adjusted for changes in income or loss that resulted from the assumed conversion
of convertible shares, by the weighted average number of shares of common stock, common stock
equivalents and potentially dilutive securities outstanding during the period.
The Company had the following potential common stock equivalents at December 31, 2013:
Convertible debt – face amount of $216,000, conversion price of $0.70  308,571
Common stock options, exercise price of $0.08 - $0.50
Common stock warrants, exercise price of $0.15 - $0.85
Common stock to be issued
Total common stock equivalents
8,975,000  
  9,306,250  
  2,770,000  
  21,359,821
The Company had the following potential common stock equivalents at December 31, 2012:
Convertible debt – face amount of $252,000, conversion price of $0.70  360,000  
  3,000,000 
Common stock options, exercise price of $0.50
Common stock warrants, exercise price of $0.70
  2,075,000 
  5,435,000 
Total common stock equivalents
Since the Company reflected a net loss in 2013 and 2012, the effect of considering any common stock
equivalents, would have been anti-dilutive. A separate computation of diluted earnings (loss) per share is not
presented.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly
transaction between market participants at the measurement date (exit price). The Company utilizes market
data or assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability, including assumptions
about risk inherent in the inputs to the valuation technique. The authoritative guidance establishes a fair
value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs used to measure fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority
to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the
lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements).
F-61
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are as follows:
Level
1
 
Level
2
 
Level
3
Quoted market prices available in active markets for identical assets or liabilities as of the reporting date.
Pricing inputs other than quoted prices in active markets included in Level 1, which are either directly or
indirectly observable as of the reporting date.
Pricing inputs that are generally unobservable inputs and not corroborated by market data.
Financial assets and liabilities are considered Level 3 when their fair values are determined using pricing
models, discounted cash flow methodologies or similar techniques and at least one significant model
assumption or input is unobservable.
The fair value hierarchy gives the highest priority to quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical
assets or liabilities and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs.  If the inputs used to measure the financial
assets and liabilities fall within more than one level described above, the categorization is based on the lowest
level input that is significant to the fair value measurement of the instrument.
The carrying amounts of the Company’s financial assets and liabilities, such as cash, inventory, prepaid
expenses and other current assets, accounts payable and accrued liabilities approximate their fair values
because of the short maturity of these instruments.
The Company’s Level 3 financial liabilities consist of the derivative warrants issued with the 2011 notes
payables for which there is no current market for this security such that the determination of fair value
requires significant judgment or estimation. The Company valued the reset adjustments in the warrant on
subsequent potential equity offerings using an option pricing model, for which management understands the
methodologies. These models incorporate transaction details such as the Company’s stock price,
contractual terms, maturity, risk-free rates, as well as assumptions about future financings, volatility, and
holder behavior as of the date of issuance and each balance sheet date.
Transactions involving related parties cannot be presumed to be carried out on an arm's-length basis, as the
requisite conditions of competitive, free-market dealings may not exist. Representations about transactions
with related parties, if made, shall not imply that the related party transactions were consummated on terms
equivalent to those that prevail in arm's-length transactions unless such representations can be
substantiated.
The Company uses Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy to measure the fair value of the derivative liabilities and
revalues its derivative warrant liability and derivative feature of convertible notes at every reporting period
and recognizes gains or losses in the statements of operations attributable to the change in the fair value of
the derivatives.
F-62
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
Financial instruments measured at fair value on a recurring basis are summarized below and disclosed on the
balance sheets as follows:
December 31, 2013
Fair Value Measurement Using
Level 1    Level 2    Level 3    Total
 
 
    
Derivative warrant liabilities $-
$76,675   $76,675
$-
December 31, 2012
 Fair Value Measurement Using
    Level 1    Level 2    Level 3     Total
 
    
 
 Derivative warrant liabilities $-
$593,555  $593,555
$-
The table below provides a summary of the changes in fair value, including net transfers in and/or out, of all
financial instruments measured at fair value on a recurring basis using significant unobservable inputs (Level
3) during the period January 1, 2012 to December 31, 2013:
Fair Value Measurement Using 
 
 
Level 3 Inputs
 Derivative Liabilities   Total
Balance, January 1, 2012
 
Purchases, issuances and settlements
 
Total gains or losses (realized/unrealized) included in net loss   258,848
 
Transfers in and/or out of Level 3
 
Balance, December 31, 2012
$ 316,924
  
   17,783
$ 593,555
-
$316,924  
     
 
    17,783  
     
 
    258,248  
 
     
 
    -
     
 
  $593,555
Purchases, issuances and settlements
 
 
Total gains or losses (realized/unrealized) included in net loss included in net loss   (516,880)   (516,880)
 
 
    
Transfers in and/or out of Level 3
 
   -  
    
 
 
Balance, December 31, 2013
 $76,675   $76,675
-
-
-
Fair Value of Financial Assets and Liabilities Measured on a Non-Recurring Basis
For periods in which impairment charges have been incurred, the Company is required to write down the
value of the impaired asset to its fair value. See Note 4 for a further discussion of the impairment charges
recorded during the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012.
F-63
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
The following table discloses the fair value of the Company’s assets measured at fair value on a non-
recurring basis for the year ended December 31, 2013 and 2012:
December 31, 2013
 
 
 
Oil and gas property impaired to fair value $ -    $ -    $183,629  $753,865
Fair Value Measurement Using
 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Losses
December 31, 2012
 
 
 
Oil and gas property impaired to fair value $ -    $ -    $295,427  $1,059,297
Fair Value Measurement Using
 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Losses
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2013, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2013-02, Reporting of Amounts
Reclassified Out of Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income, an amendment to FASB ASC Topic 220. The
update requires disclosure of amounts reclassified out of accumulated other comprehensive income by
component. In addition, an entity is required to present either on the face of the statement of operations or in
the notes, significant amounts reclassified out of accumulated other comprehensive income by the
respective line items of net income but only if the amount reclassified is required to be reclassified to net
income in its entirety in the same reporting period. For amounts not reclassified in their entirety to net income,
an entity is required to cross-reference to other disclosures that provide additional detail about those
amounts. This ASU is effective prospectively for the Company fiscal years, and interim periods within those
years beginning after December 15, 2012. The Company will comply with the disclosure requirements of this
ASU beginning with the quarter ending March 31, 2013. The Company does not expect the impact of adopting
this ASU to be material to the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
In January 2013, the FASB issued ASU 2013-01 which clarifies which instruments and transactions are
subject to the offsetting disclosure requirements established by ASU 2011-11.  The new ASU addresses
preparer concerns that the scope of the disclosure requirements under ASU 2011-11 was overly broad and
imposed unintended costs that were not commensurate with estimated benefits to the financial statement
users.  In choosing to narrow the scope of the offsetting disclosures, the Board determined that it could make
them more operable and cost effective for preparers while still giving financial statement users sufficient
information to analyze the most significant presentation differences between financial statements prepared in
accordance with U.S. GAAP and those prepared under International Financial Reporting Standards
(IFRS).  ASU 2013-01 is effective for all entities (public and private) for the fiscal years beginning on or after
January 1, 2013, and interim periods within.  Retrospective application is required for any period presented
that begins before the entity’s initial application of the new requirements.  The Company’s adoption of this
ASU had no material impact on its consolidated financial statements.
In July 2012, the FASB issued the ASU 2012-02, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other: Testing Indefinite-Lived
Intangible Assets for Impairment, which allows entities to have the option first to assess qualitative factors to
determine whether the existence of events and circumstances indicates that it is more likely than not that the
indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired. If, after assessing the totality of events and circumstances, an
entity concludes that it is not more likely than not that the indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired, then the
entity is not required to take further action to determine the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset
and perform the quantitative impairment test by comparing the fair value with the carrying amount in
accordance with ASC 350-30. An entity also has the option to bypass the qualitative assessment for any
indefinite-lived intangible asset in any period and proceed directly to performing the quantitative impairment
test. An entity will be able to resume performing the qualitative assessment in any subsequent period. The
guidance is effective for annual and interim impairment tests performed for fiscal years beginning after
September 15, 2012, with early adoption permitted. The Company’s adoption of these provisions had no
significant effect on its financial statements.
F-64
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
In December 2011, the FASB issued the ASU 2011-12, Deferral of the Effective Date for Amendments to the
Presentation of Reclassifications of Items Out of Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income in Accounting
Standards Update No. 2011-05, that deferred the effective date for amendments to the presentation of
reclassifications of items out of other comprehensive income. ASU 2011-12 was issued to allow the FASB
time to redeliberate the presentation requirements for reclassifications out of accumulated other
comprehensive income for annual and interim financial statements for public, private, and non-profit
entities. During the redeliberation period, entities will continue to report reclassifications out of accumulated
other comprehensive income using guidance in effect before ASU 2011-05 was issued. ASU 2011-05 is to be
applied retrospectively and is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years,
beginning after December 15, 2011. The adoption of these provisions did not have a material effect on the
Company’s financial statements.
In May 2011, the FASB issued ASU No. 2011-04, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Amendments to
Achieve Common Fair Value Measurement and Disclosure Requirements in U.S. GAAP and IFRSs. The
guidance in ASU 2011-04 changes the wording used to describe the requirements in U.S. GAAP for
measuring fair value and for disclosing information about fair value measurements, including clarification of
the FASB's intent about the application of existing fair value and disclosure requirements and changing a
particular principle or requirement for measuring fair value or for disclosing information about fair value
measurements. The amendments in this ASU should be applied prospectively and are effective for interim
and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2011. Early adoption by public entities is not permitted. The
adoption of this guidance is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial position or
results of operations.
Note 3 Going Concern:
As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company has a net loss of
$5,244,915 and net cash used in operations of $66,051 for the year ended December 31, 2013 and has a
working capital deficit of $1,291,209 at December 31, 2013.
The ability of the Company to continue its operations is dependent on Management's plans, which include
the raising of capital through debt and/or equity markets with some additional funding from other traditional
financing sources, including term notes, until such time that funds provided by operations are sufficient to
fund working capital requirements.  The Company may need to incur additional liabilities with certain related
parties to sustain the Company’s existence.
The Company will require additional funding to finance the growth of its current and expected future
operations as well as to achieve its strategic objectives.  The Company believes its current available cash
along with anticipated revenues may be insufficient to meet its cash needs for the near future.  There can be
no assurance that financing will be available in amounts or terms acceptable to the Company, if at all.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which
contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of
business.  These  consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery
of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be
unable to continue as a going concern.
Note 4 Oil and Gas Assets:
The following table summarizes the Company’s oil and gas assets:
Balance – January 1, 2012
 $2,661,264  
Additions
   1,851,938  
Depletion
   (470,841 )
Impairment
   (1,059,297)
Abandonments
   (455,815 )
 
    
 
Balance – December 31, 2012   2,527,249  
   1,141,503  
Additions
Depletion
   (98,335
)
   (753,865 )
Impairment
   -
Abandonments
 
   (540,000 )
Dispositions
 
    
 
Balance – December 31, 2013 $2,276,552
F-65
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
The Company owns support facilities and equipment which serve its oil and gas production activities. The
following table details these properties and equipment, together with their estimated useful lives:
Balance – January 1, 2012
 $127,965 
   -
 
Additions
   (13,470 )
Depreciation
 
   -
Impairment
 
    
 
Balance – December 31, 2012   114,495 
   40,424  
Additions
   (16,838 )
Depreciation
   -
Impairment
 
 
    
 
Balance – December 31, 2013 $138,081
In July 2013, we entered into an Assignment and Conveyance Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Oasis
Petroleum North America, LLC. (“Oasis”). Pursuant to the Agreement, we sold certain oil & gas property
located in Roosevelt, Montana to Oasis for consideration of $215,000 cash. We recognized a gain on the sale
of $215,000 in the year ended December 31, 2013.
On July 1, 2013, we entered into a Purchase & Sale Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Nebraska Alliance
Resources, LLC. (“Nebraska”). Pursuant to the Agreement, we sold certain oil & gas property located in
Sioux County, Colorado to Nebraska for consideration of $600,000 cash. We recognized a gain on the sale of
$60,000 in the year ended December 31, 2013.
During the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, the Company recorded $115,173 and $484,311,
respectively to depletion expense.
During the year ended December 31, 2012, an abandonment charge to income in the amount of $455,815 was
recognized related to the Company’s Golden Valley Land Lease.
Note 5 Furniture and Equipment:
The following table summarizes furniture and equipment:
Balance – January 1, 2012
 $1,536 
Additions
   -  
 
Depreciation
   (542 )
Impairment
 
   -  
 
    
 
Balance – December 31, 2012   994  
   2,314 
Additions
Depreciation
   (928 )
 
   -  
Impairment
 
    
 
Balance – December 31, 2013 $2,380
During years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, the Company recorded $928 and $542, respectively to
depreciation expense.
F-66
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
Note 6 Notes Payable:
(A) Notes Payable – Convertible
During the year ended December 31, 2012, the Company sold two (2) convertible promissory notes in the
aggregate principal amount of $72,000 for proceeds of $60,000 with a one year maturity and a five (5) year
common stock purchase warrant exercisable for up to 30,000 shares of common stock at $0.70 per share to
an accredited investor.  The notes are convertible at a rate of $0.70 per share.  The notes are unsecured.
The following is a summary of notes payable - convertible:
$1,111,440  
Balance – January 1, 2012
 
   72,000
Issuance of convertible notes payable
)
Original issue discount
   (12,000
Discount recorded on derivative liability at issuance   (17,783
)
   (100,000 )
Repayments
   (1,148,000)
Converted to common stock
   (180,000 )
Note matured – reclassified to due on demand
 
   344,473
Accretion of debt discount
 
    
 
 
   70,130
Balance – December 31, 2012
Issuance of convertible notes payable
   -
Original issue discount
   -
Discount recorded on derivative liability at issuance   -
   -
Repayments
Converted to common stock
   (36,000
   (36,000
Note matured – reclassified to due on demand
   1,870
Accretion of debt discount
Balance – December 31, 2013
 $-
)
)
(B)  Notes Payable Due on Demand
As of December 31, 2013, three (3) convertible notes for an aggregate principal amount of $216,000
matured.  These notes were reclassified and are recorded as due on demand.
(C)  Promissory Note
On November 12, 2012, the Company issued a promissory note with principal of $288,750.  The Company
received proceeds of $275,000.  The Company recorded the original issue discount of $13,750 and is
accreting the discount to interest expense over the life of the note.  The note matures on May 11, 2013 and is
secured by assets of the Company.  In addition, the note-holder received 1,000,000 shares of common stock
of the Company.  The issuance was recorded as a debt discount up to the face amount of the note.  The
amount in excess of the face amount of the note was recorded to interest expense on the date of issuance.
F-67
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
On May 11, 2013 the note matured and a new promissory note with principal of $288,750 was issued. This was
considered a substantial modification of terms and the Company applied extinguishment accounting. The
note bore interest at 12% per annum and was to be due in interest only payments for the first 24 months.  The
note matures on May 10, 2015, although, was paid in full on August 29, 2013.  In addition, the Company issued
the note holder a five (5) year common stock purchase warrant exercisable for up to 375,000 shares of
common stock at $0.85 per share to an accredited investor. The issuance of the warrants was recorded as
interest expense on the date of issuance.  The note was secured by certain oil and gas assets of the
Company.
Extinguishment Accounting
The Company compared the fair value of the note on the date of modification to the as-modified
note.  Because the fair value of the as-modified note was 10% greater than the fair value of the existing note,
the Company applied extinguishment accounting, resulting in a loss on extinguishment of debt of $411,030,
for the year ended December 31, 2013. The Company recorded the loss as interest expense in the Statement
of Operations.
$78,604  
Balance – January 1, 2013
Accretion of debt discount
   210,146  
Note matured – satisfied with issuance of new note   (288,750)
   288,750  
Issuance of new promissory note
   (288,750)
Payoff of note
Balance December 31, 2013
 $-
(D)  Promissory Note
On March 15, 2013, the Company issued a promissory note with principal of $400,000 for proceeds of
$400,000.  The note bears interest at 12% per annum and will be due in interest only payments for the first 24
months.  The note matures on March 14, 2015.  In addition, the Company issued the note holder a five (5) year
common stock purchase warrant exercisable for up to 500,000 shares of common stock at $0.85 per share to
an accredited investor. The issuance of the warrants was recorded as a debt discount up to the face amount
of the note.  The amount in excess of the face amount of the note was recorded to interest expense on the
date of issuance. The note is secured by certain oil and gas assets of the Company.
$-
Balance – January 1, 2013
 
Issuance of promissory note    400,000  
Original issue discount
   (400,000)
   400,000  
Accretion of debt discount
   (400,000)
Payoff of note
Balance –December 31, 2013 $-
(E)  Promissory Note
On May 20, 2013, the Company issued a promissory note with principal of $80,000 for proceeds of
$80,000.  The note bears interest at 12% per annum and will be due in interest only payments for the first 24
months.  The note matures on May 19, 2015.  In addition, the Company issued the note holder a five (5) year
common stock purchase warrant exercisable for up to 100,000 shares of common stock at $0.85 per share to
an accredited investor. The issuance of the warrants was recorded as a debt discount up to the face amount
of the note.  The amount in excess of the face amount of the note was recorded to interest expense on the
date of issuance. The note is secured by certain oil and gas assets of the Company.
$-
Balance – January 1, 2013
 
Issuance of promissory note    80,000  
Original issue discount
   (80,000)
Accretion of debt discount
   24,691  
Balance –December 31, 2013 $24,691
F-68
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
(F)  Promissory Note
On May 20, 2013, the Company issued a promissory note with principal of $25,000 for proceeds of
$25,000.  The note bears interest at 12% per annum and will be due in interest only payments for the first 24
months.  The note matures on May 19, 2015.  In addition, the Company issued the note holder a five (5) year
common stock purchase warrant exercisable for up to 31,250 shares of common stock at $0.85 per share to
an accredited investor. The issuance of the warrants was recorded as a debt discount up to the face amount
of the note.  The amount in excess of the face amount of the note was recorded to interest expense on the
date of issuance. The note is secured by certain oil and gas assets of the Company.
$-
Balance – January 1, 2013
 
Issuance of promissory note    25,000  
   (25,000)
Original issue discount
Accretion of debt discount
   7,716  
Balance –December 31, 2013 $7,716
(G)  Promissory Note
On July 1, 2013, the Company issued a promissory note with principal of $100,000 for proceeds of
$100,000.  The note bears interest at 12% per annum and will be due in interest only payments for the first 36
months.  The note matures on July 1, 2016.  In addition, the Company issued the note holder a five (5) year
common stock purchase warrant exercisable for up to 125,000 shares of common stock at $0.85 per share to
an accredited investor. The issuance of the warrants was recorded as a debt discount up to the face amount
of the note.  The amount in excess of the face amount of the note was recorded to interest expense on the
date of issuance. The note is secured by certain oil and gas assets of the Company.
$- 
 
Balance – January 1, 2013
   100,000  
Issuance of promissory note
   (100,000)
Original issue discount
Accretion of debt discount
   16,697  
Balance –September 30, 2013 $16,697
(H)  Promissory Note
On October 1, 2013, the Company issued a promissory note with principal of $500,000 for proceeds of
$500,000.  The note bears interest at 12% per annum and will be due in interest only payments for the first 36
months.  The note matures on September 30, 2016.  In addition, the Company issued the purchaser, 1,000,000
shares of the common stock of the Company. The issuance of the shares was recorded as a debt discount
equal to the market value of shares issued ($140,000) at issuance date.
$-
Balance – January 1, 2013
 
Issuance of promissory note    500,000  
Original issue discount
   (140,000)
Accretion of debt discount
   11,763  
Balance –December 31, 2013 $371,763
F-69
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
(I)  Promissory Note
On December 5, 2013, the Company issued a promissory note with principal of $500,000 for proceeds of
$500,000.  The note bears interest at 12% per annum and will be due in interest only payments for the first 36
months.  The note matures on December 4, 2016.  In addition, the Company issued the purchaser, 1,000,000
shares of the common stock of the Company. The issuance of the shares was recorded as a debt discount
equal to the market value of shares issued ($150,000) at issuance date.
$-
Balance – January 1, 2013
Issuance of promissory note    500,000  
   (150,000)
Original issue discount
Accretion of debt discount
   3,562
 
Balance –December 31, 2013 $353,562
(J)  Promissory Note
On December 12, 2013, the Company issued a promissory note with principal of $25,000 for proceeds of
$25,000.  The note bears interest at 12% per annum and will be due in interest only payments for the first 36
months.  The note matures on December 11, 2016.  In addition, the Company issued the purchaser, 50,000
shares of the common stock of the Company. The issuance of the shares was recorded as a debt discount up
to the face amount of the note.
Balance – January 1, 2013
Issuance of promissory note    25,000
$-
(9,000 )
Original issue discount
   99
 
Accretion of debt discount
Balance –December 31, 2013 $16,099
(K)  Debt Issuance Costs
Debt issuance costs, net are as follows:
Balance - January 1, 2012
 $24,458  
Debt issue costs paid in 2012    -
 
Amortization of debt issue costs   (24,458)
Balance – December 31, 2012 $-
 
Balance – December 31, 2013 $-
Note 7 Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit):
Simultaneously with the Merger with Stratex (See Note 1), on the Closing Date, all of the issued and
outstanding shares of Stratex common stock converted, on a 2 for 1 basis, into shares of the Company’s
common stock, (“Common Stock”). Also on the Closing Date, all of the issued and outstanding options to
purchase shares of Stratex common stock, and all of the issued and outstanding warrants (collectively the
“Stratex Convertible Securities”) to purchase shares of Stratex Common Stock, upon the exercise or
conversion of the Stratex Convertible Securities, shall have the right to convert such Stratex Convertible
Securities into the kind and amount of the Company’s  shares of Common Stock and other securities and
property which such holder would have owned or have been entitled to receive of Stratex prior to the Closing
of the Merger, on a 2 for 1 basis. The options will be administered under Stratex’ss 2012 Equity Incentive Plan
(the “Stratex Plan”), which the Company assumed and adopted on the Closing Date in connection with the
Merger.
F-70
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
On the Closing Date, (i) approximately 33,372,550 shares of Common Stock were issued to former Stratex
stockholders; (ii) 100 shares of Series A Preferred Stock were issued to former holders of Stratex Series A
Preferred Stock; (iii) options to purchase 3,000,000 shares of Common Stock granted under the Stratex Plan
pursuant to the assumption of the Stratex Plan; (iv) Warrants to purchase 675,000 shares of Common Stock
at $0.70 per share issued to holders of 1,350,000 Stratex Warrants (that were exercisable at a price of $.35 per
share) were assumed by the Company. In addition, pre-Merger stockholders of Pubco retained 6,110,000
shares of Common Stock.
(A)  Preferred Stock
During the year ended December 31, 2013, the Company issued 10 shares of preferred stock held in
Treasury.
Transaction Type
Services rendered – officers   10
Total
   10
$ 830
  $ 830
Quantity of 
 
Shares
Valuation
Range of 
Value per 
 
Share
  $ 83.00
  $ 83.00
During the year ended December 31, 2012, the Company issued the following preferred stock:
Transaction Type
Quantity of
 
Shares
Valuation
Range of 
Value per 
 
Share
Services rendered – officers   100
   100
Total
$ 8,292   $ 82.92
  $ 8,292   $ 82.92
(B)  Common Stock
During the year ended December 31, 2013, the Company issued the following common stock:
Transaction Type
Common stock issued for cash
Common stock issued for services
Conversion of debt and interest
Common stock issued with promissory notes
Common stock issued to acquire oil and gas assets  150,000     18,000     0.12
Total
Quantity of 
 
Shares
Range of 
Value per 
Share
 
  70,000
  $35,000   $0.50
 
  140,000     35,000     0.25
  51,249
 
    36,000     0.70
  2,000,000    290,000    0.14-0.15 
 
  2,411,249  $414,000  $0.12-0.70
Valuation
During the year ended December 31, 2012, the Company issued the following common stock:
Transaction Type
Quantity of 
 
Shares
Valuation
Range of
Value per 
Share
Common stock issued for cash
Common stock issued for services
Conversion of debt and interest
Common stock issued with promissory notes
Issued in reverse acquisition
Common stock issued to acquire oil and gas assets  250,000
Total
6,182,500   $1,497,335  $0.014-0.70 
  2,570,000     1,285,000    0.50
 
  1,692,334     1,174,165    0.50-0.70  
 
  1,000,000     500,000     0.50
  6,110,000     -  
 
 
  17,804,834  $4,906,500  $0.014-1.80
450,000     1.80
-
F-71
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
(C) Warrants
The following is a summary of the Company’s warrant activity:
Warrants  Weighted Average Exercise Price
 
  
  
 
 Outstanding – January 1, 2012
   645,000   $
 Exercisable –  January 1, 2012
   645,000   $
   1,430,000  $
 Granted
   -  
  $
 Exercised
 Forfeited/Cancelled
  $
   -  
 Outstanding – December 31, 2012   2,075,000  $
 Exercisable –  December 31, 2012   2,075,000  $
 Granted
   7,321,250  $
  $
   -  
 Exercised
 Forfeited/Cancelled
   -  
  $
 Outstanding – December 31, 2013   9,306,250  $
 Exercisable –  December 31, 2013   9,306,250  $
0.70
0.70
0.31
-  
-  
0.43
0.43
0.26
-  
-  
0.30
0.30
Warrants Outstanding
Range of 
exercise price
Weighted Average 
Remaining 
 
Contractual Life 
(in years)
$0.15 - $0.85   9,306,250   4.87 years
Number 
 
Outstanding
Weighted 
 
Average 
Exercise Price
Warrants Exercisable
Number 
 
Exercisable
Weighted 
 
Average 
Exercise Price
$ 0.30
9,306,250  $ 0.30
At December 31, 2013 and 2012, the total intrinsic value of warrants outstanding and exercisable was $61,000
and $168,750, respectively.
During 2013 the Company re-priced warrants to purchase an aggregate of 1,400,000 common shares in the
capital of the Company from an exercise price of $1.65 to an exercise price of $0.30. All other warrant terms
remain the same including the expiry date of October 31, 2017
The Company recorded compensation expense related to the re-priced warrants of $27,427 during 2013
calculated as the fair value of the re-priced warrants minus the current fair value of the surrendered warrants.
(D)Options
The following is a summary of the Company’s option activity:
Weighted Average Exercise Price 
  Options
 
 
   
   
 
 Outstanding – January 1, 2012
 
  $
   -
 Exercisable –  January 1, 2012
 
   -
  $
   3,000,000   $
 
 Granted
 
  $
   -
 Exercised
 
 Forfeited/Cancelled
   -
  $
 Outstanding – December 31, 2012   3,000,000   $
 
 Exercisable –  December 31, 2012   750,000
 
  $
   11,100,000  $
 Granted
-
-
0.50
-
-
0.50
0.50
0.13
-
  $
 Exercised
 Forfeited/Cancelled
   (1,500,000 ) $
 Outstanding – December 31, 2013   12,600,000  $
 Exercisable –  December 31, 2013   8,975,000   $
-
0.50
0.17
0.16
F-72
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
Options Outstanding
Options Exercisable
Range of 
exercise price
Weighted Average Remaining 
Weighted 
 
 
Contractual Life 
Average 
Exercise Price
(in years)
$0.08-$0.50   12,600,000  5.93 years
 $ 0.17
Number 
 
Outstanding
Number 
 
Exercisable
Weighted 
 
Average 
Exercise Price
8,975,000  $ 0.16
At December 31, 2013, the total intrinsic value of options outstanding and exercisable was $363,000 and
$333,000, respectively.
At December 31, 2012, the total intrinsic value of options outstanding and exercisable was $675,617.
(E)  Treasury Stock
During the year ended December 31, 2013, the Company repurchased 50 shares of preferred stock at cost of
$25,000 and issued 10 shares of preferred stock from treasury for compensation.
Note 8 Commitments and Contingencies:
Litigations, Claims and Assessments
From time to time, the Company may become involved in various lawsuits and legal proceedings, which arise
in the ordinary course of business. However, litigation is subject to inherent uncertainties, and an adverse
result in these or other matters may arise from time to time that may harm its business. The Company is
currently not aware of any such legal proceedings or claims that they believe will have, individually or in the
aggregate, a material adverse effect on its business, financial condition or operating results. See Note 9 for
discussion of complaint filed by the Company against its former officer subsequent to the balance sheet date.
Oil and Gas Prices
The prices of oil, natural gas, methane gas and other fuels have been, and are likely to continue to be, volatile
and subject to wide fluctuations in response to numerous factors, including but not limited to the worldwide
and domestic supplies of oil and gas, changes in the supply of and demand for such fuels, political
conditions in fuel-producing and fuel-consuming regions, weather conditions, the development of other
energy sources, and the effect of government regulation on the production, transportation and sale of
fuels.  These factors and the volatility of energy markets make it extremely difficult to predict future oil and
gas price movements with any certainty.  A decline in prices could adversely affect the Company’s financial
position, financial results, cash flows, access to capital and ability to grow.
Environmental Liabilities
Oil and gas operations are subject to many risks, including well blowouts, cratering and explosions, pipe
failure, fires, formations with abnormal pressures, uncontrollable flows of oil, natural gas, brine or other well
fluids, and other environmental hazards and risks.  Our drilling operations involve risks from high pressures
and from mechanical difficulties such as stuck pipes, collapsed casings, and separated cables.  If any of
these circumstances occur, the Company could sustain substantial losses as a result of injury or loss of life,
destruction of property and equipment, damage to natural resources, pollution or other environmental
damages, clean-up responsibilities, regulatory investigations and penalties, suspension of operations, and
compliance with environmental laws and regulations relating to air emissions, waste disposal and hydraulic
fracturing, restrictions on drilling and completion operations and other laws and regulations.  The Company’s
potential liability for environmental hazards may include those created by the previous owners of properties
purchased or leased prior to the date we purchase or lease the property.  The Company maintains insurance
against some, but not all, of the risks described above.  Insurance coverage may not be adequate to cover
casualty losses or liabilities.
F-73
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
Employment Contracts
On April 1, 2012, the Company entered into an Executive Employment Agreement with the Chief Executive
Officer (“CEO”).  The terms of the Agreement are as follows:
●Term - 5 years,
●Compensation - $250,000 salary per annum, bonus eligibility, (annual raises equal to 10%),
●Option Grant - 1,500,000 options to acquire restricted stock, (adjusted for post 2:1 stock split),
●Preferred Share Grant - 50 shares of Preferred Stock which entitle the CEO to 50 million votes on all matters
submitted to a vote of the shareholders of the Company.
Amendment to employment contract
The CEO’s employment agreement with SOG was originally for a period of 5 years, after which the agreement
is renewable for 1 year periods, unless SOG or the CEO gives 6 months’ notice of the intention to terminate
the agreement. On November 22, 2013, the CEO and SOG executed an amendment extending The CEO’s
employment for an additional period of two years. The CEO receives a salary of $250,000 per year with annual
increases of 10% per year. The CEO will also receive an annual cash bonus in an amount to be determined by
the Board of Directors.
The CEO was granted options to acquire 3,000,000 common shares under his initial employment agreement
(1,500,000 effective due to reverse stock split July 5, 2013) of restricted stock of the Company, which shall be
subject to, and vest over a period of three (3) years. The CEO was granted additional options to acquire
3,600,000 common shares of restricted stock which vested immediately when the amendment to his
employment agreement was executed. Additionally, The CEO was issued 50 shares of Stratex Preferred Stock
under his initial employment agreement and an additional 10 shares of Preferred Stock when the amendment
to his employment agreement was executed. The shares of Preferred Stock have no liquidation or dividend
preference and each share of Preferred Stock entitles the CEO to one million votes (10,000,000 in total) on all
matters submitted to a vote of the shareholders of the Company (60,000,000 votes in total). The CEO has the
ability to control all aspects of the Company as a result of his ownership of the 60 shares of Preferred Stock.
The Company agrees to promptly reimburse the CEO for all reasonable and necessary business expenses,
including without limitation, telephone and facsimile charges incurred by him on behalf of the Company. In
addition the Company agrees to provide the CEO with a monthly automobile allowance of $750.
On April 1, 2012, the Company entered into an Executive Employment Agreement with the Chief Operating
Officer which was subsequently terminated on August 30, 2013.  The terms of the Agreement were as follows:
●Term - 5 years,
●Compensation - $250,000 salary per annum, bonus eligibility, (annual raises equal to 10%),
●Option Grant - 1,500,000 options to acquire restricted stock, (adjusted for post 2:1 stock split),
●Preferred Share Grant - 50 shares of Preferred Stock which entitle the COO to 50 million votes on all matters
submitted to a vote of the shareholders of the Company.
F-74
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
Due to former officer
On August 30, 2013 Timothy Kelly resigned as (i) President, Chief Operating Officer and Secretary of the
Company; (ii) President, Chief Operating Officer and Secretary of SOG, the Company’s wholly owned
subsidiary; and (iii) Director of both the Company and SOG for personal reasons and to pursue other
opportunities.
On August 30, 2013, in conjunction with Mr. Kelly’s resignation, the Company entered into a Termination
Agreement and Release (the “Termination Agreement”) in full compromise of any and all claims Mr. Kelly may
have against the Company. Prior to the execution of the Termination Agreement the Company had accrued
liabilities for past salary and related expenses of approximately $158,000. The Company shall deliver and pay
to Mr. Kelly the following as per the Termination Agreement:
●2,500,000 shares of restricted common stock, at a fair value of $500,000 ($0.20/share),
●Compensation - $6,000 per month, for 30 consecutive months commencing September 1, 2013,
●Compensation - $25,000 per month, for 5 consecutive months commencing October 1, 2013,
●Preferred Share Repurchase - $25,000 as payment in full for the sale, return and delivery to the Company of 50
shares of Preferred Stock held by Mr. Kelly,
   
●Cancellation of 1,500,000 stock options.
On August 30, 2013, the Company paid compensation to Mr. Kelly of $6,000 and repurchased 50 shares of
preferred stock for $25,000 as per the terms of the Termination Agreement. As of September 30, 2013 the
Company has accrued a liability of $799,000 for the remaining compensation to be paid to Mr. Kelly.
Consulting Agreement
On October 15, 2013, the Company entered into a Consulting Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Alan Gaines
to provide general business consulting services and business development.  The terms of the Agreement are
as follows:
●Term - 1 year, the Agreement shall renew and continue in effect for successive one-year periods unless terminated,
●Compensation - $15,000 per month,
●Option Grant - 8% of the Company’s fully diluted shares, $0.15 exercise price, 5 year term, cashless exercise
provision,
●Preferred Share Grant - 5 shares of Preferred Stock
Amendment to consulting agreement
In December 2013 due to the present uncertainty surrounding the number of shares that Mr. Gaines may
ultimately acquire should he elect to exercise his stock option, both the Company and Mr. Gaines have
agreed to cancel the prior stock option and to issue a new stock option to Mr. Gaines, exercisable for up to
7,500,000 shares at $0.15 per share with 5 year term. The new option is immediately exercisable with respect
to 4,500,000 shares and will vest with respect to the remaining 3,000,000 shares on either (a) the date on which
Mr. Gaines shall become a director of the Company or (b) December 31, 2014, in the event the Company has
not procured D&O liability insurance in excess of $5 million by such date. Mr. Gaines has also relinquished
any and all interest in and to the five (5) shares of Preferred Stock that were granted to him and such shares
of Preferred Stock have been rescinded.
Litigation
On October 17, 2013, the Company filed a complaint in the Westchester County Supreme Court of the State of
New York (the “Court”) against Timothy Kelly (“Kelly”) seeking damages for Kelly’s breach of fiduciary duty
and usurpation of corporate opportunities. Kelly is the former President, Chief Operating Officer, Secretary
and Director of the Company. He resigned from each of these positions on or about August 30, 2013. The
complaint alleges that Kelly, prior to his resignation, engaged in a pattern of self-dealing and exposed the
Company to adverse criticism and hostility from its shareholders by: (i) purchasing, on his behalf, at least one
oil well and land that would have been profitable to the Company; (ii) claiming to sell shares of the Company’s
stock that he either obtained from other shareholders or that did not exist and (iii) misrepresenting the nature
of the stock for his personal profit. The Company is seeking $4,000,000 in compensatory damages, as well as
costs, interest and such other relief as the Court may deem just and proper.
On January 21, 2014, Tim Kelly filed a counterclaim for breach of contract against the Company and
SOG.  See Note 11 Subsequent Events for further discussion of the counterclaim.
F-75
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
Joint Development Agreement
On December 10, 2013, the Company entered into a Joint Development Agreement dated as of December 3,
2013 (the “Joint Agreement”) with Eagleford Energy, Inc., an Ontario, Canada corporation (“ Eagleford ”) and
its wholly-owned subsidiary, Eagleford Energy, Zavala Inc., a Nevada corporation (“Eagleford Zavala”).  On
January 24, 2014, the Company, Eagleford and Eagleford Zavala entered into an amendment to the Joint
Agreement (the “First Amendment”), pursuant to which Eagleford Zavala, in exchange for certain
commitments made by us therein, accelerated the grant to us of certain undivided interests in its oil and gas
lease dated September 1, 2013 covering approximately 2,629 acres in Zavala County, Texas (the “Lease”).
Under the terms of the Zavala County Lease, the lessee (Eagleford Zavala) is required to either frac the
Matthews #1H or spud a new well prior to the expiration of the Primary Term which was January 31, 2014. 
Eagleford Zavala has the right to extend the Primary Term for up to two additional months by paying the
lessors a fee of $30,000 for each one month extension. On January 23, 2014 the Company did exercise its
right to extend the lease for 30 days, and has commenced the frac of Matthews #1H in February 2014. 
Eagleford Zavala has timely satisfied the foregoing requirement and the Zavala County Lease will remain in
full force and effect. Beginning in the second lease year, Eagleford Zavala will be required to meet an annual
minimum royalty of $850,000 per year and to drill at least two new wells per year.  Failure to meet these
requirements will result in a termination of the Zavala County Lease, except for such acreage retained by
production.
Note 9 Income Taxes:
At December 31, 2013, the Company has a net operating loss carry-forward of approximately $3,300,000
available to offset future taxable income expiring through 2033. Utilization of these net operating losses may
be limited due to potential ownership changes under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code.
The valuation allowance at December 31, 2013 was $1,264,000. The net change in valuation allowance during
the year ended December 31, 2013 was a decrease of $733,000. In assessing the realizability of deferred tax
assets, management considers whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred
income tax assets will not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred income tax assets is dependent
upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences
become deductible. Management considers the scheduled reversal of deferred income tax liabilities,
projected future taxable income, and tax planning strategies in making this assessment. Based on
consideration of these items, Management has determined that enough uncertainty exists relative to the
realization of the deferred income tax asset balances to warrant the application of a full valuation allowance as
of December 31, 2013 and 2012.
Significant deferred tax assets at December 31, 2013 and 2012 are as follows:
Gross deferred tax assets:
Net operating loss carryforward $1,264,000   $1,997,000  
Total deferred tax assets
   1,264,000     1,997,000
2012
2013
Less: valuation allowance
Deferred tax asset – net
(1,264,000)   (1,997,000)
 
 $-
$-
F-76
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
There was no income tax expense for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012 due to the Company’s
utilization of net operating losses in 2013 and a net loss in 2012. The Company’s tax expense differs from the
“expected” tax expense for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, (computed by applying the Federal
Corporate tax rate of 34% to income (loss) before tax and 6.75% for State Corporate taxes for the years ended
December 31, 2013 and 2012, the blended rate used was 38% for the years ended December 31, 2013 and
2012, as follows:
The expected tax expense (benefit) based on the statutory rate is reconciled with actual tax expense benefit
as follows:
December 31, 
December 31, 
  
 
 
2013
2012
  %
 %
 
)  
(31
  
U.S. federal statutory rate
)  
  
(7
State income tax, net of federal benefit
   22
   
Non-deductible stock compensation
   
Change in fair value of derivative expense
   4
   
Amortization of debt discount and issuance costs   9
Impairment loss
   6
   
(12
)  
  
Deferred tax true-up
)  
(2
  
Utilization of NOL
)  
  
Other permanent differences
(1
   12
Change in valuation allowance
    38
   
  
Income tax provision (benefit)
(31
(7
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
)
)
-
-
The Company evaluated the provisions of ASC 740 related to the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes
recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements. ASC 740 prescribes a comprehensive model for how a
company should recognize, present, and disclose uncertain positions that the Company has taken or
expects to take in its tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-
not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. Differences between tax positions taken or
expected to be taken in a tax return and the net benefit recognized and measured pursuant to the
interpretation are referred to as “unrecognized benefits.” A liability is recognized (or amount of net operating
loss carry forward or amount of tax refundable is reduced) for unrecognized tax benefit because it represents
an enterprise’s potential future obligation to the taxing authority for a tax position that was not recognized as
a result of applying the provisions of ASC 740. The 2010 through 2013 tax years remain subject to
examination.
If applicable, interest costs related to the unrecognized tax benefits are required to be calculated and would
be classified as “Other expenses – Interest” in the statement of operations. Penalties would be recognized as
a component of “General and administrative.”
No interest or penalties on unpaid tax were recorded during the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012,
respectively. As of December 31, 2013 and 2012, no liability for unrecognized tax benefits was required to be
reported. The Company does not expect any significant changes in its unrecognized tax benefits in the next
year.
Note 10 Supplemental Information on Oil and Gas Operations (Unaudited)
This supplementary oil and natural gas information is provided in accordance with the United States Financial
Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Topic 932 - “Extractive Activities - Oil and Gas”.
The Company retains qualified independent reserves evaluators to evaluate the Company’s proved oil
reserves. The Company does not have any natural gas reserves.  For the year ended December 31, 2013 the
report by LaRoche Petroleum Consultants (“LaRoche”) covered 100% of the Company’s proved oil reserves.
F-77
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
Proved oil and natural gas reserves, as defined within the SEC Rule 4-10(a)(22) of Regulation S-X, are those
quantities of oil and gas, which, by analysis of geoscience and engineering data can be estimated with
reasonable certainty to be economically producible from a given date forward from known reservoirs, and
under existing economic conditions, operating methods and government regulations prior to the time of
which contracts providing the right to operate expire, unless evidence indicates that renewal is reasonably
certain, regardless of whether determinable or probabilistic methods are used for the estimation. The project
to extract the hydrocarbons must have commenced or the operator must be reasonably certain that it will
commence the project within a reasonable time. Developed oil and natural gas reserves are reserves that can
be expected to be recovered from existing wells with existing equipment and operating methods or in which
the cost of the required equipment is relatively minor compared to the cost of a new well; and through
installed extraction equipment and infrastructure operational at the time of the reserves estimate is the
extraction is by means not involving a well. Estimates of the Company’s oil reserves are subject to
uncertainty and will change as additional information regarding producing fields and technology becomes
available and as future economic and operating conditions change.
The following table summarizes the Company’s proved developed and undeveloped reserves (all oil) within
the United States, net of royalties, as of December 31, 2013:
2013   2012
 
Oil (MBbls)
  26,583   12,800  
Proved reserves as at January 1
  1,291    25,434  
Extensions and discoveries
  0
 
Dispositions
  (9,453 )  (11,651)
Production
Revisions of prior estimates
 
  2,531    -
Total Proved reserves as at December 31  20,952   26,583
-
2013   2012  
Oil (MBbls)
  20,952   26,583 
Proved developed producing
  -
 
Non-producing
Proved undeveloped
  2,417    1,088  
Total Proved reserves as at December 31  23,369   27,671
-
2012
Capitalized Costs Related to Oil and Gas Assets 2013
 
Proved properties
Unproved properties
Total
Less: amount impaired
Capitalized cost, net of impairment
Less: accumulated depletion
3,225,769    2,454,855  
  1,520,870    2,162,315  
  4,746,639    4,617,169  
  (2,268,977)  (1,515,112)
  2,477,662    3,102,057  
  (707,143 )  (574,809 )
  1,770,519    2,527,248
Costs incurred in Oil and Gas Activities: 2013
 
Development
Exploration
Total
734,642   374,967 
  -
 
  734,642   374,967
2012
-
F-78
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
Standardized Measure of Discounted Future Net Cash Flows From Proved Oil Reserves and Changes
Therein:
The following standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows from proved oil reserves has been
computed using the average first-day-of-the-month price during the previous 12-month period, costs as at the
balance sheet date and year-end statutory income tax rates. A discount factor of 10% has been applied in
determining the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows. The Company does not believe
that the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows will be representative of actual future net
cash flows and should not be considered to represent the fair value of the oil properties. Actual net cash
flows will differ from the presented estimated future net cash flows due to several factors including:
●Future production will include production not only from proved properties, but may also include production from
probable and possible reserves;
●Future production of oil and natural gas from proved properties may differ from reserves estimated;
●Future production rates may vary from those estimated;
●Future rather than average first-day-of-the-month prices during the previous 12-month period and costs as at the
balance sheet date will apply;
●Economic factors such as changes to interest rates, income tax rates, regulatory and fiscal environments and
operating conditions cannot be determined with certainty;
●Future estimated income taxes do not take into account the effects of future exploration expenditures; and
●Future development and asset retirement obligations may differ from those estimated.
Future net revenues, development, production and restoration costs have been based upon the estimates
referred to above. The following tables summarize the Company’s future net cash flows relating to proved oil
reserves based on the standardized measure as prescribed in FASB Topic 932 - “Extractive Activities - Oil
and Gas”:
2012
2013
 
 
   
 
  1,865,657   2,385,359 
Future cash inflows
  (849,221 )  (922,697 )
Future operating costs
Future development costs
  -
 
Future asset retirement costs  (39,138 )  (38,217 )
  -
Future income taxes
 
  977,298    1,424,445 
Future net cash flows
  (216,870 )  (342,462 )
10% discount factor
Standardized measure
  760,428    1,081,983
-
-
Reconciliation of future cash flows relating to proved reserves:
Undiscounted value as at January 1
Extensions and discoveries
Dispositions
Production
2012
2013
   
 
  1,424,445   410,990  
  198,960    1,134,342 
  -
 
  (847,257 )  (959,388 )
-
Revisions of prior volume estimates
  201,150    1,175,741 
Revisions of pricing
   (337,240 )
  -
Undiscounted value as at December 31  977,298    1,424,445 
  (216,870 )  (342,462 )
10% discount factor
Standardized measure
  760,428    1,081,983
F-79
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
December 31, 2013
Note 11 Subsequent Events:
The Company has evaluated all events that occurred after the balance sheet date through the date when the
consolidated financial statements were issued to determine if they must be reported. The management of the
Company determined that there were certain reportable subsequent events to be disclosed as follow.
Agreements with Placement Agents and Finders
The Company entered into a Financial Advisory and Investment Banking Agreement with Radnor Research &
Trading Company, LLC (“Radnor”) effective January 24, 2014 (the “Radnor Advisory Agreement”). Pursuant
to the Radnor Advisory Agreement, Radnor will act as the Company’s exclusive financial advisor and
placement agent to assist the Company in connection with a best efforts private placement (the “Financing”)
of up to $10 million of the Company’s equity and/or debt securities and/or convertible instruments (the
“Securities”).
The Company upon closing of the Financing shall pay consideration to Radnor, in cash, a fee in an amount
equal to 10% of the aggregate gross proceeds raised in the Financing. The Company shall grant and deliver
to Radnor at the closing of the Financing, for nominal consideration, five year warrants (the “Warrants”) to
purchase such number of shares of Common Stock as is equal to 10% of the Offering proceeds.  The
Warrants shall be exercisable at any time during the five year period commencing on the closing to which
they relate at an exercise price of $0.30. If the Financing is consummated by means of more than one closing,
Radnor shall be entitled to the fees provided herein with respect to each such closing.
Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities
From February 11, 2014 through March 13, 2014, Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc. (“we” or the “Company”)
sold an aggregate of $6,842,650 in principal amount of our 12% Series A Senior Secured Convertible
Promissory Notes (the “Notes”) to investors in a private offering. The Notes bear interest at the rate of 12%
per annum payable quarterly in arrears, and all outstanding principal under the Notes is due and payable on
February 11, 2016. The Notes are secured by a first lien on substantially all of the Company’s assets. Holders
of the Notes have the option to convert outstanding principal and interest under the Notes into shares of the
Company’s common stock at a conversion price of $0.30 per share. The Company may, at any time after the
six month anniversary date of the issuance of the Notes, elect to redeem all or a portion of the Notes,
provided, however, that if the Company elects to redeem the Notes prior to the one year anniversary date
from the date of issuance, the Company will be required to deliver an amount of interest equal to what the
holder of the Note would have received if such holder held the Note for a period of one year. In connection
with the sale of the Notes, the Company also issued to the participants in the private offering, warrants (the
“Warrants”) exercisable to purchase up to an aggregate of 4,561,728 shares of our common stock at an
exercise price of $0.30 per share. The Warrants are immediately exercisable and expire five years following
the date of their issuance.
In connection with the private offering of the Notes and Warrants, the Company received gross proceeds of
$6,842,650. We paid our placement agent a fee of $382,765 and issued them a Warrant exercisable for up to
1,275,900 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $0.30. The issuance of the Notes and the
Warrants were issued under the exemption from registration provided by Section 4(2) of the Securities Act,
and Rule 506 of Regulation D promulgated thereunder.
Litigation
On January 21, 2014, Tim Kelly filed a counterclaim for breach of contract against Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings,
Inc. and Stratex Oil & Gas, Inc. in the matter titled Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc. v. Kelly, No. 67528/2013 (N.Y.
Sup., Westchester Cty.)  Kelly alleges that Stratex breached the certain Termination Agreement, dated August
30, 2013 between Kelly and Stratex.  Specifically, Kelly alleges that the Termination Agreement requires
Stratex to deliver a certain number of shares of Stratex restricted common stock and pay him a total of
approximately $300,000 over a period of thirty months.  Kelly claims that Stratex has failed to deliver the
shares of Stratex stock and to pay him the monthly payments.  Kelly further claims that Stratex breached the
non-disparaging provision of the Termination Agreement by making derogatory statements about him to the
public and/or third-persons.  Kelly is seeking a minimum of $500,000 in damages, plus interest and 2,500,000
shares of Stratex restricted common stock.
F-80
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil& Gas Holdings, Inc.
Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheets
(unaudited)
Assets
Current Assets:
  Cash
  Accounts receivable
  Other receivables
  Prepaid expenses
  Note receivable and accrued interest
    Total Current Assets
 
Deposits
Debt issuance costs
Oil and gas property, plant and equipment:
June 30, 
 
2014
  
    
    
 $6,421,908   $609,061
    18,220
   138,300
    -
   244,282
   42,035
    2,800
   1,400,009     -
   8,246,534     630,081
    
   35,025
   1,751,071     -
10,025
December 31, 
  
 
2013
2,380
9,000
    715,000
    216,000
    -
    76,675
    -
4,111,567     893,763
  Proven property - net
 
   1,641,826     1,520,870
  Unproven property
 
   52,588
Vehicles, furniture and equipment - net
 
 $15,838,611   $3,057,119
Total Assets
 
    
 
 
    
Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity (Deficit)
 
    
 
 
    
Current Liabilities:
 
 $1,778,804   $904,615
  Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
 
   -
  Liability to be issued in stock
 
   751,000
  Due to former officer - current
 
   120,000
  Demand notes payable
 
   4,827
  Current maturities of notes payable - net of debt discount
 
   148,769
  Derivative liability - warrants
 
   50,000
  Other current liabilities
 
   2,853,400     1,921,290
    Total Current Liabilities
 
     
    
 
 
     
    
Long-term Liabilities:
 
    84,000
   48,000
  Due to former officer
 
   34,157
    34,000
  Asset retirement obligations
 
   1,167,283     790,528
  Notes payable - net of debt discount
 
   10,280,596     -
  Convertible notes payable, net of debt discount
 
    
     
 
 
   11,530,036     908,528
Total Long-Term Liabilities
 
    
 
 
   14,383,436     2,829,818
Total Liabilities
 
    
 
 
    
Commitments and Contingencies
 
    
 
 
    
Stockholders' Equity (Deficit):
 
   Series A, convertible preferred stock, $0.0001 par value; 400 shares authorized;    
 
   1
    and 100 shares issued; and 60 shares outstanding
 
    
  Common stock, $0.01 par value; 750,000,000 shares authorized;
 
    and 49,287,376 and 46,692,376 shares issued and outstanding
   492,874
   20,265,577     13,680,474  
  Additional paid in capital
   (19,283,277)   (13,900,098 )
  Accumulated deficit
)
   (20,000
  Less: Treasury stock, 40 shares Series A, convertible preferred stock, at cost
)   (20,000
   1,455,175     227,301
    Total Stockholders' Equity (Deficit)
 
 
    
 
Total Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity (Deficit)
 $15,838,611   $3,057,119
1
     
    466,924
See accompanying notes to the condensed consolidated financial statements.
F-81
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations
(unaudited)
For The Three Months
For The Six Months
Revenue
 
Operating Expenses:
  Production expenses
  Depletion, depreciation and amortization
  General and administrative
  Loss on abandonment of oil and gas assets
  Total Operating Expenses
 
Loss From Operations
 
Other Income and (Expense):
  Interest income
  Interest expense
  Change in fair value - derivative liabilities
  Warrant amendment expense
  Gain on sale of oil and gas interests
  Gain (loss) on settlement of liabilities
  Other income
  Total Other Income and (Expense)
 
 
Net Loss
 
Net Loss Per Common Share  
     - Basic and Diluted
 
Weighted Average Number of Common Shares
Outstanding
    - Basic and Diluted
-
Ended
  June 30,
 June 30,
  2013
 2014
   
  
  $187,402
 $320,693
     
    
     
    
    38,581
   140,791
   24,188
    39,616
   2,887,788     516,964
   318,800
   3,371,567     595,161
    
   (3,050,874 )   (407,759
    
    
   8,071
   (1,762,649 )   (584,363
   17,322
   -
   -
   84,600
   82
   (1,652,574 )   (575,338
    
    
 $(4,703,448 ) $(983,097
9,025
    -
    -
    -
    -
-
-
Ended
 
  June 30,
  June 30,
 
  2013
  2014
 
   
   
 
  $454,180
  $419,050
 
     
     
 
     
     
 
    98,651
    181,730
 
    41,707
    105,933
 
    3,666,396     973,299
    318,800
 
    4,208,633     1,177,883  
 
     
)
)   (3,789,583 )   (723,703
 
     
     
 
 
    8,071
)
)   (2,087,675 )   (845,006
    (72,094
 
 
    (14,755
 
    450,000
 
    83,600
    39,257
 
)
)   (1,593,596 )   (820,801
 
     
     
 
) $(5,383,179 ) $(1,544,504 )
)   11,245
)   -
    -
    -
    12,960
-
$(0.10
) $(0.02
) $(0.11
) $(0.03
)
48,612,651     44,436,222     47,953,674     44,376,941
See accompanying notes to the condensed consolidated financial statements.
F-82
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Condensed Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(unaudited)
 
 
 
 
 
Cash Flows From Operating Activities:
  Net loss
  Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash provided by (used in) operating activities:    
    Depletion, depreciation and amortization
    Bad debt
    Stock based compensation
June 30,
  2013
For The Six Months Ended 
 
 June 30,
 
 2014
  
 
    
 
 $(5,383,179 )   (1,544,504 )
7,707
   5,808
   1,793,412     263,166
56,933
    -
Warrant amendment expense
    Amortization of debt issue costs
    Accretion of debt discount
    Loss on abandonment of oil and gas assets
    Gain on settlement of liabilities
    Gain on sale of oil and gas interests
    Change in fair value of derivative liabilities
  Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
  (Increase) decrease in:
    Accounts receivable
    Prepaid expenses
    Deposits
    Interest receivable
  Increase (decrease) in:
    Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
    Asset retirement obligations
    Other current liabilities
Net Cash Provided By (Used In) Operating Activities
 
Cash Flows From Investing Activities:
  Purchase of oil and gas properties
  Proceeds from sale of oil and gas interests
  Purchase of vehicle
  Purchase of furniture and equipment
  Increase in other receivables
  Increase in note receivable
Net Cash Provided By (Used In) Investing Activities
 
Cash Flows From Financing Activities:
  Proceeds from notes payable
  Repayments on notes payable
  Proceeds from convertible notes payable
  Debt issuance costs paid in cash
  Sale of common stock for cash
Net Cash Provided By (Used In) Financing Activities
 
Net change  in cash
 
Cash at beginning of period
 
Cash at end of period
 
Supplemental disclosures of cash flow information:
  Cash paid for interest
  Cash paid for taxes
 
Supplemental disclosure of non-cash investing and financing activities:
 
  Conversion of notes payable and accrued interest to common stock
  Issuance of common stock to settle liabilities
  Original issue discount on notes payable
  Original issue discount on convertible notes payable
  Debt issuance costs paid in the form of warrants
  Debt issuance costs accrued
  Increase in asset retirement obligation
  Vehicle purchased through issuance of note payable
-
    -
-
)   -
)   -
    (11,245
     
     
)   26,771
)   (6,882
)   -
)   -
     
    678,612
    49,000
    -
14,755
 
   242,233
 
   1,319,595     824,912
 
   318,800
 
   (83,600
 
   (450,000
)
   72,094
 
    
 
    
 
   (125,888
)
   (39,235
 
   (25,000
 
   (8,071
 
    
 
   726,164
 
   -
 
   50,000
 
   (1,564,405 )   336,763
 
    
    
 
   (3,660,108 )   (496,345 )
    -
 
   450,000
)   -
   (21,000
 
 
)   -
   (5,700
 
   (244,282
)   -
   (1,391,938 )   -
 
   (4,873,028 )   (496,345 )
     
 
    
     
 
    
    505,000
   400,000
 
 
   (97,510
)   -
 
   13,020,510     -
 
   (1,072,720 )   -
    35,000
   -
 
 
   12,250,280     540,000
 
    
 
   5,812,847     380,418
    
 
 
   609,061
 
    
 
 $6,421,908   $455,521
    
 
 
    
 
 $206,767
 $-
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 $-
 
 
 $196,200
 
 $160,000
 
 $3,944,927   $-
 $585,359
  $-
 
 
  $-
 $335,225
 
  $-
 $157
 $28,510
  $-
75,103
$15,938
  $-
     
     
     
  $36,000
  $-
  $505,000
Reclass convertible note to demand note
$-
$36,000
See accompanying notes to the condensed consolidated financial statements.
F-83
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
Note 1 Nature of Operations and Basis of Presentation:
Nature of Operations
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc. (“we” or the “Company”) was incorporated on August 15, 2003 as Poway
Muffler and Brake Inc. in California to enter the muffler and brakes business. On December 15, 2008, a merger
was effected with Ross Investments Inc., a Colorado shell corporation. Ross Investments was the acquirer
and the surviving corporation. Ross Investments Inc. then changed its name to Poway Muffler and Brake, Inc.
On May 25, 2012, we filed an Amendment to our Certificate of Incorporation by which we changed our name
from Poway Muffler and Brake, Inc., a Colorado corporation, to Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc., with the
Secretary of the State of Colorado.
On July 6, 2012, Stratex Acquisition Corp., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
merged with and into Stratex Oil & Gas, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“SOG”). SOG was the surviving
corporation of that Merger. As a result of the merger, we acquired the business of SOG, and continue the
business operations of SOG as a wholly-owned subsidiary.
The Company is engaged in the sale of oil and gas and the exploration for and development of oil and gas
reserves in south Texas as well as Kansas, North Dakota, Utah and Montana.
Basis of Presentation- Unaudited Interim Financial Information
The accompanying unaudited interim condensed consolidated financial statements and related notes have
been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America
(“U.S. GAAP”) for interim financial information, and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the United
States Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) with respect to Form 10-Q and Article 8 of
Regulation S-X. Accordingly, they do not include all of the information and footnotes required by U.S. GAAP
for complete financial statements. The unaudited interim condensed consolidated financial statements
furnished reflect all adjustments (consisting of normal recurring accruals) which are, in the opinion of
management, necessary to fairly present the results for the interim periods presented. Interim results are not
necessarily indicative of the results for the full year. These unaudited interim condensed consolidated
financial statements should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements of the
Company for the year ended December 31, 2013 and notes thereto contained in the Company’s annual report
on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013, as filed with the SEC on March 31, 2014.
Note 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies:
Principles of Consolidation
All significant intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
Reclassification
Certain amounts in the prior period financial statements have been reclassified to conform to the current
period presentation.   These reclassifications had no effect on reported losses.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of condensed consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the condensed
consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Such estimates and assumptions impact, among
others, the following: allowance for bad debt, inventory obsolescence,  the fair value of share-based
payments, fair value of derivative liabilities, estimates of the probability and potential magnitude of contingent
liabilities and the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets due to continuing operating losses.
F-84
Table of Contents
Making estimates requires management to exercise significant judgment. It is at least reasonably possible
that the estimate of the effect of a condition, situation or set of circumstances that existed at the date of the
consolidated financial statements, which management considered in formulating its estimate could change in
the near term due to one or more future confirming events. Accordingly, the actual results could differ
significantly from our estimates.
The accompanying condensed consolidated financial statements contain estimates of the Company’s proved
reserves and the estimated future net revenues from the proved reserves.  These estimates are based on
various assumptions, including assumptions required by the United States Securities and Exchange
Commission (“SEC”) relating to oil and gas prices, drilling and operating expenses, capital expenditures,
taxes and availability of funds.
The process of estimating oil and gas reserves is complex and involves significant decisions and
assumptions in the evaluation of available geological, geophysical, engineering and economic data for each
reservoir.  Actual future production, oil and gas prices, revenues, taxes, development expenditures, operating
expenses and quantities of recoverable oil and gas reserves most likely will vary from these estimates.  Such
variations may be significant and could materially affect the estimated quantities and present value of our
proved reserves.  In addition, the Company’s management may adjust estimates of proved reserves to reflect
production history, results of exploration and development drilling, prevailing oil and gas prices and other
factors, many of which are beyond the Company’s control.  The Company’s properties may also be
susceptible to hydrocarbon drainage from production by operators on adjacent properties.
The present value of future net cash flows from the Company’s proved reserves is not necessarily the same
as the current market value of the Company’s estimated oil and natural gas reserves.  The estimated
discounted future net cash flows from the Company’s proved reserves is based on the average, first-day-of-
the-month price during the 12-month period preceding the measurement date.  Actual future net cash flows
from oil and natural gas properties also will be affected by factors such as actual prices received for oil and
gas, actual development and production costs, the amount and timing of actual production, the supply of and
demand for oil and gas, and changes in governmental regulations or taxes.
The timing of the Company’s production and incurrence of expenses in connection with the development and
production of oil and natural gas properties will affect the timing of actual future net cash flows from proved
reserves, and thus their actual present value. In addition, the 10% discount factor used when calculating
discounted future net cash flows for financial statement disclosure may not be the most appropriate discount
factor based on interest rates in effect from time to time and risks associated with the Company or the oil and
natural gas industry in general.
Risks and Uncertainties
The Company operates in an industry that is subject to intense competition and change in consumer
demand. The Company's operations are subject to significant risk and uncertainties including financial and
operational risks including the potential risk of business failure.
The Company’s future success depends largely on its ability to find and develop or acquire additional oil and
gas reserves that are economically recoverable.  Unless the Company replaces the reserves produced
through successful development, exploration or acquisition activities, proved reserves will decline over
time.  Recovery of any additional reserves will require significant capital expenditures and successful drilling
operations.  The Company may not be able to successfully find and produce reserves economically in the
future.  In addition, the Company may not be able to acquire proved reserves at acceptable costs.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid instruments purchased with an original maturity of three months or
less to be cash equivalents.  There were no cash equivalents at June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013.
The Company minimizes its credit risk associated with cash by periodically evaluating the credit quality of its
primary financial institution. The balance at times may exceed federally insured limits.
F-85
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Accounts receivable consist primarily of oil and gas receivables, net of a valuation allowance for doubtful
accounts.  As of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013, the allowance for doubtful accounts was $0.
Oil and Gas Properties, Successful Efforts Method
The Company uses the successful efforts method of accounting for oil and gas producing activities. Under
the successful efforts method, costs to acquire mineral interests in oil and gas properties, to drill and equip
exploratory wells that find proved reserves, and to drill and equip development wells are capitalized. Costs to
drill exploratory wells that do not find proved reserves, geological and geophysical costs, and costs of
carrying and retaining unproved properties are expensed as incurred.  The Company evaluates its proved oil
and gas properties for impairment on a field-by-field basis whenever events or changes in circumstances
indicate that an asset’s carrying value may not be recoverable. The Company follows FASB ASC 360 -
Property, Plant, and Equipment, for these evaluations. Unamortized capital costs are reduced to fair value if
the undiscounted future net cash flows from our interest in the property’s estimated proved reserves are less
than the asset’s net book value.
Support Facilities and Equipment
Our support facilities and equipment are generally located in proximity to certain of our principal fields.
Depreciation of these support facilities is provided on the straight-line method based on estimated useful
lives of 7 to 10 years.
Maintenance and repair costs that do not extend the useful lives of property and equipment are charged to
expense as incurred.
Proved Reserves
Estimates of the Company’s proved reserves included in this report are prepared in accordance with U.S.
GAAP and guidelines from the SEC. The Company’s engineering estimates of proved oil and natural gas
reserves directly impact financial accounting estimates, including depreciation, depletion and amortization
expense and impairment. Proved oil and natural gas reserves are the estimated quantities of oil and natural
gas reserves that geological and engineering data demonstrate with reasonable certainty to be recoverable in
future years from known reservoirs under period-end economic and operating conditions. The process of
estimating quantities of proved reserves is very complex, requiring significant subjective decisions in the
evaluation of all geological, engineering and economic data for each reservoir. The accuracy of a reserve
estimate is a function of: (i) the quality and quantity of available data; (ii) the interpretation of that data; (iii) the
accuracy of various mandated economic assumptions; and (iv) the judgment of the persons preparing the
estimate. The data for a given reservoir may change substantially over time as a result of numerous factors,
including additional development activity, evolving production history and continual reassessment of the
viability of production under varying economic conditions. Changes in oil and natural gas prices, operating
costs and expected performance from a given reservoir also will result in revisions to the amount of the
Company’s estimated proved reserves. The Company engages independent reserve engineers to estimate its
proved reserves.
Asset Retirement Obligations
The Company follows the provisions of the FASB ASC 410 - Asset Retirement and Environmental
Obligations. The fair value of an asset retirement obligation is recognized in the period in which it is incurred if
a reasonable estimate of fair value can be made.  As of June 30, 2014 and 2013, the Company’s obligations
were $34,157 and $34,000, respectively.  The present value of the estimated asset retirement costs is
capitalized as part of the carrying amount of the long-lived asset. The Company’s asset retirement obligations
relate to the abandonment of oil and gas. producing facilities. The amounts recognized are based upon
numerous estimates and assumptions, including future retirement costs, future recoverable quantities of oil
and gas, future inflation rates and the credit-adjusted risk-free interest rate. Accretion of asset retirement
costs were immaterial for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013.
F-86
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
Debt Issue Costs and Debt Discount
The Company may pay debt issue costs, and record debt discounts in connection with raising funds through
the issuance of convertible debt. These costs are amortized over the life of the debt to interest expense. If a
conversion of the underlying debt occurs, a proportionate share of the unamortized amounts is immediately
expensed.
Original Issue Discount
For certain debt issued in 2014, 2013 and 2012, the Company provided the debt holder with an original issue
discount.  The original issue discount was equal to simple interest at 10% - 20% of the proceeds raised.  The
original issue discount was recorded to debt discount reducing the face amount of the note and is being
amortized to interest expense over the maturity period of the debt. For certain debt the original issue discount
exceeded face value bringing the carrying value to $0 and the remainder charged to interest expense.
Beneficial Conversion Feature
For conventional convertible debt where the rate of conversion is below market value, the Company records a
“beneficial conversion feature” (“BCF”) and related debt discount.
When the Company records a BCF the relative fair value of the BCF would be recorded as a debt discount
against the face amount of the respective debt instrument. The debt discount attributable to the BCF is
amortized over the period from issuance to the date that the debt becomes convertible. If the debt is
immediately convertible, the discount is amortized to interest expense in full immediately.
Derivative Financial Instruments
Fair value accounting requires bifurcation of embedded derivative instruments such as ratchet provisions or
conversion features in convertible debt or equity instruments, and measurement of their fair value for
accounting purposes. In determining the appropriate fair value, the Company utilized an option pricing model.
In assessing the Company’s convertible debt instruments, management determines if the convertible debt
host instrument is conventional convertible debt and further if there is a beneficial conversion feature
requiring measurement. If the instrument is not considered conventional convertible debt, the Company will
continue its evaluation process of these instruments as derivative financial instruments.
Once determined, the derivative liabilities are adjusted to reflect fair value at each reporting period end, with
any increase or decrease in the fair value being recorded in results of operations as an adjustment to fair
value of derivatives. In addition, the fair value of freestanding derivative instruments such as warrants, are
also valued using the option pricing model.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues from the sale of oil and natural gas are recognized when the product is delivered at a fixed or
determinable price, title has transferred, and collectability is reasonably assured and evidenced by a contract.
The Company follows the “sales method” of accounting for oil and natural gas revenue, so it recognizes
revenue on all natural gas or crude oil sold to purchasers, regardless of whether the sales are proportionate
to its ownership in the property. A receivable or liability is recognized only to the extent that the Company has
an imbalance on a specific property greater than its share of the expected remaining proved reserves.
F-87
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
Share-Based Payments
Generally, all forms of share-based payments, including stock option grants, warrants, restricted stock grants
and stock appreciation rights are measured at their fair value utilizing an option pricing model on the awards’
grant date, based on the estimated number of awards that are ultimately expected to vest. Share-based
compensation awards issued to non-employees for services rendered are recorded at either the fair value of
the services rendered or the fair value of the share-based payment, whichever is more readily determinable.
The expenses resulting from share-based payments are recorded in cost of goods sold or general and
administrative expense in the statement of operations, depending on the nature of the services provided.
Income Taxes
The Company is a taxable entity and recognizes deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax
consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets
and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted
tax rates expected to be in effect when the temporary differences reverse. The effect on the deferred tax
assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the year that includes the enactment
date of the rate change. A valuation allowance is used to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is
more likely than not to be realized. Interest and penalties associated with income taxes are included in selling,
general and administrative expense.
The Company follows ASC 740 “Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes” which prescribes a
comprehensive model of how a company should recognize, measure, present, and disclose in its condensed
consolidated financial statements uncertain tax positions that the Company has taken or expects to take on a
tax return. ASC 740 states that a tax benefit from an uncertain position may be recognized if it is "more likely
than not" that the position is sustainable, based upon its technical merits. The tax benefit of a qualifying
position is the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon
ultimate settlement with a taxing authority having full knowledge of all relevant information. After review of the
Company’s tax positions, no liabilities were recorded for unrecognized tax benefits as of June 30, 2014 or
December 31, 2013.
Earnings Per Share
Basic earnings (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of
shares of common stock outstanding during each period.  Diluted earnings (loss) per share is computed by
dividing net income (loss), adjusted for changes in income or loss that resulted from the assumed conversion
of convertible shares, by the weighted average number of shares of common stock, common stock
equivalents and potentially dilutive securities outstanding during the period.
The Company had the following potential common stock equivalents at June 30, 2014:
Convertible debt – face amount of $120,000, conversion price of $0.70
 
Convertible debt – face amount of $13,020,510, conversion price of $0.30  43,401,700 
  9,225,000  
Common stock options, exercise price of $0.08 - $0.50
171,429
Common stock warrants, exercise price of $0.15 - $0.85
Common stock to be issued
Total common stock equivalents
21,581,768 
  2,500,000  
  76,879,897
The Company had the following potential common stock equivalents at June 30, 2013:
Convertible debt – face amount of $216,000, conversion price of $0.70  308,571  
  3,000,000 
Common stock options, exercise price of $0.50
  3,081,250 
Common stock warrants, exercise price of $0.70 - $1.65
 Total common stock equivalents
  6,389,821
Since the Company reflected a net loss during the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2014 and
2013, the effect of considering any common stock equivalents, would have been anti-dilutive. A separate
computation of diluted earnings (loss) per share is not presented.
F-88
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly
transaction between market participants at the measurement date (exit price). The Company utilizes market
data or assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability, including assumptions
about risk inherent in the inputs to the valuation technique. The authoritative guidance establishes a fair
value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs used to measure fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority
to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the
lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements).
The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are as follows:
Level
1
Level
2
Quoted market prices available in active markets for identical assets or liabilities as of the reporting date.
Pricing inputs other than quoted prices in active markets included in Level 1, which are either directly or
 
indirectly observable as of the reporting date.
Pricing inputs that are generally unobservable inputs and not corroborated by market data.
Level
3
Financial assets and liabilities are considered Level 3 when their fair values are determined using pricing
models, discounted cash flow methodologies or similar techniques and at least one significant model
assumption or input is unobservable.
The fair value hierarchy gives the highest priority to quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical
assets or liabilities and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs.  If the inputs used to measure the financial
assets and liabilities fall within more than one level described above, the categorization is based on the lowest
level input that is significant to the fair value measurement of the instrument.
The carrying amounts of the Company’s financial assets and liabilities, such as cash, inventory, prepaid
expenses and other current assets, accounts payable and accrued liabilities approximate their fair values
because of the short maturity of these instruments.
The Company’s Level 3 financial liabilities consist of the derivative warrants issued with the 2011 notes
payables for which there is no current market for this security such that the determination of fair value
requires significant judgment or estimation. The Company valued the reset adjustments in the warrant on
subsequent potential equity offerings using an option pricing model, for which management understands the
methodologies. These models incorporate transaction details such as the Company’s stock price,
contractual terms, maturity, risk-free rates, as well as assumptions about future financings, volatility, and
holder behavior as of the date of issuance and each balance sheet date.
F-89
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
Transactions involving related parties cannot be presumed to be carried out on an arm's-length basis, as the
requisite conditions of competitive, free-market dealings may not exist. Representations about transactions
with related parties, if made, shall not imply that the related party transactions were consummated on terms
equivalent to those that prevail in arm's-length transactions unless such representations can be
substantiated.
The Company uses Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy to measure the fair value of the derivative liabilities and
revalues its derivative warrant liability and derivative feature of convertible notes at every reporting period
and recognizes gains or losses in the statements of operations attributable to the change in the fair value of
the derivatives.
Financial instruments measured at fair value on a recurring basis are summarized below and disclosed on the
balance sheets as follows:
Fair Value Measurement Using
June 30, 2014
   Level 1    Level 2    Level 3     Total
 
 
    
Derivative warrant liabilities $-
$148,769  $148,769
$-
December 31, 2013
 Fair Value Measurement Using
   Level 1    Level 2    Level 3    Total
 
 
    
Derivative warrant liabilities $-
$76,675   $76,675
$-
F-90
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
The table below provides a summary of the changes in fair value, including net transfers in and/or out, of all
financial instruments measured at fair value on a recurring basis using significant unobservable inputs (Level
3) during the period January 1, 2013 to June 30, 2014:
Total
Fair Value Measurement
 
Using 
 
Level 3 Inputs
Derivative
 
Liabilities
  
 
 
 $593,555   $593,555  
Balance, January 1, 2013
 
    
 
 
   -
Purchases, issuances and settlements
 
    
 
Total gains or losses (realized/unrealized) included in net loss   (516,880 )   (516,880 )
 
 
 
Transfers in and/or out of Level 3
 
 
Balance, December 31, 2013
 
 
 
 
Purchases, issuances and settlements
 
 
 
Total gains or losses (realized/unrealized) included in net loss   72,094
-
     
  $76,675
     
    -
     
    72,094
-
    
 $76,675
    
   -
-
Transfers in and/or out of Level 3
 
Balance, June 30, 2014
-
    
 
 $148,769   $148,769
-
Fair Value of Financial Assets and Liabilities Measured on a Non-Recurring Basis
For periods in which impairment charges have been incurred, the Company is required to write down the
value of the impaired asset to its fair value. No impairment charges were recorded during the six months
ended June 30, 2014 and 2013.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2013, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued new guidance related to
obligations resulting from joint and several liability arrangements. The new guidance provides for the
recognition, measurement, and disclosure of obligations resulting from joint and several liability
arrangements for which the total amount of the obligation is fixed at the reporting date. The amendments in
this update are effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those years, beginning after December 15,
2013 and did not have a material impact on the Company’s unaudited condensed consolidated financial
statements.
F-91
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
On April 10, 2014, the FASB issued new guidance which amends the definition of a discontinued operation
and requires entities to provide additional disclosures about disposal transactions that do not meet the
discontinued-operations criteria. Under the new guidance, a discontinued operation is defined as a disposal
of a component or group of components that is disposed of or is classified as held for sale and represents a
strategic shift that has or will have a major effect on an entity's operations and financial results. The new
guidance is effective prospectively for all disposals (except disposals classified as held for sale before the
adoption date) or components initially classified as held for sale in periods beginning on or after December
15, 2014, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the potential impact, if any, of
the adoption of this new guidance on its financial statements.
In May 2014, the FASB issued a standard on revenue recognition providing a single, comprehensive revenue
recognition model for all contracts with customers. The revenue standard is based on the principle that
revenue should be recognized to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an
amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods
or services. The standard is effective beginning January 1, 2017, with no early adoption permitted. The
amendments may be applied retrospectively to each prior period presented or retrospectively with the
cumulative effect recognized as of the date of initial application. We are currently evaluating the adoption
method options and the impact of the new guidance on our consolidated financial statements.
Note 3 Oil and Gas Assets:
The following table summarizes the Company’s oil and gas assets:
$2,527,249 
Balance – January 1, 2013
   1,141,503 
Additions
   (98,335 )
Depletion
   (753,865 )
Impairment
   -
 
Abandonments
   (540,000 )
Dispositions
 
    
 
Balance – December 31, 2013   2,276,552 
   3,518,388 
Additions
   34,157
Asset retirement obligations
 
Depletion
   (24,953 )
   -
Impairment
 
   (318,800 )
Abandonments
 
   -
Dispositions
 
    
 
 $5,485,344 
Balance – June 30, 2014
F-92
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
The Company owns support facilities and equipment which serve its oil and gas production activities. The
following table details these properties and equipment, together with their estimated useful lives:
Balance – January 1, 2013
  $114,495 
    40,424  
Additions
    (16,838 )
Depreciation
 
    -
Impairment
     
 
 
Balance – December 31, 2013    138,081 
    141,720 
Additions
    (11,752 )
Depreciation
Impairment
    -
 
Balance – June 30, 2014
  $268,049
On March 14, 2014, we entered into a Purchase & Sale Agreement Option (the “Agreement”) to sell certain oil
& gas property  interests located in Weld, Colorado with Prime Meridian Oil & Gas, LLC (the “Purchaser”). The
sale was completed on March 31, 2014. We recognized a gain on the sale of $450,000 during the six months
ended June 30, 2014.
During the six months ended June 30, 2014, the Company abandoned certain working and net revenue
interests in oil and gas property located in Callahan County, Texas. In connection with the abandonment, the
Company recognized losses totaling $318,800.
During the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013, the Company recorded $36,705 and $56,662,
respectively to depletion and depreciation expense.
Note 4 Vehicles, Furniture and Equipment:
The following table summarizes furniture and equipment:
Balance – January 1, 2013
 
  $994
    2,314  
Additions
    (928 )
Depreciation
 
    -
Impairment
     
 
 
Balance – December 31, 2013    2,380  
    55,210 
Additions
    (5,002 )
Depreciation
Impairment
    -
 
Balance – June 30, 2014
  $52,588
During the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013, the Company recorded $5,002 and $271, respectively to
depreciation expense.
Note 5 Note Receivable and Accrued Interest:
On May 6, 2014, the Company, Richfield, and certain of Richfield’s subsidiaries entered into a Note and
Security Agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) providing for advances of up to $3,000,000 by the Company to
Richfield and its subsidiaries. Of the total amount that may be advanced by us under the Loan Agreement, up
to $2,000,000 is available to fund those costs of Richfield’s Kansas Work Program which are approved by the
Company and the remaining $1,000,000 ($500,000 of which was advanced upon the entry into the Merger
Agreement) will be used by Richfield for general corporate purposes approved by the Company.
F-93
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
Advances made under the Loan Agreement bear interest at an annual rate of 6% and must be repaid upon the
earlier of (1) November 30, 2014, (2) ten business days after the consummation of the Merger, and (3)
Richfield’s entry into a Superior Proposal (as defined in the Merger Agreement).
The obligations of Richfield and its subsidiaries under the Loan Agreement are secured by security interests
and mortgages in all of their assets.
During the six months ended June 30, 2014 advances on and interest accrued on the Loan Agreement
amounted to $1,391,938 and $8,071, respectively. As of June 30, 2014, the aggregate principal and accrued
interest due was $1,400,009.
On July 17, 2014 the Loan Agreement and Security Agreement was amended. Pursuant to the Amended and
Restated Note and Security Agreement, the amount which the Company has agreed to advance to Richfield
and its subsidiaries, has been increased by $1,000,000 to a total of $4,000,000. Of the additional $1,000,000,
$200,000 may be used by Richfield for general corporate purposes and $800,000 is to be used solely in
connection with the Kansas Work Program. As of August 8, 2014 approximately $2,025,000 has been
advanced by the Company to Richfield of which $1,200,000 had been advanced for general corporate
purposes and $825,000 to develop Richfield’s Kansas properties.
The foregoing descriptions of the Amendments to the Note and Security Agreement reflected in the Amended
and Restated Note and Security Agreement do not purport to be complete, and are qualified in their entirety
by reference to the full text of the Amended and Restated Note and Security Agreement, included as an
exhibit with the Company’s Form 8-K filed on July 23, 2014.
Note 6 Demand Notes Payable:
As of December 31, 2013, three (3) convertible notes for an aggregate principal amount of $216,000
matured.  These notes were reclassified and are recorded as due on demand. During the six months ended
June 30, 2014, two (2) of these notes in the aggregate principal amount of $96,000 were repaid in full. The
balance due to the remaining note holder as of June 30, 2014 was $120,000.
Note 7 Notes Payable:
Notes payable as of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013 is as follows:
Notes payable
Discount on notes
Notes payable, net of debt discount
Less: Current maturities
Notes payable, net of debt discount and current maturities $1,167,283  $ 790,528
)   -
December 31, 
 
  
2013
June 30, 
 
2014
  
 $1,657,000  $ 1,230,000
   (484,890 )   (439,472
   1,172,110    790,528
   (4,827
)
F-94
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
Future minimum debt repayments under these obligations at June 30, 2014 are as follows:
Year ending December 31:   
 
   
 
 
 2014 (remainder of year)
  $2,357
     
  
 
    110,061  
 2015
     
  
 
 2016
    1,130,563 
     
  
 
    406,115  
 2017
 
     
  
 2018 and thereafter
    7,904
 
     
  
 
  
  $1,657,000
Accretion of debt discount on Notes payable for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 was $114,582
and 824,912, respectively
Note 8 Convertible Notes Payable:
(A) Series A Senior Secured Convertible Promissory Notes
From February 11, 2014 through June 30, 2014, the Company raised gross proceeds of $9,987,650 through
the sale of units (the “Series A Units”) in a private offering (the “Series A Offering”). The purchase price for
each Series A Unit was $50,000 and each Series A Unit consisted of (i) a 12% Series A Senior Secured
Convertible Promissory Note in the principal amount of $50,000 (the “Series A Notes”) convertible into shares
of common stock of the Company at a conversion price of $0.30 per share and (ii) a Series A warrant to
purchase 33,333 shares of common stock of the Company at an exercise price of $0.30 (the “Series A
Warrant”). All outstanding principal and interest of each Series A Note is due on February 11, 2016.  The
Series A Notes may be redeemed by the Company at any time following six (6) months after their respective
issuance. If however,  the Company elects to redeem the Series A Notes prior to the one (1) year anniversary
date of the issuance of such Series A Note, the Company shall pay the holder all unpaid interest on the
portion of the principal redeemed that would have been earned through such one (1) year anniversary date.
The holder of each Series A Note may elect to convert the principal balance of the Series A Note into shares
of common stock at any time following six (6) months after the issuance of such note.
The Series A Notes are secured by a first lien on substantially all of the assets of the Company, including all
present and future wells and working interests, on a pro-rata basis.
Each Series A Note bears interest at 12% per annum and is due and payable quarterly, in arrears, with the
initial interest payment due March 31, 2014.
Beneficial Conversion Feature
The intrinsic value of certain convertible notes, when issued, gave rise to a beneficial conversion feature
which was recorded as a discount to the notes of $1,822,854 to be amortized over the period from issuance to
the date that the debt becomes convertible.
F-95
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
Warrants
Each investor participating in the Series A Offering received a Series A Warrant, exercisable for up to 33,333
shares of common stock for every $50,000 invested. The Series A Warrants are exercisable at $0.30 per
share.  The Series A Warrants expire five (5) years from the date of issuance. During the six months ended
June 30, 2014, we issued Series A Warrants exercisable for up to 5,658,374 of our common stock to investors
participating in the Series A Offering. The issuance of the Series A Warrants was recorded as a debt discount
of $1,681,827 and is being amortized over the life of the Series A Note.
The following is a summary of Series A Notes:
$-
 
Balance – January 1, 2014
Issuance of convertible notes payable
   9,987,650  
Discount recorded on beneficial conversion feature at issuance   (1,822,854)
   (1,681,827)
Discount recorded on warrants at issuance
 
   -
Repayments
Converted to common stock
   -
 
   -
Note matured – reclassified to due on demand
 
   1,190,559  
Accretion of debt discount
 $7,673,528  
Convertible notes payable, net of debt discount
Less current maturities
   -
 
 $7,673,528  
Balance – June 30, 2014
(B) Series B Senior Secured Convertible Promissory Notes
On June 6, 2014, the Company raised gross proceeds of $3,032,860 through the sale of units (the “Series B
Units”) in a private offering (the “Series B Offering”). The purchase price for each Series B Unit was $50,000
and each Series B Unit consisted of (i) a 12% Series B Senior Secured Convertible Promissory Note in the
principal amount of $50,000 (the “Series B Notes”) convertible into shares of common stock of the Company
at a conversion price of $0.30 per share and (ii) a Series B warrant to purchase 33,333 shares of common
stock of the Company at an exercise price of $0.30 (the “Series B Warrant”). All outstanding principal and
interest of each Series B Note is due on June 6, 2016.  The Series B Notes may be redeemed by the Company
at any time following six (6) months after their respective issuance. If however,  the Company elects to redeem
the Series B Notes prior to the one (1) year anniversary date of the issuance of such Series B Note, the
Company shall pay the holder all unpaid interest on the portion of the principal redeemed that would have
been earned through such one (1) year anniversary date. The holder of each Series B Note may elect to
convert the principal balance of the Series B Note into shares of common stock at any time following six (6)
months after the issuance of such note.
The Series B Notes are secured by a first lien on substantially all of the assets of the Company, including all
present and future wells and working interests, on a pro-rata basis. The lien is pari-passu with the lien granted
in favor of the holders of the Company’s outstanding Series A Notes.
Each Series B Note bears interest at 12% per annum and is due and payable quarterly, in arrears, with the
initial interest payment due September 30, 2014.
F-96
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
Warrants
Each investor participating in the Series B Offering received a Series B Warrant, exercisable for up to 33,333
shares of common stock for every $50,000 invested. The Series B Warrants are exercisable at $0.30 per
share.  The Series B Warrants expire five (5) years from the date of issuance. During the six months ended
June 30, 2014, we issued Series B Warrants exercisable for up to 2,021,957 of our common stock to investors
participating in the Series B Offering. The issuance of the Series B Warrants was recorded as a debt discount
of $440,246 and is being amortized over the life of the Series B Note.
The following is a summary of Series B Notes:
Balance – January 1, 2014
Issuance of convertible notes payable
Discount recorded on beneficial conversion feature at issuance   -
Discount recorded on warrants at issuance
Repayments
Converted to common stock
Note matured – reclassified to due on demand
Accretion of debt discount
Convertible notes payable, net of debt discount
Less current maturities
Balance – June 30, 2014
$-
 
   3,032,860 
 
   (440,246 )
 
   -
   -
 
 
   -
   14,454
 
 $2,607,068 
   -
 
 $2,607,068
Future minimum debt repayments under these obligations at June 30, 2014 are as follows:
Year ending December 31:     
 
 
     
 
 
  $-
2014 (remainder of year)
 
 
     
 
    -
2015
     
 
 
    13,020,510 
2016
 
     
 
 
    -
2017 and thereafter
     
 
 
 
  $13,020,510
F-97
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
(C)  Debt Issuance Costs
Debt issuance costs, net are as follows:
Balance - January 1, 2014
 
Debt issue costs incurred in 2014   1,993,304 
Amortization of debt issue costs    (242,233 )
 $1,751,071 
Balance – June 30, 2014
$-
Note 9 Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit):
(A)  Preferred Stock
During the six months ended June 30, 2014 the Company did not issue any shares of preferred stock.
During the year ended December 31, 2013, the Company issued 10 shares of preferred stock held in
Treasury.
Transaction Type
Services rendered – officers  
Total
Quantity of Shares  Valuation  Range of Value per Share
$ 830
  $ 830
10
10
$
  $
83
83
(B)  Common Stock
During the six months ended June 30, 2014, the Company issued the following common stock:
Transaction Type
Common stock issued to settle liabilities
Common stock issued for services
Common stock issued with promissory notes  800,000
Total
Quantity of Shares  Valuation  Range of Value per Share 
  320,000
 
 
  1,625,000
$112,600  $ 0.20-0.38  
    557,000   
 0.23-0.38  
    160,000    0.20
  $829,600  $ 0.20-0.38
2,745,000
During the six months ended June 30, 2014, the Company granted common stock to a consultant for future
services. The Company recognizes the fair value of the shares in the statement of operations in the period
earned. As of June 30, 2014, the Company has $60,646 in stock compensation related to common stock
issuance that is yet to be earned.
F-98
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
During the year ended December 31, 2013, the Company issued the following common stock:
Transaction Type
Common stock issued for cash
Common stock issued for services
Conversion of debt and interest
Common stock issued with promissory notes
Common stock issued to acquire oil and gas assets  150,000
Total
Quantity of Shares  Valuation  Range of Value per Share 
 
  70,000
 
  140,000
  51,249
 
 
  2,000,000
$35,000   $ 0.50
    35,000     0.25
    36,000     0.70
    290,000   
    18,000     0.12
  $414,000  $ 0.12-0.70
2,411,249
0.14-0.15
(C)  Warrants
The following is a summary of the Company’s warrant activity:
Outstanding – January 1, 2013
 Exercisable –  January 1, 2013
 Granted
Warrants
Weighted Average 
  
 
 Exercise Price
   
   
   2,075,000   $
   2,075,000   $
   7,321,250   $
0.43
0.43
0.26
-  
   -
$
 Exercised
 Forfeited/Cancelled
  $
 Outstanding – December 31, 2013   9,306,250   $
 Exercisable –  December 31, 2013   9,306,250   $
   12,275,518  $
 Granted
  $
   -  
 Exercised
 Forfeited/Cancelled
   -  
  $
 Outstanding – June 30, 2014
   21,581,768  $
 Exercisable –  June 30, 2014
   21,581,768  $
-  
-  
0.30
0.30
0.31
-  
-  
0.27
0.27
Warrants Outstanding
Range of 
exercise price
Weighted Average 
Remaining 
  
Contractual Life 
 (in years)
$0.15 - $0.85   21,581,768   4.46 years
Number 
 
Outstanding
Weighted 
 
 Average 
Exercise Price
$ 0.27
Warrants Exercisable
Number 
  
Exercisable
Weighted 
 
Average 
Exercise Price
21,581,768  $ 0.27
At June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013, the total intrinsic value of warrants outstanding and exercisable was
$732,375 and $61,000, respectively.
During the six months ended June 30, 2014 the Company re-priced warrants to purchase an aggregate of
875,000 shares of common stock from an exercise price of $0.85 per share to an exercise price of $0.15 per
share. All other terms of the warrants remain the same including the expiration dates. (March through May
2018).
F-99
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
The Company recorded interest expense of $14,755 related to the re-priced warrants during the six months
ended June 30, 2014 calculated as the fair value of the re-priced warrants minus the current fair value of the
warrants before they were repriced.
During year ended December 31, 2013 the Company re-priced warrants to purchase an aggregate of
1,400,000 shares of common stock from an exercise price of $1.65 per share to an exercise price of $0.30 per
share. All other terms of the warrants remain the same including the expiration date of October 31, 2017.
The Company recorded compensation expense of $27,427 related to the re-priced warrants during 2013
calculated as the fair value of the re-priced warrants minus the current fair value of the warrants before they
were repriced.
On the dates of issuance during the six months ended June 30, 2014, the Company valued warrant issuances
at fair value, utilizing a Black-Scholes option valuation model.  The Company utilized the following
management assumptions:
Exercise price
Expected dividends
Expected volatility
Risk fee interest rate
Expected life of warrants  5 years
Expected forfeitures
$0.30 – $0.37  
  0
%
  158% – 168%  
  1.53% – 1.73% 
 
%
0
On the dates of issuance during the year ended December 31, 2013, the Company valued warrant issuances
at fair value, utilizing a Black-Scholes option valuation model.  The Company utilized the following
management assumptions:
$0.15 – $1.65
 
Exercise price
  0
%
Expected dividends
  172
%
Expected volatility
Risk fee interest rate
  0.62% – 1.46%  
Expected life of warrants  3.9 years – 5 years 
Expected forfeitures
%
0
(D)Options
The following is a summary of the Company’s option activity:
Weighted Average Exercise Price 
  Options
 
   
   
 
 
 Outstanding – January 1, 2013
 
   3,000,000   $
 Exercisable –  January 1, 2013
 
   750,000
  $
 
   11,100,000  $
 Granted
   -
  $
 
 Exercised
 
 Forfeited/Cancelled
   (1,500,000 ) $
 Outstanding – December 31, 2013   12,600,000  $
 
 Exercisable –  December 31, 2013   8,975,000   $
 
 
   1,000,000   $
 Granted
 
  $
   -
 Exercised
 
   -
 Forfeited/Cancelled
  $
 Outstanding – June 30, 2014
   13,600,000  $
 
 Exercisable –  June 30, 2014
 
   12,725,000  $
0.50
0.50
0.13
-
0.50
0.17
0.16
0.39
-
-
0.19
0.17
F-100
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
Options Outstanding
Range of exercise price
$0.08-$0.50
Number 
Outstanding
Weighted Average Remaining 
Weighted 
 
  
Contractual Life 
Average 
Exercise Price
(in years)
   13,600,000   5.39 years
 $ 0.17
Options Exercisable
Weighted 
  
Average 
Exercise Price
Number 
  
Exercisable
12,725,000  $ 0.17
At June 30, 2014, the total intrinsic value of options outstanding and exercisable was $1,417,500.
At December 31, 2013, the total intrinsic value of options outstanding and exercisable was $363,000 and
$333,000, respectively.
During the six months ended June 30, 2014, the Company's board of directors authorized the grant of
1,000,000 stock options, having a total fair value of approximately $341,807, with a vesting period of 2.00
years. These options expire April 11, 2019.
As of June 30, 2014, the Company has $153,101 in stock-based compensation related to stock options that is
yet to be vested. The weighted average expensing period of the unvested options is 1.78 years.
On the dates of grant during the six months ended June 30, 2014, the Company valued option issuances at
fair value, utilizing a Black-Scholes option valuation model.  The Company utilized the following management
assumptions:
Exercise price
%
Expected dividends
%
Expected volatility
Risk fee interest rate
%
Expected life of options  3.5 years 
Expected forfeitures
%
$0.39
  0
  158
  1.58
0
On the dates of grant during the year ended December 31, 2013, the Company valued option issuances at fair
value, utilizing a Black-Scholes option valuation model.  The Company utilized the following management
assumptions:
Exercise price
 
  $0.08 – $0.19
Expected dividends
%
  0
Expected volatility
  172
%
Risk fee interest rate
  1.66% – 2.69 %
Expected life of options  3 years – 5 years 
Expected forfeitures
%
0
(E)  Treasury Stock
During the six months ended June 30, 2014 150,000 shares of common stock were returned to the Company
and retired. The stock was originally issued in November 2013 as partial consideration for working and net
revenue interests in oil and gas property located in Callahan County, Texas.
During the year ended December 31, 2013, the Company repurchased 50 shares of preferred stock at cost of
$25,000 and issued 10 shares of preferred stock from treasury for compensation.
F-101
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
Note 10 Commitments and Contingencies:
Litigations, Claims and Assessments
From time to time, the Company may become involved in various lawsuits and legal proceedings, which arise
in the ordinary course of business. However, litigation is subject to inherent uncertainties, and an adverse
result in these or other matters may arise from time to time that may harm its business. The Company is
currently not aware of any such legal proceedings or claims that they believe will have, individually or in the
aggregate, a material adverse effect on its business, financial condition or operating results.
On October 17, 2013, the Company filed a complaint in the Westchester County Supreme Court of the State of
New York (the “Court”) against Timothy Kelly (“Kelly”) seeking damages for Kelly’s breach of fiduciary duty
and usurpation of corporate opportunities. Kelly is the former President, Chief Operating Officer, Secretary
and Director of the Company. He resigned from each of these positions on or about August 30, 2013. The
complaint alleges that Kelly, prior to his resignation, engaged in a pattern of self-dealing and exposed the
Company to adverse criticism and hostility from its shareholders by: (i) purchasing, on his behalf, at least one
oil well and land that would have been profitable to the Company; (ii) claiming to sell shares of the Company’s
stock that he either obtained from other shareholders or that did not exist and (iii) misrepresenting the nature
of the stock for his personal profit. The Company is seeking $4,000,000 in compensatory damages, as well as
costs, interest and such other relief as the Court may deem just and proper.
On January 21, 2014, Kelly filed a counterclaim for breach of contract against the Company and SOG in the
matter titled Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc. v. Kelly, No. 67528/2013 (N.Y. Sup., Westchester Cty.)  Kelly
alleges that the Company and SOG  breached the certain Termination Agreement, dated August 30, 2013
between Kelly the Company and SOG. Specifically, Kelly alleges that the Termination Agreement requires the
Company to deliver a certain number of shares of the Company's  restricted common stock and pay him a
total of approximately $300,000 over a period of thirty months.  Kelly claims that the Company has failed to
deliver the shares of the Company's stock and to pay him the monthly payments.  Kelly further claims that the
Company breached the non-disparagement provision of the Termination Agreement by making derogatory
statements about him to the public and/or third-persons.  Kelly is seeking a minimum of $500,000 in damages,
plus interest and 2,500,000 shares of the Company's restricted common stock.
On April 10, 2014, we accepted service of process from a group of seven plaintiffs who commenced litigation
against Timothy Kelly, the former President and a director of the Company, for several of the same matters
that are currently the subject of the Company’s current pending litigation against Mr. Kelly in Superior Court,
Westchester County, New York. While the litigation was brought for alleged theft, conversion and other
malfeasance by Mr.Kelly, the plaintiffs also named the Company as a defendant in the Complaint, seeking
monetary damages from the Company under the theory of respondeat superior. The Company does not
believe that it should be held responsible for Mr. Kelly’s alleged malfeasance and we intend to assert a cross
claim against Mr. Kelly and to vigorously defend the Company in this matter. On August 7, 2014, the Company
filed a Motion to Dismiss the action.
F-102
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
Under the terms of the Termination Agreement, Kelly was to receive:
●2,500,000 shares of restricted common stock, at a fair value of $500,000 ($0.20/share),
●Compensation - $6,000 per month, for 30 consecutive months commencing September 1, 2013,
●Compensation - $25,000 per month, for 5 consecutive months commencing October 1, 2013,
●Preferred Share Repurchase - $25,000 as payment in full for the sale, return and delivery to the Company of 50
shares of Preferred Stock held by Mr. Kelly,
   
●Cancellation of 1,500,000 stock options.
On August 30, 2013, the Company paid compensation to Mr. Kelly of $6,000 and repurchased 50 shares of
preferred stock for $25,000 as per the terms of the Termination Agreement. As set forth above, by virtue of the
litigation with Kelly, the Company ceased making payments to Kelly and has accrued a liability of $799,000 for
the remaining compensation that may be payable to him.
Oil and Gas Prices
The prices of oil, natural gas, methane gas and other fuels have been, and are likely to continue to be, volatile
and subject to wide fluctuations in response to numerous factors, including but not limited to the worldwide
and domestic supplies of oil and gas, changes in the supply of and demand for such fuels, political
conditions in fuel-producing and fuel-consuming regions, weather conditions, the development of other
energy sources, and the effect of government regulation on the production, transportation and sale of
fuels.  These factors and the volatility of energy markets make it extremely difficult to predict future oil and
gas price movements with any certainty.  A decline in prices could adversely affect the Company’s financial
position, financial results, cash flows, access to capital and ability to grow.
Environmental Liabilities
Oil and gas operations are subject to many risks, including well blowouts, cratering and explosions, pipe
failure, fires, formations with abnormal pressures, uncontrollable flows of oil, natural gas, brine or other well
fluids, and other environmental hazards and risks.  Our drilling operations involve risks from high pressures
and from mechanical difficulties such as stuck pipes, collapsed casings, and separated cables.  If any of
these circumstances occur, the Company could sustain substantial losses as a result of injury or loss of life,
destruction of property and equipment, damage to natural resources, pollution or other environmental
damages, clean-up responsibilities, regulatory investigations and penalties, suspension of operations, and
compliance with environmental laws and regulations relating to air emissions, waste disposal and hydraulic
fracturing, restrictions on drilling and completion operations and other laws and regulations.  The Company’s
potential liability for environmental hazards may include those created by the previous owners of properties
purchased or leased prior to the date we purchase or lease the property.  The Company maintains insurance
against some, but not all, of the risks described above.  Insurance coverage may not be adequate to cover
casualty losses or liabilities.
F-103
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
Employment Contracts
On April 11, 2014, the Company entered into an Executive Employment Agreement with Jeffrey Robinson to
serve as the Director of Field Operations (“DFO”).  The terms of the Agreement are as follows:
●Term - 3 years,
●Compensation - $150,000 salary per annum, bonus eligibility,
●Option Grant - 1,000,000 options to acquire restricted stock at an exercise price of $0.39 per share.
Employment Agreement
On May 6, 2014, the Company entered into an Executive Employment Agreement with Alan D. Gaines to serve
as the Chairman of our Board of Directors.  The terms of the Agreement are as follows:
●Term - 5 years,
   
●Compensation - $350,000 salary per annum, subject to 10% increase per annum,
●Bonus Eligibility – Target Bonus equal to 100% of base salary based on performance criteria to be established
By virtue of Mr. Gaines joining the Board, options exercisable for up to 3,000,000 shares of our common
stock, previously granted to him in December 2013, became fully vested.  Such options are exercisable at
$0.15 per share.
Consulting Agreement
On May 1, 2014, the Company entered into a Consulting Agreement (the “IR Agreement”) with MZHCI, LLC to
provide investor relations consulting services.  The terms of the IR Agreement are as follows:
●Term - 1 year, commencing May 6, 2014, the IR Agreement shall renew and continue in effect for successive one-
year periods unless terminated,
●Compensation - $8,000 per month,
●Common Share Grant – 200,000 restricted common shares issued immediately; An additional 200,000 restricted
common shares at six month anniversary.
●Reimbursement for all reasonable and necessary business expenses
Agreements with Placement Agents and Finders
(A)
The Company entered into a Financial Advisory and Investment Banking Agreement with Radnor Research &
Trading Company, LLC (“Radnor”) effective January 24, 2014 (the “Radnor Advisory Agreement”). Pursuant
to the Radnor Advisory Agreement, Radnor will act as the Company’s exclusive financial advisor and
placement agent to assist the Company in connection with a best efforts private placement (the “Financing”)
of up to $10 million of the Company’s equity and/or debt securities and/or convertible instruments (the
“Securities”).
F-104
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
The Company upon closing of the Financing shall pay consideration to Radnor, in cash, a fee in an amount
equal to 10% of the aggregate gross proceeds raised in the Financing. The Company shall grant and deliver
to Radnor at the closing of the Financing, for nominal consideration, five year warrants (the “Warrants”) to
purchase such number of shares of Common Stock as is equal to 10% of the Offering proceeds.  The
Warrants shall be exercisable at any time during the five year period commencing on the closing to which
they relate at an exercise price of $0.30. If the Financing is consummated by means of more than one closing,
Radnor shall be entitled to the fees provided herein with respect to each such closing.
(B)
The Company entered into a Second Financial Advisory and Investment Banking Agreement with Radnor
Research & Trading Company, LLC (“Radnor”) in May 2014 (the “Radnor Advisory Agreement 2”). Pursuant
to the Radnor Advisory Agreement 2, Radnor will act as the Company’s exclusive financial advisor and
placement agent to assist the Company in connection with a best efforts private placement (the “Financing”)
of up to $15 million of the Company’s equity and/or debt securities and/or convertible instruments (the
“Securities”).
The Company upon closing of the Financing shall pay consideration to Radnor, in cash, a fee in an amount
equal to 10% of the aggregate gross proceeds raised in the Financing. The Company shall grant and deliver
to Radnor at the closing of the Financing, for nominal consideration, five year warrants (the “Warrants”) to
purchase such number of shares of Common Stock as is equal to 10% of the Offering proceeds.  The
Warrants shall be exercisable at any time during the five year period commencing on the closing to which
they relate at an exercise price of $0.30. If the Financing is consummated by means of more than one closing,
Radnor shall be entitled to the fees provided herein with respect to each such closing.
During the six months ended June 30, 2014 the Company paid to Radnor fees of $658,551 and issued Radnor
2,195,187 five year warrants with an exercise price of $0.30.
In addition to the fees paid to Radnor the Company incurred financing fees of $643,500 during the six months
ended June 30, 2014 to JD Partners Co., Ltd in relation to the 2014 private placement.
Agreement and Plan of Merger
On May 6, 2014, the Company, Richfield Oil & Gas Company (“Richfield”) and Richfield Acquisition Corp., a
wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (“RAC”), entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the
“Merger Agreement”), pursuant to which, subject to the satisfaction or waiver of certain conditions, RAC will
merge with and into Richfield (the “Merger”), with Richfield surviving as a wholly owned subsidiary of the
Company.
Upon the consummation of the Merger, each outstanding share of Richfield common stock (other than
shares held by those Richfield stockholders properly exercising dissenters rights) will be converted into the
right to receive shares of the Company common stock in an amount to be determined by the application of a
formula set forth in the Merger Agreement. Based on the number shares of Richfield common stock
outstanding on May 6, 2014, each outstanding share of Richfield common stock (other than shares held by
those Richfield stockholders properly exercising dissenters’ rights) would be converted into 1.009 shares of
the Company’s common stock. However, the number of shares of the Company’s common stock that may
actually be issued with respect to a share of Richfield common stock is subject to decrease based on the
formula set forth in the Merger Agreement in the event additional shares of Richfield common stock are
issued prior to the consummation of the Merger, including, subject to certain limited exceptions, shares of
Richfield common stock issued upon exercise of Richfield’s outstanding warrants or upon conversion of
Richfield’s outstanding convertible notes. No fractional shares of our common stock will be issued in the
Merger and Richfield’s stockholders will receive cash in lieu of fractional shares.
F-105
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
Under the Merger Agreement, Richfield is required to take such action as may be necessary so that each
outstanding warrant to purchase shares of Richfield common stock will be converted into the right to
purchase shares of the Company’s common stock, with an adjustment in the number of shares and exercise
price per share corresponding to the ratio of the number of shares of Company common stock issuable for
each share of Richfield common stock upon consummation of the Merger. Richfield is also required by the
Merger Agreement to take such action as may be necessary so that each outstanding convertible note which
is convertible into shares of Richfield common stock will instead become convertible into shares of our
common stock, also adjust by the ratio of the number of shares of the Company’s common stock issuable for
each share of Richfield common stock upon consummation of the Merger.
The Company and Richfield each made customary representations, warranties and covenants in the Merger
Agreement, including, among others, covenants by each of the Company and Richfield to, subject to certain
exceptions, conduct its business in the ordinary course during the interim period between the execution of
the Merger Agreement and the consummation of the Merger.
Note 11 Subsequent Events:
The Company has evaluated all events that occurred after the balance sheet date through the date when the
condensed consolidated financial statements were issued to determine if they must be reported. The
management of the Company determined that there were certain reportable subsequent events to be
disclosed as follow.
Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities
On July 2, 2014, we sold an aggregate of $2,376,625 in principal amount of our Series B Notes and issued
Series B Warrants to the participants in the private offering, exercisable for up to 1,584,085 shares of our
common stock.
The Company received gross proceeds of $2,376,625 and we delivered to our placement agent, a warrant
exercisable for up to758,873 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $0.30. The issuance of the
Series B Notes and the Series B Warrants were issued under the exemption from registration provided by
Section 4(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Rule 506 of Regulation D promulgated thereunder.
Amendment to Agreement and Plan of Merger
On July 17, 2014, the Company, Richfield and Richfield Acquisition Corp. entered into Amendment No. 1 (the
“Amendment”) to the Merger Agreement.
Pursuant to the Amendment, certain conditions to the obligations of the parties to consummate the Merger
were amended as follows: (i) the condition that the Company have no less than $5,000,000 in cash on hand at
the time of the Merger was reduced to no less than $2,000,000 in cash on hand; (ii) the condition that not more
than 5% of Richfield’s stockholders shall have taken the steps required by the Appraisal Provisions of the
NRS to obtain payment for the value of their shares in connection with the Merger was increased to not more
than 10% and (iii) the condition that Richfield’s liabilities (excluding certain permitted exceptions) not exceed
$6,500,000 was increased to $6,650,000. In addition, the right of each party to terminate the Merger Agreement
if the Merger has not been consummated by the “end date” of September 30, 2014 was extended to
November 30, 2014 (and until January 30, 2015 if all closing conditions (other than receipt of Richfield’s
shareholder approval or the failure of the Form S-4 registration statement to be declared effective) have been
satisfied by November 30, 2014).
Additionally, the amount that the Company may advance to Richfield (Note 5 – Note Receivable and Accrued
Interest) has been increased by $1,000,000 to a total of $4,000,000.
F-106
Table of Contents
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements
June 30, 2014
(unaudited)
Entry into Employment Agreement
On August 8, 2014, the Company entered into an Employment Agreement with Matthew S. Cohen to serve as
Executive Vice President and General Counsel. The terms of the Agreement are as follows:
●Term - 4 years,
   
●Compensation - $230,000 salary per annum, subject to 10% increase per annum,
   
●Bonus Eligibility – Target Bonus equal to 80% of base salary based on performance criteria to be established
   
●Grant of 400,000 shares of common stock and stock options exercisable for up to 2,000,000 shares of common stock
at an exercise price of $0.30 per share
F-107
Table of Contents
ANNEX A
Agreement and Plan of Merger
by and among
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.
a Colorado corporation
("Parent")
Richfield Acquisition Corp.
a Nevada corporation
("Merger Sub")
and
Richfield Oil & Gas Company
a Nevada corporation
("Company")
May 6, 2014
A-1
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
SECTION
A-4
ARTICLE I.  THE TRANSACTIONS
A-4
Section 1.1 THE MERGER
A-5
Section 1.2 CLOSING
A-5
Section 1.3 EFFECT OF THE MERGER
A-5
Section 1.4 ORGANIZATIONAL DOCUMENTS
A-5
Section 1.5 DIRECTORS
A-5
Section 1.6 OFFICERS
A-5
ARTICLE II.  CONVERSION OF SHARES; EXCHANGE OF CERTIFICATES
A-5
Section 2.1 EFFECT ON CAPITAL STOCK
A-7
Section 2.2 EXCHANGE OF CERTIFICATES
A-9
Section 2.3 INTENTIONALLY OMITTED
A-9
Section 2.4 FURTHER ASSURANCES
A-10
ARTICLE III.   REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF COMPANY
A-10
Section 3.1 QUALIFICATION, ORGANIZATION, SUBSIDIARIES, ETC
Section 3.2 CAPITAL STOCK
A-10
Section 3.3 CORPORATE AUTHORITY RELATIVE TO THIS AGREEMENT; NO VIOLATIONA-11
A-12
Section 3.4 COMPANY SEC DOCUMENTS; FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
A-13
Section 3.5 NO UNDISCLOSED LIABILITIES
A-13
Section 3.6  INFORMATION SUPPLIED
Section 3.7 INTERNAL CONTROLS AND DISCLOSURE CONTROLS
A-13
A-14
Section 3.8 COMPLIANCE WITH LAW; PERMITS
A-14
Section 3.9 ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS AND REGULATIONS
A-15
Section 3.10 EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS
Section 3.11 ABSENCE OF CERTAIN CHANGES OR EVENTS
A-16
A-16
Section 3.12 INVESTIGATIONS; LITIGATION
A-17
Section 3.13 INFORMATION SUPPLIED
Section 3.14 REGULATORY MATTERS
A-17
A-17
Section 3.15 TAX MATTERS
A-18
Section 3.16 EMPLOYMENT AND LABOR MATTERS
A-18
Section 3.17 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
Section 3.18 PROPERTIES
A-19
A-20
Section 3.19 INSURANCE
A-20
Section 3.20 [INTENTIONALLY OMITTED]
A-20
Section 3.21 MATERIAL CONTRACTS
Section 3.22 RESERVE REPORTS
A-22
A-22
Section 3.23 DERIVATIVES
A-22
Section 3.24 FINDERS OR BROKERS
A-22
Section 3.25 REQUISITE STOCKHOLDER APPROVAL
Section 3.26 STATE TAKEOVER STATUTES
A-22
A-22
Section 3.27 NO ADDITIONAL REPRESENTATIONS
A-23
ARTICLE IV.   REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF PARENT
Section 4.1 QUALIFICATION, CAPITALIZATION
A-23
A-24
Section 4.2 AUTHORITY RELATIVE TO THIS AGREEMENT; NO VIOLATION
A-2
Table of Contents
A-25
Section 4.3 REPORTS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
A-25
Section 4.4 UNDISCLOSED LIABILITIES
A-26
Section 4.5 INTERNAL CONTROLS AND DISCLOSURE CONTROLS
A-26
Section 4.6 COMPLIANCE WITH LAW; PERMITS
A-27
Section 4.7 ABSENCE OF CERTAIN CHANGES OR EVENTS
A-27
Section 4.8 ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS AND REGULATIONS
A-27
Section 4.9 INVESTIGATIONS; LITIGATION
A-27
Section 4.10 INFORMATION SUPPLIED
A-28
Section 4.11 REGULATORY MATTERS
A-28
Section 4.12 PROPERTIES
A-29
Section 4.13 INSURANCE
A-29
Section 4.14 [INTENTIONALLY OMITTED]
A-29
Section 4.15 MATERIAL CONTRACTS
A-30
Section 4.16 RESERVE REPORTS
A-30
Section 4.17 FINDERS OR BROKERS
A-30
Section 4.18 TAX MATTERS
A-31
Section 4.19 EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS
A-31
Section 4.20 EMPLOYMENT AND LABOR MATTERS
A-32
Section 4.21 NO ADDITIONAL REPRESENTATIONS
A-32
ARTICLE V.   COVENANTS AND AGREEMENTS
A-32
Section 5.1 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS BY COMPANY
A-35
Section 5.2 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS BY PARENT
Section 5.3 MUTUAL ACCESS
A-37
Section 5.4 NO SOLICITATION; RECOMMENDATION OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF COMPANY A-37
A-40
Section 5.5 FILINGS; OTHER ACTIONS
Section 5.6 EMPLOYEE MATTERS
A-40
A-41
Section 5.7 REGULATORY APPROVALS; EFFORTS
A-42
Section 5.8 TAKEOVER STATUTES
A-42
Section 5.9 PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMENTS
A-43
Section 5.10 DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS INSURANCE
A-43
Section 5.11 CONTROL OF OPERATIONS
A-43
Section 5.12 SECTION 16 MATTERS
A-43
Section 5.13 TRANSACTION LITIGATION
A-43
Section 5.14 INITIAL BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF PARENT
A-43
ARTICLE VI.   CONDITIONS TO THE MERGER
A-43
Section 6.1 CONDITIONS TO EACH PARTY’S OBLIGATION TO EFFECT THE MERGER
Section 6.2 CONDITIONS TO OBLIGATION OF COMPANY TO EFFECT THE MERGER
A-44
Section 6.3 CONDITIONS TO OBLIGATION OF PARENT AND MERGER SUB TO EFFECT THE MERGERA-45
A-46
Section 6.4 FRUSTRATION OF CLOSING CONDITIONS
A-46
ARTICLE VII.  TERMINATION
A-46
Section 7.1 TERMINATION OR ABANDONMENT
Section 7.2 EFFECT OF TERMINATION
A-47
A-47
Section 7.3 TERMINATION FEES; EXPENSES
A-49
ARTICLE VIII.   MISCELLANEOUS
A-49
Section 8.1 EXPENSES
Section 8.2 COUNTERPARTS; EFFECTIVENESS
A-49
A-49
Section 8.3 GOVERNING LAW
A-49
Section 8.4 JURISDICTION; SPECIFIC ENFORCEMENT
A-50
Section 8.5 WAIVER OF JURY TRIAL
Section 8.6 NOTICES
A-50
A-50
Section 8.7 ASSIGNMENT; BINDING EFFECT
Section 8.8 SEVERABILITY
Section 8.9 ENTIRE AGREEMENT
Section 8.10 AMENDMENTS; WAIVERS
Section 8.11 HEADINGS
Section 8.12 NO THIRD-PARTY BENEFICIARIES
Section 8.13 INTERPRETATION
Section 8.14 DEFINITIONS
A-3
Table of Contents
AGREEMENT AND PLAN OF MERGER
A-50
A-50
A-50
A-51
A-51
A-51
A-51
This AGREEMENT AND PLAN OF MERGER (this "Agreement"), dated as of May 6, 2014, is made and entered
into by and among STRATEX OIL & GAS HOLDINGS, INC., a Colorado corporation (the "Parent"), RICHFIELD
ACQUISITION CORP., a Nevada corporation and a direct wholly owned subsidiary of Parent ("Merger Sub"
and, together with Parent, the "Parent Entities"), and RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY, a Nevada
corporation ("Company") with reference to the following facts:
RECITAL
A.                  The parties intend that at the Effective Time, Merger Sub shall be merged with and into Company
pursuant to the Merger as more fully described in this Agreement and on the terms and subject to the
conditions set forth in this Agreement.
B.                  The Board of Directors of Parent has (a) unanimously determined that it is in the best interests of
Parent and its stockholders, and declared it advisable, to enter into this Agreement, and (b) approved the
execution, delivery and performance of this Agreement and the consummation of the Transactions, including
the Merger.
C.                  The Board of Directors of Company has (a) unanimously determined (provided, however, that the
parties acknowledge any member of the Board of Directors with a conflict has abstained from the vote) that it
is in the best interests of Company and its shareholders, and declared it advisable, to enter into this
Agreement, (b) approved the execution, delivery and performance of this Agreement and the consummation
of the Transactions, including the Merger, and (iii) resolved to recommend adoption of this Agreement by the
stockholders of Company.
D.                  For U.S. federal income tax purposes, it is intended that the Merger will qualify as a
"reorganization" within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the
"Code"), and the Treasury Regulations promulgated thereunder.
E.                   Each of Parent, Merger Sub, and Company desire to make certain representations, warranties,
covenants and agreements in connection with the Merger and also to prescribe various conditions to the
Merger.
AGREEMENT
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing and the representations, warranties, covenants and
agreements contained herein, and intending to be legally bound hereby, the parties hereto agree as follows:
ARTICLE I.
THE TRANSACTIONS
Section 1.1 The Merger
(a)           At the Effective Time, upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in this Agreement and in
accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 78 and 92A of the Nevada Revised Statutes (the
"NRS"), Merger Sub shall be merged with and into Company (the "Merger"), whereupon the separate
corporate existence of Merger Sub shall cease, and Company shall continue its existence under Nevada law
as the Surviving Corporation and a direct wholly owned subsidiary of Parent (the “Surviving Corporation”).
A-4
Table of Contents
(b)           On the Closing Date, Parent and Merger Sub shall file with the Secretary of State of the State of
Nevada articles of merger (the "Articles of Merger"), executed in accordance with, and containing such
information as is required by, the relevant provisions of the NRS, in order to effect the Merger. The Merger
shall become effective at such time as the Articles of Merger have been filed with the Secretary of State of the
State of Nevada or at such other, later date and time as is agreed among the parties and specified in the
Articles of Merger in accordance with the relevant provisions of the NRS (such date and time is referred to
herein as the "Effective Time").
Section 1.2 Closing. The closing of the Transactions (the "Closing") shall take place at the offices of
Buchanan Ingersoll & Rooney PC, 1290 Avenue of the Americas, 30th Floor, New York, New York 10104, at
10:00 a.m., local time, on the third business day after the satisfaction or waiver (to the extent permitted by
applicable Law) of the conditions set forth in ARTICLE VI (other than those conditions that by their nature are
to be satisfied at the Closing, but subject to the satisfaction or waiver of such conditions), or at such other
place, date and time as the parties may agree in writing. The date on which the Closing actually occurs is
referred to as the "Closing Date."
Section 1.3 Effect of the Merger. The effects of the Merger shall be as provided in this Agreement and in the
applicable provisions of the NRS. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, and subject thereto, at the
Effective Time, all of the property, rights, privileges, powers and franchises of Merger Sub shall vest in
Company as the surviving corporation, and all debts, liabilities and duties of Merger Sub shall become the
debts, liabilities and duties of Company as the surviving corporation, as provided under the NRS.
Section 1.4 Organizational Documents. At the Effective Time, the articles of incorporation and bylaws of
Merger Sub shall be the articles of incorporation and bylaws of the Surviving Corporation.
Section 1.5 Directors. Subject to applicable Law, the directors of Merger Sub immediately prior to the Effective
Time shall be, as of the Effective Time, the directors of the Surviving Corporation and shall hold office until
their respective successors are duly elected and qualified, or their earlier death, resignation or removal.
Section 1.6 Officers. The officers of Merger Sub immediately prior to the Effective Time shall be the officers of
the Surviving Corporation and shall hold office until their respective successors are duly elected and
qualified, or their earlier death, resignation or removal.
ARTICLE II.
CONVERSION OF SHARES; EXCHANGE OF CERTIFICATES
Section 2.1 Effect on Capital Stock.
(a)           Effect of Effective Time. At the Effective Time, by virtue of the Merger and without any action on the
part of Company or the Merger Sub or the holder of any shares of Company Common Stock or shares of
Merger Sub Common Stock:
(i)           Conversion of Merger Sub Common Stock. Each share of Merger Sub common stock, par value
$0.001 per share ("Merger Sub Common Stock"), issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective
Time shall automatically be converted into and become one share of common stock of Company as the
Surviving Corporation.
(ii)          Conversion of Company Common Stock. Each share of Company Common Stock issued and
outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time, other than any Dissenting Shares, shall be converted into
the right to receive such number of validly issued, fully paid and nonassessable shares, or such fraction of a
validly issued, fully paid and nonassessable share, of Parent Common Stock determined by multiplying such
share of Company Common Stock by a fraction, the numerator of which is the sum of (A) 59,193,376 and (B)
the Specified Additional Shares and the denominator of which is the number of shares of Company Common
Stock outstanding at the close of business on the day immediately preceding the Effective Time (the
"Exchange Ratio"), subject to adjustment pursuant to Section 2.1(c) (such per share amount, together with
any cash in lieu of fractional shares of Company Common Stock to be paid pursuant to Section 2.1(d) is
hereinafter referred to as the "Merger Consideration").
A-5
Table of Contents
(iii)          Conversion of Warrants to Purchase Company Common Stock. Company shall take all requisite
action so that, as of the Effective Time, each warrant to purchase shares of the Company Common Stock
issued by the Company is converted, by virtue of the Merger and without any action on the part of the holder
of such warrant, into a warrant exercisable for that number of shares of Parent Common Stock equal to the
product of (i) the aggregate number of shares of Company Common Stock, as the case may be, for which
such warrant was exercisable and (ii) the Exchange Ratio, rounded down to the nearest whole share. In
addition, the Company shall take all requisite action so that, as of the Effective Time, the exercise price per
share of such warrant shall be equal to the quotient obtained from dividing (x) the exercise price per share of
such warrant immediately prior to the Effective Time by (y) the Exchange Ratio, with the result rounded up to
the nearest whole cent. All such warrants shall continue to have, and be subject to, the same terms and
conditions set forth in such warrants except as otherwise provided for herein. By way of example, if (A) the
Exchange Ratio is determined to be 1.2 to 1, a warrant to purchase 600,000 shares of Company Common
Stock for $0.25 per share would become exercisable for 720,000 shares of Parent Common Stock at an
exercise price of $0.21 per share and (B) if the Exchange Ratio is determined to be 0.8 to 1, the same warrant
to purchase 600,000 shares of Company Common Stock at an exercise price of $0.25 per share would instead
become exercisable for 480,000 shares of Parent Common Stock at an exercise price of $0.32 per share.
(iv) Conversion of Company Convertible Notes. Company shall take all requisite action so that, as of the
Effective Time, each note issued by the Company which is convertible into shares of the Company Common
Stock is converted, by virtue of the Merger and without any action on the part of the holder of such
convertible note, into that number of shares of Parent Common Stock equal to the product of the aggregate
number of shares of Company Common Stock, as the case may be, into which such note was convertible and
(ii) the Exchange Ratio, rounded down to the nearest whole share. All such convertible notes shall continue
to have, and be subject to, the same terms and conditions set forth in such convertible notes except as
otherwise provided for herein
(v)          Effect of Conversion of Company Common Stock. All of the shares of Merger Sub Common Stock
converted into the shares of Company Common Stock pursuant to this Section 2.1 shall no longer be
outstanding and shall automatically be cancelled and shall cease to exist as of the Effective Time, and
uncertificated shares of Company Common Stock represented by book-entry form ("Book-Entry Shares ")
and each certificate that, immediately prior to the Effective Time, represented any such shares of Company
Common Stock (a "Certificate") shall thereafter represent only the right to receive the shares of Parent
Common Stock into which the shares of Company Common Stock represented by such Book-Entry Shares
or Certificate have been converted pursuant to this Section 2.1.
(b)           Shares of Dissenting Stockholders. Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, any
issued and outstanding shares of Company Common Stock held by a person (a "Dissenting Stockholder")
who has not voted in favor of, or consented to, the adoption of this Agreement and has complied with all the
provisions of the NRS concerning the right of holders of shares of Company Common Stock to demand
appraisal of their shares (the "Appraisal Provisions") of Company Common Stock (such shares, the
"Dissenting Shares"), to the extent the Appraisal Provisions are applicable, shall not be converted into the
right to receive shares of Parent Common Stock as set forth in Section 2.1(a)(ii), but instead shall become the
right to receive such consideration as may be determined to be due to such Dissenting Stockholder pursuant
to the procedures set forth in the NRS. If such Dissenting Stockholder withdraws its demand for appraisal or
fails to perfect or otherwise loses its right of appraisal, in any case pursuant to the NRS, each of such
Dissenting Stockholder’s shares of Company Common Stock shall thereupon be deemed to have been
converted into and to have become, as of the Effective Time, the right to receive shares of Parent Common
Stock as set forth in Section 2.1(a)(ii). Company shall give Parent prompt notice of any demands for appraisal
of shares received by Company, withdrawals of such demands and any other instruments served pursuant to
any NRS and shall give Parent the opportunity to participate in all negotiations and proceedings with respect
thereto. Company shall not, without the prior written consent of Parent, make any payment with respect to, or
settle or offer to settle, any such demands.
(c)           Recapitalization Adjustment. If, between the date of this Agreement and the Effective Time, the
outstanding shares of Parent Common Stock shall have been changed into a different number of shares or a
different class of shares by reason of any stock dividend, subdivision, reorganization, reclassification,
recapitalization, stock split, reverse stock split, combination or exchange of shares, or any similar event
(excluding the issuance of shares of Parent Common Stock in exchange for its Series A Preferred Stock or
pursuant to the exercise or conversion of convertible notes, warrants, or options) shall have occurred, then
the Exchange Ratio shall be equitably adjusted, without duplication, to proportionally reflect such change;
provided that nothing in this Section 2.1(c) shall be construed to permit any party to take any action with
respect to its securities that is prohibited by the terms of this Agreement. If, between the date of this
Agreement and the Effective Time, the outstanding shares of Company Common Stock shall have been
changed into a different number of shares or a different class of shares by reason of any stock dividend,
subdivision, reorganization, reclassification, recapitalization, stock split, reverse stock split, combination or
exchange of shares, or any similar event (excluding the issuance of Company Common Stock pursuant to
the exercise or conversion of convertible notes or warrants) shall have occurred, then the Exchange Ratio
shall be equitably adjusted, without duplication, to proportionally reflect such change; provided that nothing
in this Section 2.1(c) shall be construed to permit any party to take any action with respect to its securities
that is prohibited by the terms of this Agreement. The Exchange Ratio has been established based on the
assumption that all of the outstanding shares of the Parent’s Series A Preferred Stock will be exchanged for
7,000,000 shares of Parent Common Stock prior to the Closing Date.
A-6
Table of Contents
(d)           No Fractional Shares. No fractional shares of Parent Common Stock shall be issued in connection
with the Merger, and such fractional share interests shall not entitle the owner thereof to vote or to any other
rights of a holder of Parent Common Stock. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement to the
contrary, each holder of shares of Company Common Stock converted pursuant to the Merger who would
otherwise have been entitled to receive a fractional share of Parent Common Stock (after aggregating all
shares represented by the Certificates and Book-Entry Shares delivered by such holder) shall receive from
the Exchange Agent, in lieu thereof and upon surrender thereof, a cash payment (without interest) in an
amount equal to the product of (x) the fraction of a share of Parent Common Stock otherwise issuable to such
holder under this Agreement, multiplied times (y) the volume weighted average closing price of the Parent
Common Stock for the 20 trading days preceding the Effective Time (the "Fractional Share Cash Amount").
No such holder shall be entitled to distributions, voting rights or any other rights in respect of any fractional
shares of Parent Common Stock.
(e)           Share Transfer Books. At the Effective Time, the share transfer books of the Company shall be
closed, and thereafter there shall be no further registration of transfers of shares of Company Common
Stock. From and after the Effective Time, persons who held shares of Company Common Stock immediately
prior to the Effective Time shall cease to have rights with respect to such shares, except as otherwise
provided for herein. On or after the Effective Time, any Certificates presented to the Exchange Agent or the
Surviving Entity of the Parent Merger for any reason shall be exchanged for the Merger Consideration with
respect to the shares of Company Common Stock formerly represented thereby.
Section 2.2 Exchange of Certificates.
(a)           Appointment of Exchange Agent. Parent shall appoint a bank or trust company that is reasonably
acceptable to Company to act as exchange agent (the "Exchange Agent") for the payment of the Merger
Consideration and shall enter into an agreement relating to the Exchange Agent’s responsibilities under this
Agreement.
(b)           Deposit of Merger Consideration. As of the Effective Time, Parent shall deposit or cause to be
deposited with the Exchange Agent, for the benefit of holders of Certificates or evidence of Book-Entry
Shares, for exchange in accordance with this Section 2.2, (i) certificates representing the shares of Parent
Common Stock sufficient to deliver the Merger Consideration, and (ii) cash in immediately available funds in
an amount sufficient to pay the aggregate Fractional Share Cash Amount (the "Exchange Fund").
A-7
Table of Contents
(c)           Exchange Procedures. As soon as reasonably practicable after the Effective Time and in any event
within five business days of the Closing Date, Parent and the Surviving Company shall cause the Exchange
Agent to mail to each holder of record of shares of Company Common Stock whose shares were converted
pursuant to Section 2.1(a)(ii) into the right to receive the Merger Consideration a letter of transmittal and other
customary transmittal materials (collectively, the "Letter of Transmittal") which shall (A) specify that delivery
shall be effected, and risk of loss and title to the Certificates shall pass, only upon delivery of the Certificates
to the Exchange Agent and shall be in such form and have such other provisions as the parties may
reasonably agree upon prior to the Effective Time, and (B) provide instructions for use in effecting the
surrender of Certificates or Book-Entry Shares in exchange for the Merger Consideration, the Fractional
Share Cash Amount and any dividends or other distributions to which such holder of Certificates or Book-
Entry Shares becomes entitled in accordance with Section 2.2(e). Parent shall mail, or cause to be mailed, the
Letter of Transmittal to all persons who are holders of shares of Company Common Stock as of the record
date for the special meeting of the Company’s shareholders to approve the Merger (the “Company Record
Date”). Parent shall use commercially reasonable efforts to make, or cause to be made, the Letter of
Transmittal available to all persons who become holders of record (or beneficial owners) of shares of
Company Common Stock during the period between the Company Record Date and the close of business on
the date that is six (6) business days immediately preceding the Effective Time (or on such other date as the
Parties mutually agree).
(d)          Surrender of Certificates or Book-Entry Shares. Upon surrender of Certificates or Book-Entry Shares
to the Exchange Agent together with a Letter of Transmittal, duly completed and validly executed in
accordance with the instructions thereto, and such other documents as may customarily be required by the
Exchange Agent, the holder of such Certificates or Book-Entry Shares shall be entitled to receive in
exchange therefor the Merger Consideration deliverable in respect of the shares represented by such
Certificates or Book-Entry Shares pursuant to this Agreement, together with the Fractional Share Cash
Amount and any dividends or other distributions to which such holder of Certificates or Book-Entry Shares
becomes entitled in accordance with Section 2.2(e). In the event of a transfer of ownership of shares of
Company Common Stock that is not registered in the transfer or stock records of Company, any cash to be
paid upon, or shares of Parent Common Stock to be issued upon, due surrender of the Certificate or Book-
Entry Share formerly representing such shares of Company Common Stock may be paid or issued, as the
case may be, to such a transferee if such Certificate or Book-Entry Share is presented to the Exchange
Agent, accompanied by all documents required to evidence and effect such transfer and to evidence that any
applicable stock transfer or other similar Taxes have been paid or are not applicable. No interest shall be paid
or shall accrue on the cash payable upon surrender of any Certificate or Book-Entry Share. Until surrendered
as contemplated by this Section 2.2, each Certificate and Book-Entry Share shall be deemed at any time after
the Effective Time to represent only the right to receive, with respect to Certificates and Book-Entry Shares,
upon such surrender, the Merger Consideration deliverable in respect of the shares represented by such
Certificates or Book-Entry Shares pursuant to this Agreement, together with the Fractional Share Cash
Amount and any dividends or other distributions to which such holder of Certificates or Book-Entry Shares
becomes entitled in accordance with Section 2.2(e).
(e)          Treatment of Unexchanged Shares. No dividends or other distributions, if any, with a record date after
the Effective Time with respect to shares of Parent Common Stock, shall be paid to the holder of any
unsurrendered Book-Entry Shares or Certificate until such holder shall surrender such Book-Entry Shares or
Certificates in accordance with this Section 2.2. After the surrender in accordance with this Section 2.2 of
such Book-Entry Shares or Certificates, the holder thereof shall be entitled to receive (in addition to the
Merger Consideration and the Fractional Share Cash Amount payable to such holder pursuant to this Section
2.2(e)) any such dividends or other distributions, without any interest thereon, which theretofore had become
payable with respect to the shares of Parent Common Stock to be issued in exchange for such Book-Entry
Shares or Certificates.
(f)           No Further Ownership Rights in Exchanged Shares. The shares of Parent Common Stock delivered in
accordance with the terms of this Section 2.2 upon conversion of any shares of Company Common Stock
delivered in accordance with the terms of this Section 2.2, together with the payment of any Fractional Share
Cash Amounts, shall be deemed to have been delivered and paid in full satisfaction of all rights pertaining to
such shares of Company Common Stock. From and after the Effective Time, (i) all holders of Certificates and
Book-Entry Shares shall cease to have any rights as stockholders of Company other than the right to receive
the Merger Consideration into which the shares represented by such Certificates or Book-Entry Shares have
been converted pursuant to this Agreement upon the surrender of such Certificate or Book-Entry Share in
accordance with Section 2.2(d) (together with the Fractional Share Cash Amount and any dividends or other
distributions to which such Certificates or Book-Entry Shares become entitled in accordance with Section
2.2(e)), without interest, and (ii) the stock transfer books of Company shall be closed with respect to all shares
of Company Common Stock outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time. If, after the Effective Time,
any Certificates or Book-Entry Shares formerly representing shares of Company Common Stock are
presented to the Surviving Corporation or the Exchange Agent for any reason, such Certificates or Book-
Entry Shares shall be cancelled and exchanged as provided in this Section 2.2, subject to the NRS in the case
of Dissenting Shares.
A-8
Table of Contents
(g)          Termination of Exchange Fund. Any portion of the Exchange Fund (including any interest or other
amounts received with respect thereto) that remains unclaimed by, or otherwise undistributed to, the holders
of Certificates and Book-Entry Shares for 180 days after the Effective Time shall be delivered to Parent, upon
demand, and any holder of Certificates or Book-Entry Shares who has not theretofore complied with this
Article II shall thereafter look only to Parent (subject to abandoned property, escheat or other similar Laws),
as general creditors thereof, for satisfaction of its claim for Merger Consideration, any Fractional Share Cash
Amount and any dividends and distributions which such holder has the right to receive pursuant to this
Article II without any interest thereon.
(h)          No Liability. None of the parties or the Exchange Agent shall be liable to any person in respect of any
portion of the Exchange Fund or the Merger Consideration delivered to a public official pursuant to any
applicable abandoned property, escheat or similar Law. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Agreement, any portion of the Merger Consideration or the Fractional Share Cash Amounts to be paid in
accordance with this Article II that remains undistributed to the holders of Certificates and Book-Entry Shares
as of the second anniversary of the Effective Time (or immediately prior to such earlier date on which the
Merger Consideration or such cash would otherwise escheat to or become the property of any Governmental
Entity), shall, to the extent permitted by applicable Law, become the property of the Surviving Corporation,
free and clear of all claims or interest of any person previously entitled thereto.
(i)           Withholding Rights. Parent, the Surviving Corporation and the Exchange Agent (without duplication)
shall be entitled to deduct and withhold from the consideration otherwise payable to any holder of a
Certificate or Book-Entry Share pursuant to this Agreement such amounts as may be required to be deducted
and withheld with respect to the making of such payment under applicable Tax Law. Any amounts so
deducted, withheld and paid over to the appropriate Taxing Authority shall be treated for all purposes of this
Agreement as having been paid to the holder of the Certificate or Book-Entry Share in respect of whom such
deduction or withholding was made.
(j)           Lost Certificates. If any Certificate shall have been lost, stolen or destroyed, upon the making of an
affidavit of that fact by the person claiming such Certificate to be lost, stolen or destroyed and, if required by
Parent or the Exchange Agent, the posting by such person of a bond in such amount as Parent or the
Exchange Agent may determine is reasonably necessary as indemnity against any claim that may be made
against it or the Surviving Company with respect to such Certificate, the Exchange Agent (or, if subsequent to
the termination of the Exchange Fund and subject to Section 2.2(g), the Surviving Company) shall deliver, in
exchange for such lost, stolen or destroyed Certificate, the Merger Consideration, any Fractional Share Cash
Amount and any dividends and distributions deliverable in respect thereof pursuant to this Agreement.
Section 2.3 Intentionally omitted.
Section 2.4 Further Assurances. If at any time before or after the Effective Time, any party reasonably believes
or is advised that any further instruments, deeds, assignments or assurances are reasonably necessary or
desirable to consummate the Merger or any other transaction contemplated by this Agreement (the
"Transactions") or to carry out the purposes and intent of this Agreement at or after the Effective Time, then
the parties and their respective officers and directors shall execute and deliver all such proper instruments,
deeds, assignments or assurances and do all other things reasonably necessary or desirable to consummate
the Transactions and to carry out the purposes and intent of this Agreement.
A-9
Table of Contents
ARTICLE III.
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF COMPANY
Except as disclosed in Company SEC Documents filed prior to the date hereof (excluding any disclosures set
forth in the disclosure schedule delivered by Company to Parent immediately prior to the execution of this
Agreement (the "Company Disclosure Schedule ") (each section of which qualifies the correspondingly
numbered representation, warranty or covenant if specified therein and such other representations,
warranties or covenants where its relevance as an exception to (or disclosure for purposes of) such other
representation, warranty or covenant is reasonably apparent), Company hereby represents and warrants to
Parent as follows:
Section 3.1 Qualification, Organization, Subsidiaries, etc.
(a)          Company is a corporation duly incorporated, validly existing and in good standing under the laws of
the State of Nevada and has all requisite corporate power and authority to own, lease and operate its
properties and assets and to carry on its business as presently conducted. Section 3.1(a) of the Company
Disclosure Schedule sets forth a complete list of each of the Company’s Subsidiaries. Each of the Company's
Subsidiaries is a legal entity duly organized, validly existing and in good standing under the Laws of its
respective jurisdiction of organization and has all requisite corporate or similar power and authority to own,
lease and operate its properties and assets and to carry on its business as presently conducted. Each of
Company and its Subsidiaries is duly qualified or licensed, and has all necessary governmental approvals, to
do business and is in good standing in each jurisdiction in which the property owned, leased or operated by
it or the nature of the business conducted by it makes such approvals, qualification or licensing necessary,
except where the failure to be so duly approved, qualified or licensed and in good standing would not have,
individually or in the aggregate, a material adverse effect on the Company or such Subsidiary.
(b)          Company has made available prior to the date of this Agreement a true and complete copy of its
articles of incorporation and bylaws (collectively, the "Organizational Documents"), and the certificate of
incorporation, bylaws, limited partnership agreement, limited liability company agreement or comparable
constituent or organizational documents for each Subsidiary of Company, in each case, as amended through
the date hereof.
Section 3.2 Capital Stock.
(a)          The authorized capital stock of Company consists of 450,000,000 shares of Company Common Stock
and 50,000,000 shares of preferred stock. As of the date of this Agreement, the Company has no issued and
outstanding shares of preferred stock. Section 3.2(a) of the Company’s Disclosure Schedule sets forth as of
the date of this Agreement, (i) the number of shares of Company Common Stock issued and outstanding and
(ii) the number of shares of Company Common Stock reserved for issuance under all Company warrants (the
"Company Warrants") and convertible notes (“Company Convertible Notes”), together with the
exercise/conversion prices and exercise/conversion periods thereof. All outstanding shares of Company
Common Stock are, and shares of Company Common Stock reserved for issuance with respect to Company
Warrants and Company Convertible Notes, when issued in accordance with the respective terms thereof, will
be, duly authorized, validly issued, fully paid and nonassessable and free of preemptive rights.
(b)          Except as set forth in Section 3.2(a) (and other than the shares of Company Common Stock issuable
pursuant to the terms of outstanding Company Warrants and Company Convertible Notes identified in
Section 3.2(a) of the Company’s Disclosure Schedule), there are no outstanding subscriptions, options,
warrants, calls, convertible securities, exchangeable securities or other similar rights, agreements or
commitments to which Company or any of its Subsidiaries is a party (i) obligating Company or any of its
Subsidiaries to (A) issue, transfer, exchange, sell or register for sale any shares of capital stock or other
equity interests of Company or any Subsidiary or securities convertible into or exchangeable for such shares
or equity interests, (B) grant, extend or enter into any such subscription, option, warrant, call, convertible
securities or other similar right, agreement or arrangement, (C) redeem or otherwise acquire any such shares
of capital stock or other equity interests, (D) provide a material amount of funds to, or make any material
investment (in the form of a loan, capital contribution or otherwise) in, any Subsidiary or (E) make any
payment to any person the value of which is derived from or calculated based on the value of Company
Common Stock, or (ii) granting any preemptive or antidilutive or similar rights with respect to any security
issued by Company or its Subsidiaries. No Subsidiary of Company owns any shares of capital stock of
Company.
A-10
Table of Contents
(c)          Neither Company nor any of its Subsidiaries has outstanding bonds, debentures, notes or other
indebtedness, the holders of which have the right to vote (or which are convertible or exchangeable into or
exercisable for securities having the right to vote) with the stockholders of Company on any matter.
(d)          There are no voting trusts or other agreements or understandings to which Company or any of its
Subsidiaries is a party with respect to the voting or registration of the capital stock or other equity interest of
Company or any of its Subsidiaries.
(e)          Company or a Subsidiary of Company owns, directly or indirectly, all of the issued and outstanding
shares of capital stock or other equity interests of each Subsidiary of Company, free and clear of any
preemptive rights and any Liens other than Permitted Liens, and all of such shares of capital stock or other
equity interests are duly authorized, validly issued, fully paid and nonassessable and free of preemptive
rights. Except for equity interests in Company's Subsidiaries and for the interests described in Section 3.2(e)
of the Company Disclosure Schedule, neither Company nor any of its Subsidiaries owns, directly or
indirectly, any equity interest in any person (or any security or other right, agreement or commitment
convertible or exercisable into, or exchangeable for, any equity interest in any person). Neither Company nor
any of its Subsidiaries has any obligation to acquire any equity interest in, any person.
Section 3.3 Corporate Authority Relative to this Agreement; No Violation.
(a)          Company has the requisite corporate power and authority to execute and deliver this Agreement and
each other document to be entered into by Company in connection with the Transactions (together with this
Agreement, the "Transaction Documents") and, subject to the adoption of this Agreement and the approval
of the Merger by the holders of a majority of the shares of Company Common Stock entitled to vote thereon
(the "Company Stockholder Approval"), to consummate the Transactions. The execution and delivery of this
Agreement and the other Transaction Documents and the consummation of the Transactions have been duly
and validly authorized by the Board of Directors of Company and, except for the Company Stockholder
Approval, no other corporate proceedings on the part of Company or vote of any stockholders are necessary
to authorize the consummation of the Transactions. The Company Board of Directors have (i) resolved to
recommend that Company's stockholders adopt this Agreement (the "Recommendation"), (ii) determined that
this Agreement and the Merger are advisable and fair to and in the best interests of Company's stockholders,
(iii) approved this Agreement and the Merger, and (iv) directed that the adoption of this Agreement be
submitted to Company's stockholders for approval. Each of the Transaction Documents has been duly and
validly executed and delivered by Company and, assuming each such Transaction Document constitutes the
legal, valid and binding agreement of the counterparty thereto, each of the Transaction Documents
constitutes the legal, valid and binding agreement of Company and is enforceable against Company in
accordance with its terms, except as such enforcement may be subject to (A) the effect of bankruptcy,
insolvency, reorganization, receivership, conservatorship, arrangement, moratorium or other Laws affecting
or relating to creditors’ rights generally or (B) the rules governing the availability of specific performance,
injunctive relief or other equitable remedies and general principles of equity, regardless of whether
considered in a proceeding in equity or at law (the "Remedies Exceptions").
(b)          Other than in connection with or in compliance with (i) the filing of the articles of merger with the
Secretary of State of the State of Nevada, (ii) the U.S. Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and the
rules and regulations promulgated thereunder (the "Exchange Act"), (iii) the U.S. Securities Act of 1933, as
amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder (the " Securities Act"), (iv) applicable state
securities, takeover and "blue sky" Laws, and (iv) the approvals set forth in Section 3.3(b) of the Company
Disclosure Schedule (collectively, the "Approvals"), no authorization, consent, order, license, permit or
approval of, or registration, declaration, notice or filing with, any United States, state of the United States or
foreign governmental or regulatory agency, commission, court, body, entity or authority (each, a
"Governmental Entity") or any third party is necessary for the consummation by Company of the
Transactions, except for such authorizations, consents, orders, licenses, permits, approvals or filings that are
not required to be obtained or made prior to consummation of the Transactions.
A-11
Table of Contents
(c)          The execution and delivery by Company of this Agreement does not, and (assuming the Approvals
are obtained) the consummation of the Transactions and compliance with the provisions hereof will not
(i) result in any loss, or suspension, limitation or impairment of any right of Company or any of its
Subsidiaries to own or use any assets required for the conduct of their business or result in any violation of,
or default (with or without notice or lapse of time, or both) under, or give rise to a right of termination,
cancellation, first offer, first refusal, modification or acceleration of any material obligation or to the loss of a
benefit under any loan, guarantee of indebtedness or credit agreement, note, bond, mortgage, indenture,
lease, agreement, contract (including any Oil and Gas Lease or Oil and Gas Contract), instrument, permit,
concession, franchise, right or license binding upon Company or any of its Subsidiaries or by which or to
which any of their respective properties, rights or assets are bound or subject, or result in the creation of any
liens, claims, mortgages, encumbrances, pledges, security interests, equities or charges of any kind (each, a
"Lien") other than Permitted Liens, in each case, upon any of the properties or assets of Company or any of
its Subsidiaries, (ii) conflict with or result in any violation of any provision of the articles of incorporation or
bylaws or other equivalent organizational document, in each case as amended or restated, of Company or
any of its Subsidiaries or (iii) conflict with or violate any applicable Laws.
Section 3.4 Company SEC Documents; Financial Statements. Since December 30, 2011, the Company has
filed with or otherwise furnished to (as applicable) the SEC all registration statements, prospectuses, forms,
reports, definitive proxy statements, schedules and documents required to be filed or furnished by it under
the Securities Act or the Exchange Act, as the case may be, together with all certifications required pursuant
to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as amended (the “Sarbanes-Oxley Act”) (such documents and any other
documents filed by the Company with the SEC, as have been supplemented, modified or amended since the
time of filing, collectively, the “Company SEC Documents”). As of their respective filing dates or, if
supplemented, modified or amended since the time of filing, as of the date of the most recent supplement,
modification or amendment, the Company SEC Documents (i) did not at the time each such document was
filed contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact required to be stated
therein or necessary in order to make the statements made therein, in light of the circumstances under which
they were made, not misleading and (ii) complied in all material respects with all applicable requirements of
the Exchange Act or the Securities Act, as the case may be, and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, and the rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder, in each case as in effect on the date each such document was filed.
None of the Company Subsidiaries is currently required to file any forms or reports with the SEC. As of the
date hereof, there are no material outstanding or unresolved comments received from the SEC with respect to
any of the reports filed by the Company with the SEC. Since December 30, 2011, the Company has been and
is in compliance in all material respects with the applicable provisions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. The audited
consolidated financial statements and unaudited consolidated interim financial statements of the Company
(including, in each case, any notes thereto) and the consolidated Company Subsidiaries included in or
incorporated by reference into the Company SEC Documents (collectively, the “Company Financial
Statements”) (x) complied as of their respective dates of filing in all material respects with the then applicable
accounting requirements and the published rules and regulations of the SEC with respect thereto, (y) were
prepared in conformity with GAAP (as in effect in the United States on the date of such Company Financial
Statement) applied on a consistent basis during the periods involved (except as may be indicated in the notes
thereto or, in the case of interim financial statements, for normal and recurring year-end adjustments that
were not (or will not be) material in amount or effect) and (z) present fairly, in all material respects, the financial
position of the Company and the consolidated Company Subsidiaries and the results of their operations and
their cash flows as of the dates and for the periods referred to therein (except as may be indicated in the
notes thereto or, in the case of interim financial statements, for normal and recurring year-end adjustments
that were not (or will not be) material in amount or effect). Neither the Company nor any Company Subsidiary
is a party to, or has any commitment to become a party to any “off-balance sheet arrangements” (as defined
in Item 303(a) of Regulation S-K of the SEC), where the result, purpose or effect of such contract is to avoid
disclosure of any material transaction involving, or material liabilities of, the Company or any of the Company
Subsidiaries, in the Company Financial Statements or the Company SEC Documents.
A-12
Table of Contents
Section 3.5 No Undisclosed Liabilities. Neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries has, or is subject to,
any liabilities or obligations of any nature (whether accrued, absolute, contingent or otherwise) that would be
required by GAAP to be reflected on a consolidated balance sheet of Company and its consolidated
Subsidiaries (including the notes thereto) other than liabilities and obligations (a) disclosed, reserved against
or provided for in the audited consolidated balance sheet of the Company as of December 31, 2013 or in the
notes thereto, (b) incurred in the ordinary course of business consistent with past practice since
December 31, 2013 which have not had and will not have, individually or in the aggregate, a Material Adverse
Effect, or (c) incurred under this Agreement or in connection with the transactions contemplated hereby or
otherwise disclosed in the Company Disclosure Schedule. Except as disclosed in the Company Financial
Statements, Company is not a guarantor or indemnitor of any indebtedness of any other person.
Section 3.6 Information Supplied. The proxy statement to be sent to the Company’s stockholders in
connection with the special meeting for the Company Stockholder Approval (the “Company Stockholder
Meeting”) (such proxy statement, together with any amendments or supplements thereto, the “Proxy
Statement”) will not, at the time the Proxy Statement is first mailed to the Company’s stockholders or at the
time of the Company Stockholder Meeting, as applicable, contain any untrue statement of a material fact or
omit to state any material fact required to be stated therein or necessary in order to make the statements
therein, in light of the circumstances under which they are made, not misleading. The Proxy Statement,
insofar as it relates to the Company or the Company Subsidiaries or other information supplied by the
Company for inclusion or incorporation by reference therein, will comply as to form in all material respects
with the provisions of the Exchange Act and the rules and regulations thereunder and other applicable Law.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no representation or warranty is made by the Company with respect to
statements made or incorporated by reference therein based on information supplied by Parent or Merger
Sub or any of their representatives specifically for inclusion (or incorporation by reference therein) in the
Proxy Statement.
Section 3.7 Internal Controls and Disclosure Controls. The Company has designed and maintains a system of
internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) of the Exchange Act)
intended to provide reasonable assurances regarding the reliability of financial reporting for the Company
and the Company Subsidiaries. The Company (a) has designed disclosure controls and procedures (as
defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) of the Exchange Act) to ensure that material information required to
be disclosed by the Company in the reports that it files or submits under the Exchange Act is recorded,
processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms and is
accumulated and communicated to the Company’s management as appropriate to allow timely decisions
regarding required disclosure and (b) based on its most recent evaluation of internal control prior to the date
hereof, has disclosed to the Company’s auditors and the audit committee of the Company’s board of
directors (i) any significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control
over financial reporting that are reasonably likely to adversely affect in any material respect the Company’s
ability to report financial information and (ii) any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or
other employees who have a significant role in the Company’s internal control over financial reporting. The
Company has established and maintains “disclosure controls and procedures” (as defined in Rules 13a-15(e)
and 15d-15(e) promulgated under the Exchange Act) that are reasonably designed (but without making any
representation or warranty as to the effectiveness of any such controls or procedures so designed) to ensure
that material information (both financial and non-financial) relating to the Company and the Company
Subsidiaries required to be disclosed by the Company in the reports that it files or submits under the
Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the rules
and forms of the SEC, and that such information is accumulated and communicated to the Company’s
principal executive officer and principal financial officer, or persons performing similar functions, as
appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure and to make the certifications of the
“principal executive officer” and the “principal financial officer” of the Company required by Section 302 of
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act with respect to such reports. Each of the principal executive officer of the Company
and the principal financial officer of the Company (or each former principal executive officer of the Company
and each former principal financial officer of the Company, as applicable) has made all certifications required
by Sections 302 and 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder
with respect to the Company SEC Documents and the statements contained in such certifications are true
and accurate in all material respects as of the date hereof. There are no “significant deficiencies” or “material
weaknesses” (as defined by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act) in the design or operation of the Company’s internal
controls and procedures which could adversely affect the Company’s ability to record, process, summarize
and report financial data.
A-13
Table of Contents
Section 3.8 Compliance with Law; Permits.
(a)          Company and its Subsidiaries are in compliance with, and are not in default under or in violation of,
any applicable federal, state, local or foreign law, statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, judgment, order,
injunction, decree, settlement or agency requirement of any Governmental Entity (collectively, "Laws " and
each, a "Law"), except where such non-compliance, default or violation have not had and would not have,
individually or in the aggregate, a Material Adverse Effect. Since December 31, 2012, neither Company nor
any of its Subsidiaries has received any written notice or, to Company's knowledge, other communication
from any Governmental Entity regarding any actual or possible violation of, or failure to comply with, any Law.
(b)          Company and its Subsidiaries are in possession of all franchises, grants, authorizations, licenses,
permits, easements, variances, exceptions, consents, certificates, approvals, clearances, permissions,
qualifications and registrations and orders of all applicable Governmental Entities, and all rights under any
Company Material Contract with all Governmental Entities, and have filed all tariffs, reports, notices and other
documents with all Governmental Entities necessary for Company and its Subsidiaries to own, lease and
operate their properties and assets and to carry on their businesses as they are now being conducted (the
"Permits"), except where the failure to have any of the Permits or to have filed such tariffs, reports, notices or
other documents would not have, individually or in the aggregate, a Material Adverse Effect. All Permits are
valid and in full force and effect and are not subject to any administrative or judicial proceeding that could
result in modification, termination or revocation thereof. Company and each of its Subsidiaries is in
compliance with the terms and requirements of all Permits.
(c)          Each of Company, its Subsidiaries and each third-party operator of any of the Oil and Gas Interests of
Company and its Subsidiaries (with respect to such interests) is and has been, in compliance with applicable
Laws and Orders, except where the failure to be in compliance would not have, individually or in the
aggregate, a Material Adverse Effect.
(d)           None of Company, any Subsidiary of Company, or any director, officer, employee, auditor,
accountant or representative of Company or any Subsidiary of Company, has received or otherwise had or
obtained knowledge of any material complaint, allegation, assertion or claim, whether written or oral,
regarding accounting, internal accounting controls or auditing practices, procedures, methodologies or
methods of Company or any Subsidiary of Company or any material concerns from employees of Company
or any Subsidiary of Company regarding questionable accounting or auditing matters with respect to
Company any or any Subsidiary of Company, and (ii) no attorney representing Company or any Subsidiary of
Company, whether or not employed by Company or any Subsidiary of Company, has reported in writing
evidence of a violation of securities Laws, breach of fiduciary duty or similar violation by Company, any
Subsidiary of Company or any of their respective officers, directors, employees or agents to the Board of
Directors of Company or any committee thereof, or to the General Counsel or Chief Executive Officer of
Company.
Section 3.9 Environmental Laws and Regulations. There are no investigations, actions, suits or proceedings
(whether administrative or judicial) pending, or to the knowledge of Company, threatened against Company
or any of its Subsidiaries or any person or entity whose liability Company or any of its Subsidiaries has
retained or assumed either contractually or by operation of Law, alleging non-compliance with or other
liability under any Environmental Law and there are no existing facts or circumstances that would reasonably
be expected to give rise to any such action, suit or proceeding. Company, its Subsidiaries and each third-
party operator of any of the Oil and Gas Interests of Company and its Subsidiaries (with respect to such
interests) are, and except for matters that have been fully resolved with the applicable Governmental Entity,
since December 31, 2012 have been, in compliance with all Environmental Laws (which compliance includes
the possession by Company and each of its Subsidiaries of all Permits required under applicable
Environmental Laws to conduct their respective business and operations, and compliance with the terms and
conditions thereof). There have been no Releases at any location of Hazardous Materials by Company, its
Subsidiaries, or as a result of any operations or activities of their contractors or other third-party operators,
that would reasonably be expected to give rise to any fine, penalty, remediation, investigation, obligation,
injunction or liability of any kind to Company or its Subsidiaries. None of Company, its Subsidiaries, and any
third-party operator of any of the Oil and Gas Interests of Company and its Subsidiaries (with respect to such
interests) and any predecessor of any of them, is subject to any Order or any indemnity obligation (other than
asset retirement obligations, plugging and abandonment obligations and other reserves of Company set
forth in the Company Reserve Reports that have been provided to Parent prior to the date of this Agreement)
or other Contract with any other person that would reasonably be expected to result in obligations or
liabilities under applicable Environmental Laws or concerning Hazardous Materials or Releases. None of
Company and its Subsidiaries has received any unresolved claim, notice, complaint or request for
information or contribution from a Governmental Entity or any other person relating to actual or alleged
noncompliance with or liability under applicable Environmental Laws (including any such liability or
obligation arising under, retained or assumed by contract or by operation of law).
A-14
Table of Contents
Section 3.10 Employee Benefit Plans.
(a)          Section 3.10(a) of the Company Disclosure Schedule sets forth a correct and complete list of each
Benefit Plan. For purposes of this Agreement, "Benefit Plan" means each employee benefit plan, program,
agreement or arrangement, including pension, retirement, profit-sharing, deferred compensation, stock
option, change in control, retention, equity or equity-based compensation, stock purchase, employee stock
ownership, severance pay, vacation, bonus or other incentive plans, medical, retiree medical, vision, dental or
other health plans, life insurance plans, and each other employee benefit plan or fringe benefit plan, including
any "employee benefit plan" as that term is defined in Section 3(3) of the Employee Retirement Income
Security Act of 1974, as amended ("ERISA"), in each case, whether oral or written, funded or unfunded, or
insured or self-insured, maintained by Company or any Subsidiary, or to which Company or any Subsidiary
contributes or is obligated to contribute for the benefit of any current or former employees, directors,
consultants or independent contractors of Company or any of its Subsidiaries.
(b)          With respect to the Benefit Plans, each to the extent applicable, correct and complete copies of the
following have been delivered or made available to Parent by Company: (i) all Benefit Plans (including all
amendments and attachments thereto); (ii) written summaries of any Benefit Plan not in writing; (iii) all related
trust documents; (iv) all insurance contracts or other funding arrangements; (v) the two most recent annual
reports (Form 5500) filed with the Internal Revenue Service (the "IRS"); (vi) the most recent determination
letter from the IRS; (vii) the most recent summary plan description and any summary of material modifications
thereto; and (viii) all material communications received from or sent to the IRS, the Pension Benefit Guaranty
Corporation (the "PBGC"), the Department of Labor, or any other Governmental Entity since December 31,
2012. Except as specifically provided in the foregoing documents delivered or made available to Parent, there
are no material amendments to any material Benefit Plans that have been adopted or approved nor has
Company or any of its Subsidiaries undertaken to make any such material amendments or to adopt or
approve any new Benefit Plans.
(c)          Each Benefit Plan has been established, operated and administered in accordance with its terms and
the requirements of all applicable Laws, including ERISA and the Code, and all contributions required to be
made to any Benefit Plan by applicable Law or by any plan document or other contractual undertaking, and
all premiums due or payable with respect to insurance policies funding any Benefit Plan, have been timely
made or paid in full or, to the extent not required to be made or paid on or before the date hereof, have been
fully reflected on the books and records of Company.
(d)          Section 3.10(d) of the Company Disclosure Schedule identifies each Benefit Plan that is intended to
be qualified under Section 401(a) of the Code (the "Qualified Plans"). The IRS has issued a favorable
determination letter with respect to each Qualified Plan and its related trust, such determination letter has not
been revoked (nor, to the knowledge of Company, has revocation been threatened), and there are no existing
circumstances and no events have occurred that would reasonably be expected to adversely affect the
qualified status of any Qualified Plan or the related trust or increase the costs relating thereto. No trust
funding any Benefit Plan is intended to meet the requirements of Code Section 501(c)(9).
(e)          None of Company and its Subsidiaries nor any of their respective ERISA Affiliates has, at any time
during the last six years, maintained, established, contributed to or been obligated to contribute to any
employee benefit plan that is subject to Title IV or Section 302 of ERISA or Section 412, 430 or 4971 of the
Code.
(f)           None of Company and its Subsidiaries nor any of their respective ERISA Affiliates has, at any time
during the last six years, maintained, established, contributed to or been obligated to contribute to any plan
that is a "multiemployer plan" within the meaning of Section 4001(a)(3) of ERISA (a "Multiemployer Plan") or a
plan that has two or more contributing sponsors at least two of whom are not under common control, within
the meaning of Section 4063 of ERISA (a "Multiple Employer Plan"). None of Company and its Subsidiaries
nor any of their respective ERISA Affiliates has incurred any liability to a Multiemployer Plan or a Multiple
Employer Plan as a result of a complete or partial withdrawal from such Multiemployer Plan or Multiple
Employer Plan.
A-15
Table of Contents
(g)          There are no pending or, to Company’s knowledge, threatened claims (other than claims for benefits
in the ordinary course), lawsuits or arbitrations which have been asserted or instituted against Company with
respect to any Benefit Plan, any fiduciaries thereof with respect to their duties to the Benefit Plans or the
assets of any of the trusts under any of the Benefit Plans.
(h)          Neither Company nor any of its Subsidiaries, has sponsored or has any material obligation with
respect to any employee benefit plan that provides for any post-employment or post-retirement medical or life
insurance benefits for retired, former or current employees or beneficiaries or dependents thereof, except as
required by applicable Law or pursuant to post-termination continuation provisions not in excess of three
years set forth in employment agreements or severance arrangements that are Benefit Plans.
(i)           Company is not party to, or otherwise obligated under, any contract, agreement, plan or arrangement
that provides for the gross-up of taxes imposed by Section 409A(a)(1)(B) of the Code.
(j)           The execution and delivery of this Agreement and the consummation of the Transactions will not,
either alone or in combination with another event, except as provided under this Agreement or as required by
applicable Law (i) entitle any current or former employee, director, consultant or officer of Company or any of
its Subsidiaries to severance pay or accrued pension benefit or any other payment, (ii) accelerate the time of
payment or vesting, or increase the amount of compensation due any such employee, director, consultant or
officer, or (iii) trigger any funding obligation under any Benefit Plan or impose any restrictions or limitations
on Company’s rights to administer, amend or terminate any Benefit Plan.
(k)          The consummation of the Transactions will not, either alone or in combination with another event,
result in any payment (whether in cash or property or the vesting of property) to any "disqualified individual"
(as such term is defined in Treasury Regulation Section 1.280G-1) that would, individually or in combination
with any other such payment, constitute an "excess parachute payment" (as defined in Section 280G(b)(1) of
the Code). No Benefit Plan provides for the gross-up or reimbursement of Taxes under Section 4999 of the
Code or otherwise.
Section 3.11 Absence of Certain Changes or Events.
(a)          From December 31, 2013 through the date of this Agreement, the businesses of Company and its
Subsidiaries have been conducted in all material respects in the ordinary course of business, and none of
Company or any Subsidiary of Company have undertaken any action that would be prohibited by Section
5.1(b) of this Agreement if such section were in effect at all times since December 31, 2013.
(b)          Since December 31, 2013, there has not been any event, change, effect, development or occurrence
that, individually or in the aggregate, has had a Material Adverse Effect.
Section 3.12 Investigations; Litigation. There is no investigation or review pending (or, to the knowledge of
Company, threatened) by any Governmental Entity with respect to Company or any of its Subsidiaries. There
are no actions, suits (or, to the knowledge of Company, inquiries), investigations, proceedings, subpoenas,
civil investigative demands or other requests for information by any Governmental Entity or any other person
(or, to the knowledge of Company, threatened) against or affecting Company or any of its Subsidiaries, or any
of their respective properties. There are no orders, judgments or decrees of any Governmental Entity against
Company or any of its Subsidiaries.
A-16
Table of Contents
Section 3.13  Information Supplied. The information supplied or to be supplied by Company in writing
expressly for inclusion in the registration statement on Form S-4 to be filed by Parent in connection with the
issuance of shares of Parent Common Stock in the Merger (the "Form S-4") shall not, at the time the Form S-4
is declared effective by the SEC, contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state any material
fact required to be stated therein or necessary in order to make the statements therein, in light of the
circumstances under which they are made, not misleading, except that no representation or warranty is made
by Company with respect to statements made or incorporated by reference therein based on information
supplied by any Parent Entity in writing expressly for inclusion therein. The information supplied or to be
supplied by Company in writing expressly for inclusion in the joint proxy statement/prospectus (the "Proxy
Statement/Prospectus") relating to the Company Stockholder Meeting included in the Form S-4 will not, at the
time the Proxy Statement/Prospectus is first mailed to the stockholders of Company, and at the time of the
Company Stockholder Meeting, contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state any material
fact required to be stated therein or necessary in order to make the statements therein, in light of the
circumstances under which they are made, not misleading, except that no representation or warranty is made
by Company with respect to statements made or incorporated by reference therein based on information
supplied by Parent in writing expressly for inclusion therein. The Form S-4 and the Proxy
Statement/Prospectus (solely with respect to the portion thereof based on information supplied or to be
supplied by Company in writing expressly for inclusion therein but excluding any portion thereof based on
information supplied by Parent in writing expressly for inclusion therein, with respect to which no
representation or warranty is made by Company) will comply as to form in all material respects with the
provisions of the Securities Act and the Exchange Act.
Section 3.14 Regulatory Matters.
(a)          Company is not (i) an "investment company" or a company "controlled" by an "investment company"
within the meaning of the U.S. Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, and the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder or (ii) a "holding company," a "subsidiary company" of a "holding company," an
affiliate of a "holding company," a "public utility" or a "public-utility company," as each such term is defined
in the U.S. Public Utility Holding Company Act of 2005.
(b)          All natural gas pipeline Systems and related facilities constituting Company’s and its Subsidiaries’
properties are, except to the extent the failure to comply with the following provisions will not have,
individually or in the aggregate, a Material Adverse Effect: (i) "gathering facilities" that are exempt from
regulation by the U.S. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission under the Natural Gas Act of 1938, as
amended, and (ii) not subject to rate regulation or comprehensive nondiscriminatory access regulation under
the Laws of any state or other local jurisdiction.
Section 3.15 Tax Matters.
(a)          Except as would not have, individually or in the aggregate, a Material Adverse Effect:
(i)           (A) Company and each of its Subsidiaries has timely filed all Tax Returns with the appropriate Taxing
Authority required to be filed, taking into account any extensions of time within which to file such Tax
Returns, and all such Tax Returns were complete and correct, and (B) all Taxes due and owing by Company
and each of its Subsidiaries (whether or not shown on such filed Tax Returns), including Taxes required to be
collected or withheld from payments to employees, creditors, shareholders or other third parties, have been
paid, except in each case of clause (A) and (B) for amounts being contested in good faith by appropriate
proceedings or for which adequate reserves have been maintained in accordance with GAAP.
(ii)          (A) No deficiencies for Taxes with respect to Company or any of its Subsidiaries have been claimed,
proposed or assessed by any Taxing Authority that have not been settled and paid or adequately reserved in
accordance with GAAP, (B) as of the date hereof, there are no pending or threatened audits, assessments or
other actions for or relating to any liability in respect of Taxes of Company or any of its Subsidiaries, and
(C) neither Company nor any of its Subsidiaries has waived any statute of limitations in respect of Taxes or
agreed to any extension of time with respect to a Tax assessment or deficiency.
(iii)         There are no Liens for Taxes upon any property or assets of Company or any of its Subsidiaries other
than Permitted Liens.
(iv)         Neither Company nor any of its Subsidiaries has participated in a "listed transaction" within the
meaning of Treasury Regulation Section 1.6011-4(b).
A-17
Table of Contents
(v)          No claim has been made by any Taxing Authority in a jurisdiction where Company or any Subsidiary
does not file Tax Returns that Company or any Subsidiary is or may be subject to taxation by that jurisdiction,
other than any such claims that have been resolved.
(vi)         Neither Company nor any of its Subsidiaries is a party to any Tax allocation, sharing, indemnity, or
reimbursement agreement or arrangement (excluding any such agreements pursuant to customary
provisions in contracts not primarily related to Taxes).
(vii)        Neither Company nor any of its Subsidiaries has been a member of an affiliated group within the
meaning of Section 1504(a) of the Code (or any similar group defined under a similar provision of foreign,
state or local Law), other than a group of which Company or any Subsidiary is or was the common parent,
and neither Company nor any of its Subsidiaries has any liability for Taxes of any other person (other than
Taxes of Company or any Subsidiary) under Treasury Regulation Section 1.1502-6 (or any similar provision of
foreign, state or local Law), as a transferee or successor, by contract or otherwise.
(viii)       Within the last two years, neither Company nor any of its Subsidiaries has been a party to any
transaction intended to qualify under Section 355 of the Code.
(b)          Neither Company nor any of its Subsidiaries is aware of any fact, or has taken or agreed to take any
action that would reasonably be expected to prevent or impede the Merger from qualifying as a
"reorganization" within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code.
Section 3.16 Employment and Labor Matters. As of the date hereof, neither Company nor any of its
Subsidiaries is, or has been, a party to any collective bargaining agreement, labor union contract, or trade
union agreement (each a "Collective Bargaining Agreement"), and no employee is represented by a labor
organization for purposes of collective bargaining with respect to Company or any of its Subsidiaries. To the
knowledge of Company, as of the date hereof, there are no activities or proceedings of any labor or trade
union to organize any employees of Company or any of its Subsidiaries. As of the date hereof, no Collective
Bargaining Agreement is being negotiated by Company or, to the knowledge of Company, any of its
Subsidiaries. As of the date hereof, there is no strike, lockout, slowdown, or work stoppage against Company
or any of its Subsidiaries pending or, to the knowledge of Company, threatened, that may interfere in any
material respect with the business activities of Company and its Subsidiaries taken as a whole. There is no
pending charge or complaint against Company or any of its Subsidiaries by the National Labor Relations
Board or any comparable Governmental Entity, and none of Company or any of its Subsidiaries is a party, or
otherwise bound by, any consent decree with, or citation by, any Governmental Entity relating to employees
or employment practices. Company has complied with all applicable Laws regarding employment and
employment practices, terms and conditions of employment and wages and hours (including classification of
employees) and other applicable Laws in respect of any reduction in force, including notice, information and
consultation requirements. There are no outstanding assessments, penalties, fines, Liens, charges,
surcharges, or other amounts due or owing by Company pursuant to any workplace safety and
insurance/workers’ compensation Laws.
Section 3.17 Intellectual Property.
(a)           Either Company or a Subsidiary owns, or is licensed or otherwise possesses valid rights to use, free
and clear of Liens other than Permitted Liens, all trademarks, trade names, service marks, service names,
mark registrations, logos, assumed names, domain names, registered and unregistered copyrights, patents
or applications and registrations, trade secrets and other intellectual property rights necessary to their
respective businesses as currently conducted (collectively, the "Intellectual Property"). There are no pending
or, to the knowledge of Company, threatened claims by any person alleging infringement, misappropriation or
other violation by Company or any of its Subsidiaries of any intellectual property rights of any person. To the
knowledge of Company, the conduct of the business of Company and its Subsidiaries does not infringe,
misappropriate or otherwise violate any intellectual property rights of any person. Neither Company nor any
of its Subsidiaries has made any claim of a violation, infringement or misappropriation by others of
Company’s or any its Subsidiaries’ rights to or in connection with the Intellectual Property. To the knowledge
of Company, no person is infringing, misappropriating or otherwise violating any Intellectual Property.
A-18
Table of Contents
(b)          Company and its Subsidiaries have implemented (i) commercially reasonable measures, consistent
with industry standards, to protect the confidentiality, integrity and security of the IT Assets (and all
information and transactions stored or contained therein or transmitted thereby), and (ii) commercially
reasonable data backup, data storage, system redundancy and disaster avoidance and recovery procedures,
as well as a commercially reasonable business continuity plan, in each case consistent with customary
industry practices.
Section 3.18 Properties.
(a)          Company and its Subsidiaries have good and defensible title to all of the Oil and Gas Interests
reflected in the Company Reserve Reports as attributable to interests owned by Company and its
Subsidiaries, except for such Oil and Gas Interests sold, used, farmed out or otherwise disposed of since
December 31, 2013 in the ordinary course of business, in each case free and clear of all Liens other than
Permitted Liens and Production Burdens. Each Oil and Gas Lease to which Company or any of its
Subsidiaries is a party is valid and in full force and effect. None of Company or any of its Subsidiaries has
violated any provision of, or taken or failed to take any act which, with or without notice, lapse of time, or both,
would constitute a default under the provisions of such Oil and Gas Lease. None of Company or any of its
Subsidiaries has received written notice from the other party to any such Oil and Gas Lease that Company or
any of its Subsidiaries, as the case may be, has breached, violated or defaulted under any Oil and Gas Lease.
(b)          Either Company or a Subsidiary of Company has good and valid title to each material real property
(and each real property at which material operations of Company or any of its Subsidiaries are conducted)
owned by Company or any Subsidiary (but excluding the Oil and Gas Interests of Company), other than the
Real Property Leases (such owned property collectively, the "Company Owned Real Property"). Either
Company or a Subsidiary of Company has a good and valid leasehold interest in each material lease,
sublease and other agreement under which Company or any of its Subsidiaries uses or occupies or has the
right to use or occupy any material real property (or real property at which material operations of Company or
any of its Subsidiaries are conducted) (but excluding the Oil and Gas Interests of Company) (such property
subject to a lease, sublease or other agreement, the "Company Leased Real Property" and such leases,
subleases and other agreements are, collectively, the "Company Real Property Leases"), in each case, free
and clear of all Liens other than any Permitted Liens, and other than any conditions, encroachments,
easements, rights-of-way, restrictions and other encumbrances that do not adversely affect the existing use
of the real property subject thereto by the owner (or lessee to the extent a leased property) thereof in the
operation of its business. Each Company Real Property Lease is valid, binding and in full force and effect. No
uncured default of a material nature on the part of Company or, if applicable, its Subsidiary or, to the
knowledge of Company, the landlord thereunder, exists under any Company Real Property Lease, and no
event has occurred or circumstance exists which, with or without the giving of notice, the passage of time, or
both, would constitute a material breach or default under a Company Real Property Lease.
(c)          There are no leases, subleases, licenses, rights or other agreements affecting any portion of the
Company Owned Real Property or the Company Leased Real Property that would reasonably be expected to
adversely affect the existing use of such Company Owned Real Property or the Company Leased Real
Property by Company or its Subsidiaries in the operation of its business thereon. Except for such
arrangements solely among Company and its Subsidiaries or among Company’s Subsidiaries, there are no
outstanding options or rights of first refusal in favor of any other party to purchase any Company Owned Real
Property or any portion thereof or interest therein that would reasonably be expected to adversely affect the
existing use of the Company Owned Real Property by Company in the operation of its business thereon.
Neither Company nor any of its Subsidiaries is currently subleasing, licensing or otherwise granting any
person the right to use or occupy a material portion of a Company Owned Real Property or Company Leased
Real Property that would reasonably be expected to adversely affect the existing use of such Company
Owned Real Property or Company Leased Real Property by Company or its Subsidiaries in the operation of
its business thereon.
(d)          All proceeds from the sale of Hydrocarbons produced from the Oil and Gas Interests of Company and
its Subsidiaries are being received by them in a timely manner and are not being held in suspense for any
reason other than awaiting preparation and approval of division order title opinions for recently drilled Wells.
A-19
Table of Contents
(e)          All of the Wells and all water, CO2 or injection wells located on the Oil and Gas Leases or Units of
Company and its Subsidiaries or otherwise associated with an Oil and Gas Interest of Company or its
Subsidiaries have been drilled, completed and operated within the limits permitted by the applicable Oil and
Gas Contracts and applicable Law, and all drilling and completion (and plugging and abandonment) of the
Wells and such other wells and all related development, production and other operations have been
conducted in compliance with all applicable Laws.
(f)           All Oil and Gas Interests operated by Company and its Subsidiaries have been operated in
accordance with reasonable, prudent oil and gas field practices and in compliance with the applicable Oil and
Gas Leases and applicable Law.
(g)          None of the material Oil and Gas Interests of Company or its Subsidiaries is subject to any preferential
purchase, consent or similar right that would become operative as a result of the Transactions.
(h)          None of the Oil and Gas Interests of Company or its Subsidiaries are subject to any Tax partnership
agreement or provisions requiring a partnership income Tax Return to be filed under Subchapter K of
Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Code.
Section 3.19 Insurance. Company and its Subsidiaries maintain insurance in such amounts and against such
risks substantially as are customary for the industries in which it and its Subsidiaries operate and as their
management has in good faith determined to be prudent and appropriate. All insurance policies maintained
by or on behalf of Company or any of its Subsidiaries as of the date of this Agreement are in full force and
effect, and all premiums due on such policies have been paid by Company or its Subsidiaries. Company and
its Subsidiaries are in compliance with the terms and provisions of all insurance policies maintained by or on
behalf of Company or any of its Subsidiaries as of the date of this Agreement, and neither Company nor any
of its Subsidiaries is in breach or default under, or has taken any action that would permit termination or
material modification of, any material insurance policies.
Section 3.20 [Intentionally Omitted]
Section 3.21 Material Contracts.
(a)          Except for this Agreement, the Benefit Plans and agreements filed as exhibits to the Company SEC
Documents, as of the date of this Agreement, neither Company nor any of its Subsidiaries is a party to or
bound by:
(i)           any "material contract" (as such term is defined in Item 601(b)(10) of Regulation S-K of the SEC);
(ii)          any Contract that (A) expressly imposes any restriction on the right or ability of Company or any of its
Subsidiaries to compete with any other person or acquire or dispose of the securities of another person or
(B) contains an exclusivity or "most favored nation" clause that restricts the business of Company or any of
its Subsidiaries in a material manner, other than those contained in customary oil and gas leases or
customary confidentiality agreements;
(iii)         any mortgage, note, debenture, indenture, security agreement, guaranty, pledge or other agreement
or instrument evidencing indebtedness for borrowed money or any guarantee of such indebtedness of
Company or any of its Subsidiaries in an amount in excess of $100,000, except any transactions among
Company and its wholly owned subsidiaries or among Company’s wholly owned Subsidiaries;
(iv)         any Contract that provides for the acquisition, disposition, license, use, distribution or outsourcing of
assets, services, rights or properties with a value, or requiring the payment of an annual amount by Company
and its Subsidiaries, in excess of $100,000;
(v)          any joint venture, partnership or limited liability company agreement or other similar Contract relating
to the formation, creation, operation, management or control of any joint venture, partnership or limited
liability company, other than any such Contract solely between Company and its Subsidiaries or among
Company’s Subsidiaries and other than any customary joint operating agreements, unit agreements or
participation agreements affecting the Oil and Gas Interests of Company;
A-20
Table of Contents
(vi)         any Contract expressly limiting or restricting the ability of Company or any of its Subsidiaries to make
distributions or declare or pay dividends in respect of their capital stock, partnership interests, membership
interests or other equity interests, as the case may be;
(vii)        any Contract that obligates Company or any of its Subsidiaries to make any loans, advances or
capital contributions to, or investments in, any person other than (A) advances for expenses required under
customary joint operating agreements and customary advances to operators of Oil and Gas Interests of
Company not covered by a joint operating agreement or participation agreement or (B) any loan or capital
contribution to, or investment in Company or one of its wholly owned Subsidiaries;
(viii)       any Contract providing for the sale by Company or any of its Subsidiaries of Hydrocarbons that
(A) has a remaining term of greater than 60 days and does not allow Company or such Subsidiary to
terminate it without penalty on 60 days’ notice or less or (B) contains a "take-or-pay" clause or any similar
material prepayment or forward sale arrangement or obligation (excluding "gas balancing" arrangements
associated with customary joint operating agreements) to deliver Hydrocarbons at some future time without
then or thereafter receiving full payment therefor;
(ix)          any Contract that provides for a call or option on production, or acreage dedication to a gathering,
transportation or other arrangement downstream of the wellhead, covering in excess of 100 Mcf per day (or, in
the case of liquids, in excess of 25 barrels of oil equivalent) of Hydrocarbons per day over a period of one
month (calculated on a yearly average basis);
(x)           any Oil and Gas Lease that contains express provisions (A) establishing bonus obligations in excess
of $5,000 that were not satisfied at the time of leasing or signing or (B) providing for a fixed term, even if there
is still production in paying quantities;
(xi)          any agreement pursuant to which Company or any of its Subsidiaries has paid amounts associated
with any Production Burden in excess of $25,000 during the immediately preceding fiscal year or with respect
to which Company reasonably expects that it will make payments associated with any Production Burden in
any of the next three succeeding fiscal years that could, based on current projections, exceed $25,000 per
year;
(xii)         any agreement which is a joint development agreement, exploration agreement or acreage dedication
agreement (excluding, in respect of each of the foregoing, customary joint operating agreements) that either
(A) is material to the operation of Company and its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, or (B) would reasonably be
expected to require Company and its Subsidiaries to make expenditures in excess of $25,000 in the
aggregate during the 12-month period following the date hereof;
(xiii)        any acquisition Contract that contains "earn out" or other contingent payment obligations, or
remaining indemnity or similar obligations (other than asset retirement obligations, plugging and
abandonment obligations and other reserves of Company set forth in the Company Reserve Reports that
have been provided to Parent prior to the date of this Agreement), that would reasonably be expected to
result in payments after the date hereof by Company or any of its Subsidiaries in excess of $50,000; or
(xiv)       any material lease or sublease with respect to a Company Leased Real Property.
All contracts of the types referred to in clauses (i) through (xiv) above are referred to herein as "Company
Material Contracts."
(b)          Neither Company nor any Subsidiary of Company is in breach of or default under the terms of any
Company Material Contract. To the knowledge of Company, no other party to any Company Material Contract
is in breach of or default under the terms of any Company Material Contract. Each Company Material Contract
is a valid and binding obligation of Company or the Subsidiary of Company that is party thereto and, to the
knowledge of Company, of each other party thereto, and is in full force and effect.
A-21
Table of Contents
Section 3.22 Reserve Reports. Company has delivered or otherwise made available to Parent true and correct
copies of the written report commissioned by Company and delivered to Company estimating Company’s
and its Subsidiaries’ proved oil and gas reserves prepared by an unaffiliated person (the "Company Report
Preparer") concerning the Oil and Gas Interests of Company and such Subsidiaries as of December 31, 2013
(the "Company Reserve Report"). The factual, non-interpretive data provided by Company and its
Subsidiaries to the Company Report Preparer in connection with the preparation of the Company Reserve
Report that was material to such Company Report Preparer’s estimates of the proved oil and gas reserves set
forth in the Company Reserve Report was, as of the time provided (or as modified or amended prior to the
issuance of the Company Reserve Report) accurate in all material respects. The oil and gas reserve estimates
of Company set forth in the Company Reserve Report are derived from reports that have been prepared by
the petroleum consulting firm as set forth therein, and such reserve estimates fairly reflect, in all material
respects, the oil and gas reserves of Company at the dates indicated therein and are in accordance with SEC
guidelines applicable thereto applied on a consistent basis throughout the periods involved. Except for
changes generally affecting the oil and gas exploration, development and production industry (including
changes in commodity prices) and normal depletion by production, there has been no change in respect of
the matters addressed in the Company Reserve Report that would have, individually or in the aggregate, a
Material Adverse Effect.
Section 3.23 Derivatives. Section 3.23 of the Company Disclosure Schedule accurately summarizes, in all
material respects, the outstanding Derivative positions of Company and its Subsidiaries, including
Hydrocarbon and financial Derivative positions attributable to the production and marketing of Company and
its Subsidiaries, as of the dates reflected therein. Section 3.23 of the Company Disclosure Schedule lists, as
of the date of this Agreement, all Derivative Contracts to which Company or any of its Subsidiaries is a party.
Section 3.24 Finders or Brokers. Neither Company nor any of its Subsidiaries has employed any investment
banker, broker or finder in connection with the Transactions who would be entitled to any fee or any
commission in connection with or upon consummation of the Merger.
Section 3.25 Requisite Stockholder Approval. The only vote of the stockholders of the Company required to
approve the plan of merger (as such term is used in Section 92A.120 of the NRS) contained in this Agreement
and approve the Merger is the affirmative vote of the holders of not less than a majority of the outstanding
Shares in favor of the adoption of the plan of merger (as such term is used in Section 92A.120 of the NRS)
contained in this Agreement (the “Requisite Stockholder Approval”). No other vote of the stockholders of the
Company is required by Law, the Articles of Incorporation or Bylaws of the Company or otherwise to adopt
the plan of merger (as such term is used in Section 92A.120 of the NRS) contained in this Agreement and
approve and consummate the Merger.
Section 3.26 State Takeover Statutes. The Board of Directors of Company has taken all action necessary to
render inapplicable to this Agreement and the Transactions all potentially applicable state anti-takeover
statutes or regulations and any similar provisions in Company’s articles of incorporation or bylaws.
Section 3.27 No Additional Representations.
(a)          Company acknowledges that no Parent Entity makes any representation or warranty as to any matter
whatsoever except as expressly set forth in ARTICLE IV or in any certificate delivered by Parent to Company
in accordance with the terms hereof, and specifically (but without limiting the generality of the foregoing) that
no Parent Entity makes any representation or warranty with respect to (i) any projections, estimates or
budgets delivered or made available to Company (or any of its affiliates, officers, directors, employees or
Representatives) of future revenues, results of operations (or any component thereof), cash flows or financial
condition (or any component thereof) of Parent and its Subsidiaries or (ii) the future business and operations
of Parent and its Subsidiaries, and Company has not relied on such information or any other representation
or warranty not set forth in ARTICLE IV.
A-22
Table of Contents
(b)          Company has conducted its own independent review and analysis of the business, operations,
assets, liabilities, results of operations, financial condition and prospects of Parent and its Subsidiaries and
acknowledges that Company has been provided access for such purposes. Except for the representations
and warranties expressly set forth in ARTICLE IV or in any certificate delivered to Company by Parent in
accordance with the terms hereof, in entering into this Agreement, Company has relied solely upon its
independent investigation and analysis, and Company acknowledges and agrees that it has not been
induced by and has not relied upon any representations, warranties or statements, whether express or
implied, made by Parent or any of its respective Subsidiaries, affiliates, stockholders, controlling persons or
Representatives that are not expressly set forth in ARTICLE IV or in any certificate delivered by Parent to
Company, whether or not such representations, warranties or statements were made in writing or orally.
Company acknowledges and agrees that, except for the representations and warranties expressly set forth in
ARTICLE IV or in any certificate delivered by Parent to Company: (i) Parent does not make, and have not
made, any representations or warranties relating to themselves or their businesses or otherwise in
connection with the Transactions and Company is not relying on any representation or warranty except for
those expressly set forth in this Agreement, (ii) no person has been authorized by Parent to make any
representation or warranty relating to themselves or their business or otherwise in connection with the
Transactions, and if made, such representation or warranty must not be relied upon by Company as having
been authorized by such party, and (iii) any estimates, projections, predictions, data, financial information,
memoranda, presentations or any other materials or information provided or addressed to Company or any of
its Representatives are not and shall not be deemed to be or include representations or warranties unless any
such materials or information is the subject of any express representation or warranty set forth in ARTICLE
IV.
ARTICLE IV.
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF PARENT
Except as disclosed in the disclosure schedule delivered by Parent to Company immediately prior to the
execution of this Agreement (the "Parent Disclosure Schedule ") (each section of which qualifies the
correspondingly numbered representation, warranty or covenant if specified therein and such other
representations, warranties or covenants where its relevance as an exception to (or disclosure for purposes
of) such other representation, warranty or covenant is reasonably apparent), Parent represents and warrants
to Company as follows:
Section 4.1 Qualification, Capitalization
(a)          Parent is a corporation duly organized, validly existing and in good standing under the Laws of the
State of Colorado and has all requisite corporate power and authority to own, lease and operate its properties
and assets and to carry on its business as presently conducted. Each of Parent’s Subsidiaries is a legal entity
duly organized, validly existing and in good standing under the Laws of its respective jurisdiction of
organization and has all requisite corporate or similar power and authority to own, lease and operate its
properties and assets and to carry on its business as presently conducted. Each of Parent and its
Subsidiaries is duly qualified or licensed, and has all necessary approvals, to do business and is in good
standing in each jurisdiction in which the property owned, leased or operated by it or the nature of the
business conducted by it makes such approvals, qualification or licensing necessary, except where the
failure to be so duly approved, qualified or licensed and in good standing would not have, individually or in
the aggregate, a material adverse effect on Parent or such Subsidiary.
(b)          The authorized capital stock of Parent consists of 750,000,000 shares of Parent Common Stock and
10,000,000 shares of Preferred Stock. As of the date of this Agreement, 60 shares of Parent Series A Preferred
Stock are issued and outstanding. Section 4.1(b) of Parent’s Disclosure Schedule sets forth as of the date of
this Agreement, (i) the number of shares of Parent Common Stock issued and outstanding and (ii) the number
of shares of Parent Common Stock reserved for issuance under all options, warrants and convertible notes,
together with the exercise/conversion prices and exercise/conversion periods thereof. All outstanding shares
of Parent Common Stock are, and shares of Parent Common Stock reserved for issuance with respect to
options, warrants and convertible notes, when issued in accordance with the respective terms thereof, will be,
duly authorized, validly issued, fully paid and nonassessable and free of preemptive rights.
A-23
Table of Contents
(c)           Except as set forth in Section 4.1(b) or as set forth in Section 4.1(c) of the Parent Disclosure Schedule
as of the date hereof, there are no outstanding subscriptions, options, warrants, calls, convertible securities,
exchangeable securities or other similar rights, agreements or commitments to which Parent or any of its
Subsidiaries is a party (i) obligating Parent or any of its Subsidiaries to (A) issue, transfer, exchange, sell or
register for sale any shares of capital stock or other equity interests of Parent or any Subsidiary or securities
convertible into or exchangeable for such shares or equity interests, (B) grant, extend or enter into any such
subscription, option, warrant, call, convertible securities or other similar right, agreement or arrangement,
(C) redeem or otherwise acquire any such shares of capital stock or other equity interests, (D) provide a
material amount of funds to, or make any material investment (in the form of a loan, capital contribution or
otherwise) in, any Subsidiary or (E) make any payment to any person the value of which is derived from or
calculated based on the value of Parent Common Stock, or (ii) granting any preemptive or antidilutive or
similar rights with respect to any security issued by Parent or its Subsidiaries. No Subsidiary of Parent owns
any shares of capital stock of Parent.
(d)          Neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries has outstanding bonds, debentures, notes or other
indebtedness, the holders of which have the right to vote (or which are convertible or exchangeable into or
exercisable for securities having the right to vote) with the stockholders of Parent on any matter.
(e)          There are no voting trusts or other agreements or understandings to which Parent or any of its
Subsidiaries is a party with respect to the voting or registration of the capital stock or other equity interest of
Parent or any of its Subsidiaries.
(f)           Parent or a Subsidiary of Parent owns, directly or indirectly, all of the issued and outstanding shares
of capital stock or other equity interests of each Subsidiary of Parent, free and clear of any preemptive rights
and any Liens other than Permitted Liens, and all of such shares of capital stock or other equity interests are
duly authorized, validly issued, fully paid and nonassessable and free of preemptive rights. Except for equity
interests in Parent’s Subsidiaries, neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries owns, directly or indirectly, any
equity interest in any person (or any security or other right, agreement or commitment convertible or
exercisable into, or exchangeable for, any equity interest in any person). Neither Parent nor any of its
Subsidiaries has any obligation to acquire any equity interest in, any person.
Section 4.2 Authority Relative to this Agreement; No Violation.
(a)           Each of the Parent Entities has all necessary power and authority to execute and deliver this
Agreement and each other Transaction Document to be entered into by Parent and Merger Sub. The
execution, delivery and performance by Parent Entities of this Agreement and the other Transaction
Documents and the consummation by each of them of the Merger and the other transactions contemplated
hereby and thereby have been duly authorized by all necessary action on the part of each Parent Entity, and
no other action on the part of any Parent Entity is necessary to authorize the execution and delivery by any
Parent Entity of this Agreement and the other Transaction Documents and the consummation of the Merger.
The Board of Directors of Parent has approved this Agreement and the Transactions, including the Merger.
This Agreement has been duly executed and delivered by each Parent Entity and, assuming due and valid
authorization, execution and delivery hereof by Company, is the valid and binding obligation of each Parent
Entity enforceable against each of them in accordance with its terms, subject to the Remedies Exceptions.
(b)          Other than in connection with or in compliance with (i) the filing of the articles of merger with the
Secretary of State of the State of Nevada, (ii) the Exchange Act, (iii) the Securities Act, (iv) applicable state
securities, takeover and "blue sky" Laws, and (v) the approvals set forth in Section 4.2(b) of Parent Disclosure
Schedule (collectively, the "Parent Approvals"), and, subject to the accuracy of the representations and
warranties of Company in Section 3.3(b), no authorization, consent, order, license, permit or approval of, or
registration, declaration, notice or filing with, any Governmental Entity or any third party is necessary for the
consummation by any Parent Entity of the Transactions, except for such authorizations, consents, orders,
licenses, permits, approvals or filings that are not required to be obtained or made prior to consummation of
the Transactions.
A-24
Table of Contents
(c)          The execution and delivery by Parent Entities of this Agreement do not, and the consummation of the
Transactions and compliance with the provisions hereof will not (i) result in any loss, or suspension, limitation
or impairment of any right of a Parent Entity or its Subsidiaries to own or use any assets required for the
conduct of its business or result in any violation of, or default (with or without notice or lapse of time, or both)
under, or give rise to a right of termination, cancellation, first offer, first refusal, modification or acceleration of
any material obligation or to the loss of a benefit under any loan, guarantee of indebtedness or credit
agreement, note, bond, mortgage, indenture, lease, agreement, contract (including any Oil and Gas Lease or
Oil and Gas Contract), instrument, permit, concession, franchise, right or license binding upon a Parent Entity
or any of its Subsidiaries or by which or to which any of its properties, rights or assets are bound or subject,
or result in the creation of any Liens other than Permitted Liens, in each case, upon any of the properties or
assets of a Parent Entity or any of its Subsidiaries, (ii) conflict with or result in any violation of any provision of
the certificate of incorporation, certificate of formation, bylaws, limited liability company agreement or other
equivalent organizational document, in each case as amended or restated, of a Parent Entity or any of its
Subsidiaries or (iii) conflict with or violate any applicable Laws.
Section 4.3 Reports and Financial Statements.
(a)           Parent and each of its Subsidiaries has filed or furnished all forms, documents and reports required
to be filed or furnished prior to the date hereof by it with the SEC since July 12, 2012 (all such documents and
reports filed or furnished by a Parent Entity or any of its Subsidiaries, the "Parent SEC Documents "). As of
their respective dates or, if amended, as of the date of the last such amendment, the Parent SEC Documents
complied in all material respects with the requirements of the Securities Act, the Exchange Act and the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, as the case may be, and the applicable rules and regulations promulgated thereunder,
and none of the Parent SEC Documents contained any untrue statement of a material fact or omitted to state
any material fact required to be stated therein or necessary to make the statements therein, in light of the
circumstances under which they were made, not misleading, except that information set forth in the Parent
SEC Documents as of a later date (but before the date of this Agreement) will be deemed to modify
information as of an earlier date.
(b)          The consolidated financial statements (including all related notes and schedules) of each Parent
Entity included in the applicable Parent SEC Documents (the "Parent Financial Statements") (i) fairly present
in all material respects the consolidated financial position of such Parent Entity and its consolidated
Subsidiaries, as at the respective dates thereof, and the consolidated results of their operations and their
consolidated cash flows for the respective periods then ended, (ii) were prepared in conformity with GAAP
(except, in the case of the unaudited statements, subject to normal year-end audit adjustments and the
absence of footnote disclosure) applied on a consistent basis during the periods involved (except as may be
indicated therein or in the notes thereto), (iii) comply in all material respects with the applicable accounting
requirements and with the rules and regulations of the SEC, the Exchange Act and the Securities Act.
(c)          As of the date hereof, there are no outstanding or unresolved comments in any comment letters of the
staff of the SEC received by Parent relating to the Parent SEC Documents.
Section 4.4 Undisclosed Liabilities. Neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries has, or is subject to, any
liabilities or obligations of any nature (whether accrued, absolute, contingent or otherwise) that would be
required by GAAP to be reflected on a consolidated balance sheet of Parent and its consolidated
Subsidiaries (including the notes thereto) other than liabilities and obligations (a) disclosed, reserved against
or provided for in the audited consolidated balance sheet of the Parent as of December 31, 2013 or in the
notes thereto, (b) incurred in the ordinary course of business consistent with past practice since
December 31, 2013 which have not had and will not have, individually or in the aggregate, a Material Adverse
Effect, or (c) incurred under this Agreement or in connection with the transactions contemplated hereby or
otherwise disclosed in the Parent Disclosure Schedule. Except as disclosed in the Company Financial
Statements, Company is not a guarantor or indemnitor of any indebtedness of any other person.
A-25
Table of Contents
Section 4.5 Internal Controls and Disclosure Controls. Parent has designed and maintains a system of
internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) of the Exchange Act)
intended to provide reasonable assurances regarding the reliability of financial reporting for Parent and the
Parent Subsidiaries. Parent (a) has designed disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-
15(e) and 15d-15(e) of the Exchange Act) to ensure that material information required to be disclosed by the
Parent in the reports that it files or submits under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and
reported within the time periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms and is accumulated and
communicated to Parent’s management as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required
disclosure and (b) based on its most recent evaluation of internal control prior to the date hereof, has
disclosed to the Parent’s auditors (i) any significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or
operation of internal control over financial reporting that are reasonably likely to adversely affect in any
material respect the Parent’s ability to report financial information and (ii) any fraud, whether or not material,
that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the Parent’s internal control over
financial reporting. The Parent has established and maintains “disclosure controls and procedures” (as
defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) promulgated under the Exchange Act) that are reasonably designed
(but without making any representation or warranty as to the effectiveness of any such controls or
procedures so designed) to ensure that material information (both financial and non-financial) relating to the
Parent and the Parent Subsidiaries required to be disclosed by the Parent in the reports that it files or submits
under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified
in the rules and forms of the SEC, and that such information is accumulated and communicated to the
Parent’s principal executive officer and principal financial officer, or persons performing similar functions, as
appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure and to make the certifications of the
“principal executive officer” and the “principal financial officer” of the Parent required by Section 302 of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act with respect to such reports. Each of the principal executive officer of the Parent and the
principal financial officer of the Parent (or each former principal executive officer of the Parent and each
former principal financial officer of the Parent, as applicable) has made all certifications required by Sections
302 and 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder with respect to
the Parent SEC Documents and the statements contained in such certifications are true and accurate in all
material respects as of the date hereof. There are no “significant deficiencies” or “material weaknesses” (as
defined by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act) in the design or operation of the Parent’s internal controls and
procedures which could adversely affect the Parent’s ability to record, process, summarize and report
financial data.
Section 4.6 Compliance with Law; Permits.
(a)           Each Parent Entity and its Subsidiaries are in compliance with, and are not in default under or in
violation of, any Laws, except where such non-compliance, default or violation would not have, individually or
in the aggregate, a Material Adverse Effect. Since December 31, 2012, neither Parent nor any of its
Subsidiaries has received any written notice or, to the knowledge of Parent, other communication from any
Governmental Entity regarding any actual or possible material violation of, or material failure to comply with,
any Law.
(b)          Parent and its Subsidiaries are in possession of all franchises, grants, authorizations, licenses,
permits, easements, variances, exceptions, consents, certificates, approvals, clearances, permissions,
qualifications and registrations and orders of all applicable Governmental Entities, and all rights under any
Material Contract with all Governmental Entities, and have filed all tariffs, reports, notices and other
documents with all Governmental Entities necessary for each of Parent and its Subsidiaries to own, lease and
operate their properties and assets and to carry on their businesses as they are now being conducted (the
"Parent Permits "), except where the failure to have any of Parent Permits or to have filed such tariffs, reports,
notices or other documents would not, individually or in the aggregate, have a Material Adverse Effect. All
Parent Permits are valid and in full force and effect and are not subject to any administrative or judicial
proceeding that could result in modification, termination or revocation thereof. Parent and each of its
Subsidiaries is in compliance with the terms and requirements of all Parent Permits.
(c)          Since December 31, 2012, (i) neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries nor, to the knowledge of
Parent, any director, officer, employee, auditor, accountant or representative of either Parent or any of its
Subsidiaries, has received or otherwise had or obtained knowledge of any material complaint, allegation,
assertion or claim, whether written or oral, regarding accounting, internal accounting controls or auditing
practices, procedures, methodologies or methods of such Parent Entity or any material concerns from
employees of Parent or any Parent Subsidiary regarding questionable accounting or auditing matters with
respect to Parent or any Parent Subsidiary, and (ii) to the knowledge of the Parent Entities, no attorney
representing either Parent Entity or any of its Subsidiaries, whether or not employed by such Parent Entity or
any such Subsidiary, has reported in writing evidence of a violation of securities Laws, breach of fiduciary
duty or similar violation by such Parent Entity, any Subsidiary of such Parent Entity or any of their respective
officers, directors, employees or agents to the Board of Directors of such Parent Entity, or to the Chief
Executive Officer of such Parent Entity.
A-26
Table of Contents
Section 4.7 Absence of Certain Changes or Events.
(a)           From January 1, 2013 through the date of this Agreement, the businesses of Parent and its
Subsidiaries have been conducted in all material respects in the ordinary course of business, and neither
Parent nor any Parent Subsidiary has undertaken any action that would be prohibited by Section 5.2 of this
Agreement if such section were in effect at all times since January 1, 2013.
(b)          Since January 1, 2013, there has not been any event, change, effect, development or occurrence that,
individually or in the aggregate, has had a Material Adverse Effect.
Section 4.8 Environmental Laws and Regulations. There are no investigations, actions, suits or proceedings
(whether administrative or judicial) pending, or, to the knowledge of Parent Entities, threatened against Parent
or any of its Subsidiaries or any person or entity whose liability any Parent Entity or any of its Subsidiaries
has retained or assumed either contractually or by operation of Law, alleging non-compliance with or other
liability under any Environmental Law and, to the knowledge of Parent Entities, there are no existing facts or
circumstances that would reasonably be expected to give rise to any such action, suit or proceeding. Parent
and its Subsidiaries are, and except for matters that have been fully resolved with the applicable
Governmental Entity, since December 31, 2012 have been, in compliance with all Environmental Laws (which
compliance includes the possession by Parent and each of its Subsidiaries of all Parent Permits required
under applicable Environmental Laws to conduct their respective business and operations, and compliance
with the terms and conditions thereof). There have been no Releases at any location of Hazardous Materials
by Parent or any of its Subsidiaries that would reasonably be expected to give rise to any fine, penalty,
remediation, investigation, obligation, injunction or liability of any kind to Parent or its Subsidiaries. Neither
Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries nor, to the knowledge of Parent Entities, any third-party operator of any of
the Oil and Gas Interests of Parent or its Subsidiaries or any predecessor of any of them, is subject to any
Order or any indemnity obligation or other Contract with any other person that would reasonably be expected
to result in obligations or liabilities under applicable Environmental Laws or concerning Hazardous Materials
or Releases. Neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries has received any unresolved claim, notice, complaint
or request for information or contribution from a Governmental Entity or any other person relating to actual or
alleged noncompliance with or liability under applicable Environmental Laws (including any such liability or
obligation arising under, retained or assumed by contract or by operation of law).
Section 4.9 Investigations; Litigation. There is no investigation or review pending (or, to the knowledge of
Parent Entities, threatened) by any Governmental Entity with respect to Parent or any of its Subsidiaries.
There are no actions, suits (or, to the knowledge of Parent Entities, inquiries), investigations, proceedings,
subpoenas, civil investigative demands or other requests for information by any Governmental Entity or any
other person pending (or, to the knowledge of Parent Entities, threatened) against or affecting Parent or any
of its Subsidiaries, or any of their respective properties. There are no orders, judgments or decrees of any
Governmental Entity against Parent or any of its Subsidiaries.
Section 4.10 Information Supplied. The information supplied or to be supplied by Parent Entities in writing
expressly for inclusion in the Form S-4 shall not, at the time the Form S-4 is declared effective by the SEC,
contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state any material fact required to be stated therein
or necessary in order to make the statements therein, in light of the circumstances under which they are
made, not misleading, except that no representation or warranty is made by Parent Entities with respect to
statements made or incorporated by reference therein based on information supplied by Company in writing
expressly for inclusion therein. The information supplied or to be supplied by Parent Entities in writing
expressly for inclusion in the Proxy Statement/Prospectus shall not, at the time the Proxy
Statement/Prospectus is first mailed to the stockholders of Company, and at the time of the Company
Stockholder Meeting, contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state any material fact required
to be stated therein or necessary in order to make the statements therein, in light of the circumstances under
which they are made, not misleading, except that no representation or warranty is made by Parent Entities
with respect to statements made or incorporated by reference therein based on information supplied by
Company in writing expressly for inclusion therein. The Form S-4 and the Proxy Statement/Prospectus (solely
with respect to the portion thereof based on information supplied or to be supplied by a Parent Entity in
writing expressly for inclusion therein, but excluding any portion thereof based on information supplied by
Company in writing expressly for inclusion therein, with respect to which no representation or warranty is
made by either Parent Entity) will comply as to form in all material respects with the provisions of the
Securities Act and the Exchange Act.
A-27
Table of Contents
Section 4.11 Regulatory Matters.
(a)          Neither Parent Entity is (i) an "investment company" or a company "controlled" by an "investment
company" within the meaning of the U.S. Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, and the rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder or (ii) a "holding company," a "subsidiary company" of a "holding
company," an affiliate of a "holding company," a "public utility" or a "public-utility company," as each such
term is defined in the U.S. Public Utility Holding Company Act of 2005.
(b)          All natural gas pipeline Systems and related facilities constituting Parent and its Subsidiaries’
properties are (i) gathering facilities" that are exempt from regulation by the U.S. Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission under the Natural Gas Act of 1938, as amended, and (ii) not subject to rate regulation or
comprehensive nondiscriminatory access regulation under the Laws of any state or other local jurisdiction.
Section 4.12 Properties.
(a)          Parent and its Subsidiaries have good and defensible title to all of the Oil and Gas Interests reflected
in Parent Reserve Reports as attributable to interests owned by Parent or any of its Subsidiaries, except for
such Oil and Gas Interests sold, used, farmed out or otherwise disposed of since December 31, 2013 in the
ordinary course of business, in each case free and clear of all Liens other than Permitted Liens and
Production Burdens. Each Oil and Gas Lease to which Parent or any of its Subsidiaries is a party is valid and
in full force and effect. Neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries has violated any provision of, or taken or
failed to take any act which, with or without notice, lapse of time, or both, would constitute a default under the
provisions of such Oil and Gas Lease. Neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries has received written notice
from the other party to any such Oil and Gas Lease that Parent or any of its Subsidiaries, as the case may be,
has breached, violated or defaulted under any Oil and Gas Lease.
(b)          Either Parent or a Parent Subsidiary has good and valid title to each material real property (and each
real property at which material operations of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries are conducted) owned by
Parent or any Parent Subsidiary (but excluding the Oil and Gas Interests), other than Parent Real Property
Leases (such owned property collectively, the "Parent Owned Real Property"). Either Parent or a Parent
Subsidiary has a good and valid leasehold interest in each material lease, sublease and other agreement
under which Parent or any of its Subsidiaries uses or occupies or has the right to use or occupy any material
real property (or real property at which material operations of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries are conducted)
(but excluding the Oil and Gas Interests) (such property subject to a lease, sublease or other agreement, the
"Parent Leased Real Property" and such leases, subleases and other agreements are, collectively, the
"Parent Real Property Leases ), in each case, free and clear of all Liens other than any Permitted Liens, and
other than any conditions, encroachments, easements, rights-of-way, restrictions and other encumbrances
that do not adversely affect the existing use of the real property subject thereto by the owner (or lessee to the
extent a leased property) thereof in the operation of its business. Each Real Property Lease is valid, binding
and in full force and effect. No uncured default of a material nature on the part of Parent or any Parent
Subsidiary or, to the knowledge of the Parent Entities, the landlord thereunder, exists under any Parent Real
Property Lease, and no event has occurred or circumstance exists which, with or without the giving of notice,
the passage of time, or both, would constitute a material breach or default under a Parent Real Property
Lease.
(c)          There are no leases, subleases, licenses, rights or other agreements affecting any portion of Parent
Owned Real Property or Parent Leased Real Property that would reasonably be expected to adversely affect
the existing use of such Parent Owned Real Property or Parent Leased Real Property by Parent or its
Subsidiaries in the operation of its business thereon. Except for such arrangements solely among Parent and
its Subsidiaries or among any Parent Subsidiaries, there are no outstanding options or rights of first refusal
in favor of any other party to purchase any Parent Owned Real Property or any portion thereof or interest
therein that would reasonably be expected to adversely affect the existing use of Parent Owned Real Property
by the Parent Entities in the operation of their business thereon. Neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries is
currently subleasing, licensing or otherwise granting any person the right to use or occupy a material portion
of a Parent Owned Real Property or Parent Leased Real Property that would reasonably be expected to
adversely affect the existing use of such Parent Owned Real Property or Parent Leased Real Property by
Parent or its Subsidiaries in the operation of its business thereon.
A-28
Table of Contents
(d)          All proceeds from the sale of Hydrocarbons produced from the Oil and Gas Interests of Parent or its
Subsidiaries are being received by them in a timely manner and are not being held in suspense for any
reason other than awaiting preparation and approval of division order title opinions for recently drilled Wells.
(e)          All of the Wells and all water, CO2 or injection wells located on the Oil and Gas Leases or Units of
Parent and its Subsidiaries or otherwise associated with an Oil and Gas Interest of Parent or its Subsidiaries
have been drilled, completed and operated within the limits permitted by the applicable Oil and Gas Contracts
and applicable Law, and all drilling and completion (and plugging and abandonment) of the Wells and such
other wells and all related development, production and other operations have been conducted in compliance
with all applicable Laws.
(f)           All Oil and Gas Interests operated by Parent and its Subsidiaries have been operated in accordance
with reasonable, prudent oil and gas field practices and in compliance with the applicable Oil and Gas Leases
and applicable Law.
(g)          None of the material Oil and Gas Interests of Parent or its Subsidiaries is subject to any preferential
purchase, consent or similar right that would become operative as a result of the Transactions.
(h)          None of the Oil and Gas Interests of Parent or its Subsidiaries are subject to any Tax partnership
agreement or provisions requiring a partnership income Tax Return to be filed under Subchapter K of
Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Code.
Section 4.13 Insurance. Parent and its Subsidiaries maintain insurance in such amounts and against such
risks substantially as are customary for the industries in which they and their Subsidiaries operate and as
their management has in good faith determined to be prudent and appropriate. Except as would not have,
individually or in the aggregate, a Material Adverse Effect, all insurance policies maintained by or on behalf of
Parent or any of its Subsidiaries as of the date of this Agreement are in full force and effect, and all premiums
due on such policies have been paid by Parent or its Subsidiaries. Except as would not have, individually or
in the aggregate, a Material Adverse Effect, Parent and their Subsidiaries are in compliance with the terms and
provisions of all insurance policies maintained by or on behalf of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries as of the
date of this Agreement, and neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries is in breach or default under, or has
taken any action that could permit termination or material modification of, any material insurance policies.
Section 4.14 [Intentionally Omitted]
Section 4.15 Material Contracts.
(a)          Except for this Agreement and agreements filed as exhibits to Parent's SEC Documents, as of the
date of this Agreement, neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries is a party to or bound by any "material
contract" (as such term is defined in Item 601(b)(10) of Regulation S-K of the SEC) (a "Parent Material
Contract").
(b)          Neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries is in breach of or default under the terms of any Parent
Material Contract and, to the knowledge of the Parent Entities, no other party to any Parent Material Contract
is in breach of or default under the terms of any Parent Material Contract. Each Parent Material Contract is a
valid and binding obligation of the Parent or the Parent Subsidiary that is party thereto and, to the knowledge
of, of each other party thereto, and is in full force and effect.
A-29
Table of Contents
Section 4.16 Reserve Reports. Parent has delivered or otherwise made available to Company true and correct
copies of the written report requested or commissioned by Parent or its Subsidiaries and delivered to a
Parent or its Subsidiaries in writing on or before the date of this Agreement estimating Parent’s and such
Subsidiaries’ proved oil and gas reserves prepared by any unaffiliated person (each, a "Parent Report
Preparer") concerning the Oil and Gas Interests of Parent and such Subsidiaries as of December 31, 2013 (the
"Parent Reserve Reports"). The factual, non-interpretive data provided by Parent and its Subsidiaries to each
Parent Report Preparer in connection with the preparation of Parent Reserve Reports that was material to
such Parent Report Preparer’s estimates of the proved oil and gas reserves set forth in Parent Reserve
Reports was, as of the time provided (or as modified or amended prior to the issuance of Parent Reserve
Reports) accurate in all material respects. The oil and gas reserve estimates set forth in Parent Reserve
Reports are derived from reports that have been prepared by the petroleum consulting firm as set forth
therein, and such reserve estimates fairly reflect, in all material respects, the oil and gas reserves of Parent
and its Subsidiaries at the dates indicated therein and are in accordance with SEC guidelines applicable
thereto applied on a consistent basis throughout the periods involved. Except for changes generally affecting
the oil and gas exploration, development and production industry (including changes in commodity prices)
and normal depletion by production, there has been no change in respect of the matters addressed in Parent
Reserve Reports that, individually or in the aggregate, has had or would have a Material Adverse Effect.
Section 4.17 Finders or Brokers. Neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries has employed any investment
banker, broker or finder in connection with the Transactions who would be entitled to any fee or any
commission in connection with or upon consummation of the Merger.
Section 4.18 Tax Matters.
(a)          Except as would not have, individually or in the aggregate, a Material Adverse Effect:
(i)           (A) Each of Parent and its Subsidiaries has timely filed all Tax Returns with the appropriate Taxing
Authority required to be filed, taking into account any extensions of time within which to file such Tax
Returns, and all such Tax Returns were complete and correct, and (B) all Taxes due and owing by each of
Parent and its Subsidiaries (whether or not shown on such filed Tax Returns), including Taxes required to be
collected or withheld from payments to employees, creditors, shareholders or other third parties, have been
paid, except in each case of clause (A) and (B) for amounts being contested in good faith by appropriate
proceedings or for which adequate reserves have been maintained in accordance with GAAP.
(ii)          (A) No deficiencies for Taxes with respect to a Parent or any of its Subsidiaries have been claimed,
proposed or assessed by any Taxing Authority that have not been settled and paid or adequately reserved in
accordance with GAAP, (B) as of the date hereof, there are no pending or threatened audits, assessments or
other actions for or relating to any liability in respect of Taxes of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries, and
(C) neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries have waived any statute of limitations in respect of Taxes or
agreed to any extension of time with respect to a Tax assessment or deficiency.
(iii)         There are no Liens for Taxes upon any property or assets of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries other
than Permitted Liens.
(iv)         Neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries has participated in a "listed transaction" within the meaning
of Treasury Regulation Section 1.6011-4(b).
(v)          No claim has been made by any Taxing Authority in a jurisdiction where Parent or any of its
Subsidiaries does not file Tax Returns that Parent or any of its Subsidiaries is or may be subject to taxation
by that jurisdiction, other than any such claims that have been resolved.
(vi)         Neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries is a party to any Tax allocation, sharing, indemnity, or
reimbursement agreement or arrangement (excluding any such agreements pursuant to customary
provisions in contracts not primarily related to Taxes).
(vii)        Neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries has been a member of an affiliated group within the
meaning of Section 1504(a) of the Code (or any similar group defined under a similar provision of foreign,
state or local Law), other than a group of which Parent or any of its Subsidiaries is or was the common parent,
and neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries has any liability for Taxes of any other person (other than Taxes
of Parentor such Subsidiary) under Treasury Regulation Section 1.1502-6 (or any similar provision of foreign,
state or local Law), as a transferee or successor, by contract or otherwise.
A-30
Table of Contents
(b)          Neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries is aware of any fact, or has taken or agreed to take any
action, that would reasonably be expected to prevent or impede the Merger from qualifying as a
"reorganization" within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code.
Section 4.19 Employee Benefit Plans.
(a)          For purposes of this Agreement, "Parent Benefit Plan" means each employee benefit plan, program,
agreement or arrangement, including pension, retirement, profit-sharing, deferred compensation, stock
option, change in control, retention, equity or equity-based compensation, stock purchase, employee stock
ownership, severance pay, vacation, bonus or other incentive plans, medical, retiree medical, vision, dental or
other health plans, life insurance plans, and each other employee benefit plan or fringe benefit plan, including
any "employee benefit plan" as that term is defined in Section 3(3) of ERISA, in each case, whether oral or
written, funded or unfunded, or insured or self-insured, maintained by Parent or any of its Subsidiaries, or to
which Parent or any of its Subsidiaries contributes or is obligated to contribute for the benefit of any current
or former employees, directors, consultants or independent contractors of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries.
(b)          Each Parent Benefit Plan has been established, operated and administered in all material respects in
accordance with its terms and the requirements of all applicable Laws, including ERISA and the Code. All
contributions required to be made to any Parent Benefit Plan by applicable Law or by any plan document or
other contractual undertaking, and all premiums due or payable with respect to insurance policies funding
any Parent Benefit Plan, have been timely made or paid in full or, to the extent not required to be made or paid
on or before the date hereof, have been fully reflected on the books and records of Parent and its
Subsidiaries.
(c)          Neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries nor any of their respective ERISA Affiliates has, at any time
during the last six years, maintained, established, contributed to or been obligated to contribute to any
employee benefit plan that is subject to Title IV or Section 302 of ERISA or Section 412, 430 or 4971 of the
Code.
(d)          Neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries nor any of their respective ERISA Affiliates has, at any time
during the last six years, maintained, established, contributed to or been obligated to contribute to any plan
that is a Multiemployer Plan or a Multiple Employer Plan, and neither Parent, its Subsidiaries, nor any of their
respective ERISA Affiliates has incurred any liability to a Multiemployer Plan or a Multiple Employer Plan as a
result of a complete or partial withdrawal from such Multiemployer Plan or Multiple Employer Plan.
Section 4.20 Employment and Labor Matters. As of the date hereof, neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries
is, or since December 31, 2012 has been, a party to any Collective Bargaining Agreement, and no employee is
represented by a labor organization for purposes of collective bargaining with respect to Parent or any of its
Subsidiaries. To the knowledge of Parent, as of the date hereof, there are no activities or proceedings of any
labor or trade union to organize any employees of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries. As of the date hereof, no
Collective Bargaining Agreement is being negotiated by Parent or, to the knowledge of Parent, any of its
Subsidiaries. As of the date hereof, there is no strike, lockout, slowdown, or work stoppage against any
Parent or any of its Subsidiaries pending or, to the knowledge of the Parent Entities, threatened. There is no
pending charge or complaint against Parent or any of its Subsidiaries by the National Labor Relations Board
or any comparable Governmental Entity, and neither nor any of its Subsidiaries is a party, or otherwise bound
by, any consent decree with, or citation by, any Governmental Entity relating to employees or employment
practices. Parent and its Subsidiaries have complied with all applicable Laws regarding employment and
employment practices, terms and conditions of employment and wages and hours (including classification of
employees) and other applicable Laws in respect of any reduction in force, including notice, information and
consultation requirements. There are no outstanding assessments, penalties, fines, Liens, charges,
surcharges, or other amounts due or owing by Parent or any of its Subsidiaries pursuant to any workplace
safety and insurance/workers’ compensation Laws.
A-31
Table of Contents
Section 4.21 No Additional Representations.
(a)          Parent acknowledges that Company does not make any representation or warranty as to any matter
whatsoever except as expressly set forth in ARTICLE III, in any certificate delivered by Company to a Parent
in accordance with the terms hereof, and the Parent Loan Agreement and specifically (but without limiting the
generality of the foregoing) that Company makes no representation or warranty with respect to (a) any
projections, estimates or budgets delivered or made available to Parent (or any of their respective affiliates,
officers, directors, employees or Representatives) of future revenues, results of operations (or any
component thereof), cash flows or financial condition (or any component thereof) of Company and its
Subsidiaries or (b) the future business and operations of Company and its Subsidiaries, and Parent has not
relied on such information or any other representations or warranties not set forth in ARTICLE III or the Parent
Loan Agreement.
(b)          Parent has conducted its own independent review and analysis of the business, operations, assets,
liabilities, results of operations, financial condition and prospects of Company and its Subsidiaries and
acknowledges that it has been provided access for such purposes. Except for the representations and
warranties expressly set forth in ARTICLE III or in any certificate delivered to Parent by Company in
accordance with the terms hereof, in entering into this Agreement, Parent has relied solely upon its
independent investigation and analysis of Company and its Subsidiaries, and Parent acknowledges and
agrees that they have not been induced by and have not relied upon any representations, warranties or
statements, whether express or implied, made by Company, its Subsidiaries, or any of their respective
affiliates, stockholders, controlling persons or other Representatives that are not expressly set forth in
ARTICLE III, in any certificate delivered by Company to Parent, or in the Parent Loan Agreement, whether or
not such representations, warranties or statements were made in writing or orally. Parent acknowledges and
agrees that, except for the representations and warranties expressly set forth in ARTICLE III, in any certificate
delivered by Company to Parent, or in the Parent Loan Agreement: (i) Company does not make, or has not
made, any representations or warranties relating to itself or its business or otherwise in connection with the
Transactions and Parent is not relying on any representation or warranty except for those expressly set forth
in this Agreement or the Parent Loan Agreement, (ii) no person has been authorized by Company to make
any representation or warranty relating to itself or its business or otherwise in connection with the
Transactions, and if made, such representation or warranty must not be relied upon by Parent as having been
authorized by Company, and (iii) any estimates, projections, predictions, data, financial information,
memoranda, presentations or any other materials or information provided or addressed to Parent or any of its
Representatives are not and shall not be deemed to be or include representations or warranties of Company
unless any such materials or information is the subject of any express representation or warranty set forth in
ARTICLE III or in the Parent Loan Agreement.
ARTICLE V.
COVENANTS AND AGREEMENTS
Section 5.1 Conduct of Business by Company.
(a)          From and after the date hereof until the earlier of the Effective Time or the date, if any, on which this
Agreement is terminated pursuant to Section 7.1 (the "Termination Date"), and except (i) as may be required
by applicable Law or the regulations or requirements of any stock exchange or regulatory organization
applicable to Parent or any of its Subsidiaries, (ii) with the prior written consent of Parent, (iii) as may be
contemplated or required by this Agreement, or (iv) as set forth in Section 5.1 of the Company Disclosure
Schedule, Company covenants and agrees that the business of Company and its Subsidiaries shall be
conducted in the ordinary course of business, and shall use commercially reasonable efforts to preserve
intact their present lines of business, maintain their rights, franchises and Permits and preserve their
relationships with customers and suppliers; provided, however, that no action by Company or its
Subsidiaries with respect to matters specifically addressed by any provision of Section 5.1(b) shall be
deemed a breach of this sentence unless such action would constitute a breach of such other provision of
Section 5.1(b).
(b)          Company agrees with the Parent Entities, on behalf of itself and its Subsidiaries, that from the date
hereof and prior to the earlier of the Effective Time and the Termination Date, except (i) as may be required by
applicable Law or the regulations or requirements of any stock exchange or regulatory organization
applicable to Company or any of its Subsidiaries, (ii) as may be consented to by Parent, or (iii) as may be
contemplated or required by this Agreement, Company:
A-32
Table of Contents
(i)           shall not adopt any amendments to its certificate of incorporation or bylaws or similar applicable
organizational documents, and shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries to adopt any amendments to its
articles of incorporation or bylaws or similar applicable organizational documents;
(ii)          shall not, and shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, split, combine or reclassify any of its capital
stock or issue or authorize the issuance of any other securities in respect of, in lieu of or in substitution for
shares of its capital stock, except for any such transaction by a wholly owned Subsidiary of Company which
remains a wholly owned Subsidiary after consummation of such transaction;
(iii)         shall not, and shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries that is not wholly owned by Company or wholly
owned Subsidiaries of any such Subsidiaries to, authorize or pay any dividends on or make any distribution
with respect to its outstanding shares of capital stock (whether in cash, assets, stock or other securities),
except dividends or distributions by any direct or indirect wholly owned Subsidiary only to Company or to
another wholly owned Subsidiary of Company in the ordinary course of business;
(iv)         shall not, and shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, adopt a plan of complete or partial liquidation,
dissolution, merger, consolidation, restructuring, recapitalization or other reorganization, other than the
Merger or take any action with respect to any securities owned by such person that would reasonably be
expected to prevent, materially impede or materially delay the consummation of the Merger or any other
transaction contemplated by this Agreement;
(v)          shall not, and shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, make any acquisition of any other person or
business or make any loans, advances or capital contributions to, or investments in, any other person;
(vi)         except for authorized expenditures made with the proceeds of the Parent Loan, shall not, and shall
not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, to the extent any expenditures exceed, in the aggregate, $25,000:
(A)          sell, lease, license, transfer, exchange or swap, or otherwise dispose of or encumber any properties
or non-cash assets, except (1) sales, transfers and dispositions of obsolete or worthless equipment, (2) sales,
transfers and dispositions of inventory, commodities and produced Hydrocarbons, crude oil and refined
products in the ordinary course of business, or (3) sales, leases, transfers or other dispositions made in
connection with any transaction among Parent and its wholly owned Subsidiaries or among its wholly owned
Subsidiaries;
(B)           authorize any capital expenditures, except for (1) expenditures contemplated by Company Reserve
Report provided to Parent (whether or not such capital expenditure is made during the 2014 fiscal year), but
only to the extent Company has sufficient cash on hand to make such expenditures without incurring
additional debt other than the Parent Loan, (2) expenditures made in response to any emergency, whether
caused by war, terrorism, weather events, public health events, outages or otherwise, and (3) expenditures
made to acquire or re-lease oil and gas leases owned by Company that will be expiring in 2014;
(vii)        shall not, and shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, enter into any new Contract to sell
Hydrocarbons other than in the ordinary course of business consistent with past practice, but in no event
having a duration longer than 30 days;
A-33
Table of Contents
(viii)       except as required by applicable Law or the terms of any Company Benefit Plan existing and as in
effect on the date of this Agreement, shall not, and shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, (1) establish,
adopt, amend, modify, commence participation in or terminate (or commit to establish, adopt, amend, modify,
commence participation in or terminate) any Collective Bargaining Agreement, bonus, profit-sharing, thrift,
pension, retirement, deferred compensation, stock option, restricted stock agreement, plan or arrangement
covering any current or former directors, officers, employees, consultants, independent contractors or other
service providers of Company or any of its Subsidiaries or other existing Company Benefit Plan (other than
amendments or modifications to broad-based Company Benefit Plans in the ordinary course of business that
do not materially increase the cost or expense to Company of providing or administering such benefits),
(2) increase in any manner the compensation, severance or benefits of any of the current or former directors,
officers, employees, consultants, independent contractors or other service providers of Company or its
Subsidiaries, (3) pay or award, or commit to pay or award, any bonuses or incentive compensation, (4) enter
into any new or modify any existing employment, severance, termination, retention or consulting agreement
with any current or former directors, officers, employees, consultants, independent contractors or other
service providers of Company or any of its Subsidiaries, (5) accelerate any rights or benefits, (6) fund any
rabbi trust or similar arrangement, (7) change any actuarial assumptions used to calculate funding
obligations with respect to any Company Benefit Plan or change the manner in which contributions to such
plans are made or the basis on which such contributions are determined, except as may be required by
GAAP or applicable Law, or (8) hire or terminate the employment or services of (other than for cause) any
officer, employee, independent contractor or consultant;
(ix)          shall not, and shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, materially change financial accounting
policies or procedures or any of its methods of reporting income, deductions or other material items for
financial accounting purposes, except as required by GAAP, SEC rule or policy or applicable Law;
(x)           shall not, and shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, issue, sell, pledge, dispose of or encumber,
or authorize the issuance, sale, pledge, disposition or encumbrance of, any shares of its capital stock or other
ownership interest in Company or any of its Subsidiaries or any securities convertible into or exchangeable
for any such shares or ownership interest, or any rights, warrants or options to acquire any such shares of
capital stock, ownership interest or convertible or exchangeable securities or take any action to cause to be
exercisable any otherwise unexercisable option under any existing Company Benefit Plans (except as
otherwise provided by the terms of this Agreement or the express terms of any Company Warrant, or
Company Convertible Note identified in Section 3.2(a) of the Company’s Disclosure Schedule);
(xi)          shall not, and shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, directly or indirectly, purchase, redeem or
otherwise acquire any shares of the capital stock of any of them or any rights, warrants or options to acquire
any such shares, except for transactions among Company and its Subsidiaries or among its Subsidiaries;
(xii)         shall not, and shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, incur, assume, guarantee or otherwise
become liable for any indebtedness for borrowed money or any guarantee of such indebtedness, except for
(1) indebtedness under the Parent Loan, (2) any indebtedness among Company and its wholly owned
Subsidiaries or among its wholly owned Subsidiaries, (3) for any indebtedness incurred to replace, renew,
extend, refinance or refund any existing indebtedness on substantially the same or more favorable terms to
Company than such existing indebtedness, and (4) for any guarantees by Company of indebtedness of
Subsidiaries of Company or guarantees by its Subsidiaries of indebtedness of Company or any Subsidiary of
Company, which indebtedness is incurred in compliance with this Section 5.1(b); provided, however, that in
the case of each of clauses (2) through (4) such indebtedness does not impose or result in any additional
restrictions or limitations that would be material to Company and its Subsidiaries, or, following the Closing,
Parent and its Subsidiaries, other than any obligation to make payments on such indebtedness and other
than any restrictions or limitations to which Company or any Subsidiary is currently subject under the terms
of any indebtedness outstanding as of the date hereof;
(xiii)        other than in the ordinary course of business, shall not, and shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries
to, modify, amend or terminate, or waive any rights under any Company Material Contract or under any
Company Permit, or enter into any new Contract which would be a Company Material Contract, in each case
in a manner or with an effect that is adverse to Company and its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, or which
would reasonably be expected to, after the Effective Time, restrict or limit in any material respect any Parent
Entity, the Surviving Company or any of their respective affiliates from engaging in any business or
competing in any geographic location with any person;
(xiv)       shall not, and shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, waive, release, assign, settle or compromise
any claim, action or proceeding, other than waivers, releases, assignments, settlements or compromises
equal to or lesser than the amounts reserved with respect thereto on the most recent consolidated balance
sheet of Company and its Subsidiaries;
A-34
Table of Contents
(xv)        shall not make, change or revoke any Tax election outside the ordinary course of business, change
any Tax accounting method, file any amended Tax Return, enter into any closing agreement, request any Tax
ruling, settle or compromise any Tax proceeding, or surrender any claim for a refund of Taxes, in each case, if
such action would reasonably be expected to increase by a material amount the Taxes of Company or Parent;
(xvi)       except as otherwise permitted by this Agreement, any refinancing permitted by clauses (xii)(3) and
(4) above or for transactions between Company and its Subsidiaries or among its Subsidiaries, shall not, and
shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries, to prepay, redeem, repurchase, defease, cancel or otherwise acquire
any indebtedness or guarantees thereof of Company or any Subsidiary, other than (1) at stated maturity and
(2) any required amortization payments and mandatory prepayments (including mandatory prepayments
arising from any change of control put rights to which holders of such indebtedness or guarantees thereof
may be entitled), in each case in accordance with the terms of the instrument governing such indebtedness
as in effect on the date hereof; and
(xvii)      shall not, and shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, agree, in writing or otherwise, to take any of
the foregoing actions that are prohibited pursuant to clauses (i)) through (xvi) of this Section 5.1(b).
Section 5.2 Conduct of Business by Parent.
(a)          Ordinary Course. From and after the date hereof until the earlier of the Effective Time or the
Termination Date, and except (i) as may be required by applicable Law or the regulations or requirements of
any stock exchange or regulatory organization applicable to Parent or any of its Subsidiaries, (ii) with the
prior written consent of Company (which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld), (iii) as may be
contemplated or required by this Agreement, (iv) as permitted under Section 5.2(c), below, (v) or as set forth in
Section 5.2(a) of the Parent Disclosure Schedule, Parent covenants and agrees that the business of Parent
and its Subsidiaries shall be conducted in the ordinary course of business, and shall use commercially
reasonable efforts to preserve intact their present lines of business, maintain their rights, franchises and
Parent Permits and preserve their relationships with customers and suppliers; provided, however, that no
action by Parent or its Subsidiaries with respect to matters specifically addressed by any provision of Section
5.2(b) shall be deemed a breach of this sentence unless such action would constitute a breach of such other
provision of Section 5.2(b).
(b)          Pre-Effective Time Operations. Parent agrees that from the date hereof and prior to the earlier of the
Effective Time and the Termination Date, except (i) as may be required by applicable Law or the regulations or
requirements of any stock exchange or regulatory organization applicable to Parent or any of its Subsidiaries,
(ii) as may be consented to by Company (which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld), (iii) as may be
contemplated or required by this Agreement, or (iv) as is permitted under Section 5.2(c), below, or as set forth
in Section 5.2(b) of Parent Disclosure Schedule, Parent:
(i)           shall not adopt or agree to adopt any amendments its certificate of incorporation or bylaws or similar
applicable organizational documents and shall not permit its Subsidiaries to adopt any amendments its
certificate of incorporation or bylaws or similar applicable organizational documents ;
(ii)         shall not, and shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries that is not wholly owned by Parent or wholly
owned by any wholly owned Subsidiary of Parent to, authorize or pay any dividends on or make any
distribution with respect to its outstanding equity securities (whether in cash, assets, stock or other
securities), except dividends or distributions by any direct or indirect wholly owned Subsidiary only to Parent
or another wholly owned Subsidiary of Parent in the ordinary course of business;
(iii)         shall not, and shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, adopt a plan of complete or partial liquidation,
dissolution, restructuring, recapitalization or other reorganization, other than any restructurings or
reorganizations solely among a Parent Entity and its Subsidiaries or among its Subsidiaries, or take any
action with respect to any securities owned by such person that would reasonably be expected to prevent,
materially impede or materially delay the consummation of the Merger or any other transaction contemplated
by this Agreement;
A-35
Table of Contents
(iv)         shall not, and shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, issue, sell, pledge, dispose of or encumber, or
authorize the issuance, sale, pledge, disposition or encumbrance of, any share of capital stock or other
ownership interest in Parent or any of its Subsidiaries or any securities convertible into or exchangeable for
any such shares or ownership interest, or any rights, warrants or options to acquire any such shares of
capital stock, ownership interest or convertible or exchangeable securities or take any action to cause to be
exercisable any otherwise unexercisable option under any existing Parent Benefit Plans (except as otherwise
provided by the terms of this Agreement or the express terms of any unexercisable or unexercised options or
warrants outstanding on the date hereof), other than (1) as contemplated by this Agreement, (2) issuances
and sales of convertible debt, warrants, capital stock, and other securities for cash, (3) the sale of Parent
Common Stock pursuant to the exercise of Parent Options if necessary to effectuate an option direction upon
exercise or for withholding of Taxes, or (4) for transactions among Parent and its wholly owned Subsidiaries
or among its wholly owned Subsidiaries;
(v)        shall not make, change or revoke any Tax election outside the ordinary course of business, change
any Tax accounting method, file any amended Tax Return, enter into any closing agreement, request any Tax
ruling, settle or compromise any Tax proceeding, or surrender any claim for a refund of Taxes, in each case, if
such action would reasonably be expected to increase by a material amount the Taxes of a Parent Entity or
any of its Subsidiaries;
(vi) shall not, unless one or more additional directors have been added to Parent’s Board of Directors who
satisfy the definition of “Independent Director” set forth in the rules of the NASDAQ Stock Market, grant
compensatory cash bonuses or stock options to any person that is a director, officer, or consultant of Parent
on the date of this Agreement, and
(vii)       shall not, and shall not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, agree, in writing or otherwise, to take any of
the foregoing actions that are prohibited pursuant to clauses (i) through (vi) of this Section 5.2(b).
(c)          Certain Parent Transactions. The parties:
(i)                   (a) acknowledge that Parent and its Subsidiaries may desire to sell certain of their respective
existing assets (including interests in Subsidiaries and other assets held by Parent and each of its
Subsidiaries) in order to generate working capital that would be deployed to develop the assets of Company
after the Effective Time, and (b) agree that notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section 5.2 or any
other provision of this Agreement to the contrary, during the period from and after the date of this Agreement
and prior to the Effective Time, Parent and its Subsidiaries (and each of their respective Subsidiaries) may sell
or otherwise dispose of any of their respective assets (without regard to whether such sales or other
dispositions may be outside the ordinary course of business for Parent or such respective Subsidiary),
including but not limited to oil and gas leases, working interests, development rights, and ownership interests
in any Subsidiary, to any unrelated third party for fair market value;
(ii)                 (a) acknowledge that Parent and its Subsidiaries may issue convertible debt, warrants, capital
stock, and other securities in capital raising transactions prior to the Effective Time to generate funds for
acquisitions and other purposes both before and after the Effective Time and that they may issue convertible
debt, warrants, capital stock, and other securities in connection with acquisitions prior to the Effective Time,
and (b) agree that notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section 5.2 or any other provision of this
Agreement to the contrary, Parent and its Subsidiaries (and each of their respective Subsidiaries) may sell
issue convertible debt, warrants, capital stock, and other securities in such capital raising transactions or
acquisitions prior to the Effective Time;
(iii)                (a) acknowledge that Parent and its Subsidiaries may grant compensatory stock options prior to
the Effective Time to new (non-director) employees or consultants as part of their compensation, and (b)
agree that notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section 5.2 or any other provision of this
Agreement to the contrary, Parent and its Subsidiaries (and each of their respective Subsidiaries) may grant
options to purchase up to 3,500,000 shares of Parent Common Stock to new (non-director) employees or
consultants prior to the Effective Time for such purpose; and
A-36
Table of Contents
(iv)               (a) acknowledge that Parent and its Subsidiaries may make acquisitions (whether through merger,
consolidation or otherwise) of other persons or businesses or make loans, advances or capital contributions
to, or investments in, other persons prior to the Effective Time and (b) agree that notwithstanding the
foregoing provisions of this Section 5.2 or any other provision of this Agreement to the contrary, Parent and
its Subsidiaries (and each of their respective Subsidiaries) may make such acquisitions, loans, advances,
capital contributions, and investments.
Section 5.3 Mutual Access.
(a)          For purposes of furthering the Transactions, each of Company and Parent shall afford the other party
and (i) the officers and employees and (ii) the accountants, consultants, legal counsel, financial advisors,
financing sources and agents and other Representatives of each such party reasonable access during
normal business hours, throughout the period prior to the earlier of the Effective Time and the Termination
Date, to its and its Subsidiaries’ personnel and properties, contracts, commitments, books and records and
any report, schedule or other document filed or received by it pursuant to the requirements of applicable
Laws and with such additional accounting, financing, operating, environmental and other data and
information regarding such party and its Subsidiaries, as such other party may reasonably request.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no party shall be required to afford such access if it would unreasonably
disrupt the operations of such party or any of its Subsidiaries, would cause a violation of any agreement to
which such party or any of its Subsidiaries is a party, would cause a risk of a loss of privilege to such party or
any of its Subsidiaries or would constitute a violation of any applicable Law. No party or any of its officers,
employees or Representatives shall be permitted to perform any onsite procedures (including an onsite study
or any invasive testing or sampling) with respect to any property of another party or any of its Subsidiaries
without the prior written consent of such party.
(b)          The parties hereto hereby agree that all information provided to them or their respective officers,
directors, employees or Representatives in connection with this Agreement and the consummation of the
Transactions shall be governed in accordance with the mutual nondisclosure agreement executed by Parent
and Company in February 2014 (the "Confidentiality Agreement").
Section 5.4 No Solicitation; Recommendation of the Board of Directors of Company.
(a)          Except as expressly permitted by this Section 5.4, Company shall, and shall cause each of its affiliates
and its and their respective officers, directors and employees to, and shall use reasonable best efforts to
cause the agents, financial advisors, investment bankers, attorneys, accountants and other representatives
(collectively "Representatives") of Company or any of its affiliates to: (A) immediately cease any ongoing
solicitation, knowing encouragement, discussions or negotiations with any persons that may be ongoing with
respect to a Takeover Proposal, and promptly instruct (to the extent it has contractual authority to do so and
has not already done so prior to the date of this Agreement) or otherwise request, any person that has
executed a confidentiality or non-disclosure agreement with Company within the 24-month period prior to the
date of this Agreement in connection with any actual or potential Takeover Proposal to return or destroy all
such information or documents or material incorporating confidential information in the possession of such
person or its Representatives and (B) until the Effective Time or, if earlier, the Termination Date, not, directly
or indirectly, (1) solicit, initiate or knowingly facilitate or knowingly encourage (including by way of furnishing
non-public information) any inquiries regarding, or the making of any proposal or offer that constitutes, or
would reasonably be expected to lead to, a Takeover Proposal, (2) engage in, continue or otherwise
participate in any discussions or negotiations regarding, or furnish to any other person (other than any
Parent Entity or any of its directors, officers, employees, affiliates or Representatives) any non-public
information regarding Company or any of its Subsidiaries in connection with or for the purpose of
encouraging or facilitating, a Takeover Proposal, or (3) approve, recommend or enter into, or propose to
approve, recommend or enter into, any letter of intent or similar document, agreement, commitment, or
agreement in principle (whether written or oral) with respect to a Takeover Proposal. Except to the extent
necessary to take any actions that Company or any third party would otherwise be permitted to take pursuant
to this Section 5.4 (and in such case only in accordance with the terms hereof) or except to the extent that the
Board of Directors of Company concludes, after consultation with its outside legal counsel, that the failure to
take such action would be inconsistent with the fiduciary duties of the Board of Directors of Company under
applicable Law, (A) Company and its Subsidiaries shall not release any third party from, or waive, amend or
modify any provision of, or grant permission under, any standstill provision in any agreement to which
Company or any of its Subsidiaries is a party, and (B) Company shall, and shall cause its Subsidiaries to,
enforce the standstill provisions of any such agreement, and Company shall, and shall cause its Subsidiaries
to, promptly take all steps within their power in an effort to terminate any waiver that may have been
heretofore granted, to any person (other than Parent or any of its Affiliates), under any such provisions.
A-37
Table of Contents
(b)          Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Section 5.4(a), if at any time from and after the
date of this Agreement and prior to obtaining the Company Stockholder Approval, Company, directly or
indirectly receives a bona fide, unsolicited written Takeover Proposal from any person that did not result from
Company’s, its affiliates’ or Company’s or its affiliates’ Representatives’ material breach of this Section 5.4
and if the Board of Directors of Company determines in good faith, after consultation with its outside financial
advisors and outside legal counsel, that such Takeover Proposal constitutes a Superior Proposal, then
Company may, directly or indirectly, (A) furnish, pursuant to an Acceptable Confidentiality Agreement,
information (including non-public information) with respect to Company and its Subsidiaries, and afford
access to the business, properties, assets, employees, officers, Contracts, books and records of Company
and its Subsidiaries, to the person who has made such Takeover Proposal and its Representatives and
potential sources of financing; provided, that Company shall substantially concurrently with the delivery to
such person provide to Parent any non-public information concerning Company or any of its Subsidiaries
that is provided or made available to such person or its Representatives unless such non-public information
has been previously provided or made available to Parent and (B) engage in or otherwise participate in
discussions or negotiations with the person making such Takeover Proposal and its Representatives and
potential sources of financing regarding such Takeover Proposal. "Acceptable Confidentiality Agreement"
means any customary confidentiality agreement that contains provisions that are no less favorable to
Company than those applicable to Parent that are contained in the Confidentiality Agreement (including
standstill restrictions); provided that such confidentiality agreement shall not prohibit compliance by
Company with any of the provisions of this Section 5.4 and such confidentiality agreement shall permit the
person making the Takeover Proposal to make non-public Takeover Proposals directly to Company and the
Board of Directors of Company (as opposed to directly to the shareholders of Company). Nothing in this
Section 5.4 shall prohibit Company, or the Board of Directors of Company, directly or indirectly through any
officer, employee or Representative, from (1) informing any person that Company is party to this Agreement
and informing such person of the restrictions that are set forth in this Section 5.4, or (2) disclosing factual
information regarding the business, financial condition or results of operations of Company or its
Subsidiaries or the fact that a Takeover Proposal has been made, the identity of the party making such
proposal or the material terms of such proposal in the Proxy Statement/Prospectus or otherwise; provided
that, in the case of this clause (2), (x) the Board of Directors of the Company shall in good faith determine that
such information, facts, identity or terms is required to be disclosed under applicable Law or that failure to
make such disclosure is inconsistent with its fiduciary duties under applicable Law and (y) Company
complies with the obligations set forth in the proviso in Section 5.4(f).
(c)          Company shall promptly (and in no event later than 24 hours after actual receipt) notify, orally and in
writing, Parent after receipt by Company or any of its Representatives of any Takeover Proposal, including of
the identity of the person making the Takeover Proposal and the material terms and conditions thereof, and
shall promptly (and in no event later than 24 hours after actual receipt) provide copies to Parent of any written
proposals, indications of interest, and/or draft agreements relating to such Takeover Proposal. Company
shall keep Parent reasonably informed, on a prompt basis, as to the status of (including changes to any
material terms of, and any other material developments with respect to) such Takeover Proposal (including by
promptly (and in no event later than 24 hours after actual receipt) providing to Parent copies of any additional
or revised written proposals, indications of interest, and/or draft agreements relating to such Takeover
Proposal). Company agrees that it and its Subsidiaries will not enter into any agreement with any person
subsequent to the date of this Agreement which prohibits Company from providing any information to Parent
in accordance with this Section 5.4.
A-38
Table of Contents
(d)          Except as expressly permitted by Section 5.4(e), the Board of Directors of Company shall not (A) fail
to include the Company Recommendation in the Proxy Statement/Prospectus, (B) change, qualify, withhold,
withdraw or modify, or authorize or publicly propose to change, qualify, withhold, withdraw or modify, in a
manner adverse to Parent, the Company Recommendation, (C) make any recommendation or public
statement that addresses or relates to the approval, recommendation or declaration of advisability by the
Board of Directors of Company in connection with a tender offer or exchange offer that constitutes a
Takeover Proposal (other than (I) a recommendation against such offer or (II) a customary "stop, look and
listen" communication of the type contemplated by Rule 14d-9(f) under the Exchange Act that includes a
reaffirmation of the Company Recommendation or refers to the prior Company Recommendation of the
Board of Directors of Company) (it being understood that the Board of Directors of Company may refrain
from taking a position with respect to such a tender offer or exchange offer until the close of business as of
the tenth business day after the commencement of such tender offer or exchange offer pursuant to Rule 14d-
9(f) under the Exchange Act without such action being considered a Company Adverse Recommendation
Change, and such refrain shall not be treated as a Company Adverse Recommendation Change) or (D) adopt,
approve or recommend, or publicly propose to adopt, approve or recommend to stockholders of Company a
Takeover Proposal (any action described in this sentence being referred to as a "Company Adverse
Recommendation Change").
(e)          Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this Agreement, with respect to a Takeover
Proposal, at any time prior to the time the Company Stockholder Approval is obtained, the Board of Directors
of Company may make a Company Adverse Recommendation Change and/or terminate this Agreement
pursuant to Section 7.1(h) if, after receiving a bona fide, unsolicited Takeover Proposal that did not result from
a material breach of Section 5.4(a), the Board of Directors of Company has determined in good faith, after
consultation with its outside financial advisors and outside legal counsel, that (i) such Takeover Proposal
constitutes a Superior Proposal and (ii) in light of such Takeover Proposal, the failure to take such action
would be inconsistent with the fiduciary duties of the Board of Directors of Company under applicable
Law; provided, however, that, prior to making such Company Adverse Recommendation Change and/or
terminating this Agreement pursuant to Section 7.1(h), (A) Company has given Parent at least three business
days’ prior written notice of its intention to take such action (which notice shall specify the material terms and
conditions of any such Superior Proposal) and has contemporaneously provided to Parent a copy of the
Superior Proposal, a copy of any proposed transaction agreements with the person making such Superior
Proposal and a copy of any financing commitments relating thereto (or, if not provided in writing to Company,
a written summary of the material terms thereof), (B) Company has negotiated, and has caused its
Representatives to negotiate, in good faith with Parent during such notice period, to the extent Parent wishes
to negotiate, to enable Parent to propose revisions to the terms of this Agreement such that it would cause
such Superior Proposal to no longer constitute a Superior Proposal, (C) the Board of Directors of Company
shall have considered in good faith any revisions to the terms of this Agreement proposed in writing by
Parent and, at the end of such notice period, shall have determined, after consultation with its outside
financial advisors and outside legal counsel, that the Superior Proposal would nevertheless continue to
constitute a Superior Proposal if the revisions proposed by Parent were to be given effect, and (D) in the
event of any change to any of the financial terms (including the form, amount and timing of payment of
consideration) or any other material terms of such Superior Proposal, Company shall, in each case, have
delivered to Parent an additional notice consistent with that described in clause (A) above of this proviso and
a new notice period under clause (A) of this proviso shall commence (except that the three-business-day
notice period referred to in clause (A) above of this proviso shall instead be equal to the longer of (1) two
business days and (2) the period remaining under the notice period under clause (A) of this proviso
immediately prior to the delivery of such additional notice under this clause (D)) during which time Company
shall be required to comply with the requirements of this Section 5.4(e)  anew with respect to such additional
notice, including clauses (A) through (D) above of this proviso.
(f)          Nothing contained in this Section 5.4 or elsewhere in this Agreement shall prohibit Company or the
Board of Directors of Company from taking and disclosing to the stockholders of Company a position
contemplated by Rule 14e-2(a) or Rule 14d-9 promulgated under the Exchange Act or from making any "stop,
look and listen" communication or any other similar disclosure to the stockholders of Parent pursuant to
Rule 14d-9(f) under the Exchange Act; provided that any such disclosure that addresses or relates to the
approval, recommendation or declaration of advisability by the Board of Directors of Company with respect to
this Agreement or a Takeover Proposal shall be deemed to be a Company Adverse Recommendation Change
unless the Board of Directors of Company in connection with such communication publicly states that its
recommendation with respect to this Agreement has not changed or refers to the prior recommendation of
the Board of Directors of Company.
A-39
Table of Contents
Section 5.5 Filings; Other Actions.
(a)          As promptly as reasonably practicable following the date of this Agreement, Parent and Company
shall jointly prepare and file with the SEC the Form S-4, which will include the Proxy Statement/Prospectus.
Parent and Company shall use all commercially reasonable efforts to have the Form S-4 declared effective
under the Securities Act as promptly as reasonably practicable after such filing and to keep the Form S-4
effective as long as necessary to consummate the Merger. Parent shall take any action required to be taken
under any applicable state securities Laws in connection with the issuance and reservation of shares of
Parent Common Stock in the Merger. No filing of, or amendment or supplement to, the Form S-4 or the Proxy
Statement/Prospectus will be made by Parent or Company, without the other party’s prior consent (which
shall not be unreasonably withheld) and without providing the other party a reasonable opportunity to review
and comment thereon. Parent will advise the Company promptly after it receives oral or written notice of the
time when the Form S-4 has become effective or any supplement or amendment thereto has been filed, or the
issuance of any stop order, the suspension of the qualification of the shares of Parent Common Stock
issuable in connection with the Merger for offering or sale in any jurisdiction. Parent and Company will
promptly advise the other party of any oral or written request by the SEC for amendment of the Form S-4 or
the Proxy Statement/Prospectus or comments thereon and responses thereto or requests by the SEC for
additional information, and will promptly provide the other with copies of any written communication from the
SEC or any state securities commission. If at any time prior to the Effective Time any information relating to
Parent or Company, or any of their respective affiliates, officers or directors, is discovered by Parent or
Company which should be set forth in an amendment or supplement to the Form S-4 or the Proxy
Statement/Prospectus, so that any of such documents would not include a misstatement of a material fact or
omit to state any material fact necessary to make the statements therein, in light of the circumstances under
which they were made, not misleading, the party that discovers such information shall promptly notify the
other parties hereto and an appropriate amendment or supplement describing such information shall be
promptly filed with the SEC and, to the extent required by Law, disseminated to the stockholders of Parent
and Company, as applicable.
(b)          As promptly as reasonably practicable following the date of this Agreement, the Company shall, in
accordance with applicable Law and its articles of incorporation and bylaws, establish a record date for, duly
call, give notice of, convene and hold the Company Stockholder Meeting. The Company shall cause the
Proxy Statement/Prospectus to be mailed to the stockholders of the Company and to hold the Company
Stockholder Meeting as soon as reasonably practicable after the Form S-4 is declared effective under the
Securities Act. The Company shall, through the Company Board, recommend to its stockholders that they
give the Company Stockholder Approval, include such recommendation in the Proxy Statement/Prospectus
and solicit and use all commercially efforts to obtain the Company Stockholder Approval, except to the extent
that the Company Board shall have made a Company Adverse Recommendation Change as permitted by
Section 5.4(d). Company will, except in the case of a Company Adverse Recommendation Change, through
its Board of Directors, recommend that its stockholders adopt the plan of merger set forth in this Agreement
and this Agreement and will use all commercially reasonable efforts to solicit from its stockholders written
consents in favor of the adoption of the plan of merger in this Agreement and this Agreement and to take all
other action necessary or advisable to secure the vote or consent of its stockholders to obtain such
approvals. Company will not submit to the vote of its stockholders any Takeover Proposal other than the
Merger.
Section 5.6 Employee Matters.
(a)          Following the Closing Date, Parent shall, or shall cause its applicable affiliate to, cause any employee
benefit plans sponsored or maintained by Parent or its applicable affiliate in which the employees of
Company (the "Company Employees") are eligible to participate following the Closing Date (collectively, the
"Post-Closing Plans") to recognize the service of each Company Employee with Company and its
Subsidiaries and their respective predecessors prior to the Closing Date for purposes of eligibility, vesting,
benefit levels and benefit accrual rates or contribution rates under such Post-Closing Plans, in each case, to
the same extent such service was recognized immediately prior to the Effective Time under a comparable
Company Benefit Plan in which such Company Employee was eligible to participate immediately prior to the
Effective Time; provided that such recognition of service shall not (i) apply for purposes of any defined
benefit retirement plan or plan that provides retiree welfare benefits, (ii) operate to duplicate any benefits of a
Company Employee with respect to the same period of service, (iii) apply for purposes of any plan, program
or arrangement (x) under which similarly situated employees of Parent or its applicable affiliate do not receive
credit for prior service or (y) that is grandfathered or frozen, either with respect to level of benefits or
participation.
A-40
Table of Contents
(b)          If requested by Parent in writing delivered to Company not less than ten business days before the
Closing Date, the Board of Directors of Company (or the appropriate committee thereof) shall adopt
resolutions and take such corporate action as is necessary to terminate the Company 401(k) plans (the
"Company 401(k) Plan"), effective as of the day prior to the Closing Date.
(c)          Nothing in this Agreement shall confer upon any Company Employee or other service provider any
right to continue in the employ or service of Parent or any of its affiliates, or shall interfere with or restrict in
any way the rights of Parent, the Surviving Company, Company or any of their affiliates, which rights are
hereby expressly reserved, to discharge or terminate the services of any Company Employee at any time for
any reason whatsoever, with or without cause. In no event shall the terms of this Agreement be deemed to
(i) establish, amend, or modify any Company Benefit Plan or any "employee benefit plan" as defined in
Section 3(3) of ERISA, or any other benefit plan, program, agreement or arrangement maintained or
sponsored by Parent, the Surviving Company, Company or any of their Subsidiaries (including, after the
Closing Date, Company and its Subsidiaries) or affiliates; or (ii) alter or limit the ability of Parent, the Surviving
Company or any of their Subsidiaries (including, after the Closing Date, Company and its Subsidiaries) or
affiliates to amend, modify or terminate any Company Benefit Plan, employment agreement or any other
benefit or employment plan, program, agreement or arrangement after the Closing Date. Notwithstanding any
provision in this Agreement to the contrary, nothing in this Section 5.6 shall create any third party beneficiary
rights in any Company Employee or current or former service provider of Company or its affiliates (or any
beneficiaries or dependents thereof).
Section 5.7 Regulatory Approvals; Efforts.
(a)          Prior to the Closing, the parties shall use their respective reasonable best efforts to take, or cause to
be taken, all actions, and to do, or cause to be done, all things necessary, proper or advisable under any
applicable Laws to consummate and make effective the Transactions as promptly as practicable, including
(i) the preparation and filing of all forms, registrations and notices required to be filed to consummate the
Merger, (ii) the satisfaction of the conditions to consummating the Transactions, (iii) taking all reasonable
actions necessary to obtain (and cooperating with each other in obtaining) any consent, authorization, Order
or approval of, or any exemption by, any third party, including any Governmental Entity required to be
obtained or made by the parties or any of their respective Subsidiaries in connection with the Transactions or
the taking of any action contemplated by this Agreement, (iv) defending any lawsuits or other legal
proceedings, whether judicial or administrative, challenging this Agreement or the consummation of the
Merger contemplated by this Agreement, including seeking to have any stay or temporary restraining order
entered by any Governmental Entity vacated or reversed, and (v) the execution and delivery of any additional
instruments necessary to consummate the Transactions and to fully carry out the purposes of this
Agreement. In the event that any litigation, administrative or judicial action or other proceeding is commenced
challenging the Merger or any of the other Transactions contemplated by this Agreement, the parties shall
cooperate with each other and use all commercially reasonable efforts to contest and resist any such
litigation, action or proceeding and to have vacated, lifted, reversed or overturned any decree, judgment,
injunction or other order, whether temporary, preliminary or permanent, that is in effect and that prohibits,
prevents or restricts consummation of the Merger or the other Transactions contemplated by this Agreement.
Additionally, each of the parties shall use all commercially reasonable efforts to fulfill all conditions precedent
to the Transactions and shall not take any action after the date of this Agreement that would reasonably be
expected to materially hinder or delay the obtaining of, or result in not obtaining, any permission, approval or
consent from any such Governmental Entity necessary to be obtained prior to Closing or to materially hinder
or delay the expiration of the required waiting period under any applicable Law. To the extent that transfers of
any permits issued by any Governmental Entity are required as a result of the execution of this Agreement or
the consummation of the Transactions, the parties hereto shall use all commercially efforts to effect such
transfers.
A-41
Table of Contents
(b)          The parties shall each keep the other apprised of the status of matters relating to the completion of
the Transactions and the regulatory approvals and work cooperatively in connection with obtaining all
required consents, authorizations, Orders or approvals of, or any exemptions by, any Governmental Entity
undertaken pursuant to the provisions of this Section 5.7. In that regard, prior to the Closing, each party shall
promptly consult with the other parties to this Agreement with respect to, provide any necessary information
with respect to (and, in the case of correspondence, provide the other parties (or their counsel) copies of), all
filings made by such party with any Governmental Entity or any other information supplied by such party to,
or correspondence with, a Governmental Entity in connection with this Agreement and the Transactions.
Each party to this Agreement shall promptly inform the other parties to this Agreement, and if in writing,
furnish the other party with copies of (or, in the case of oral communications, advise the other party orally of)
any communication from any Governmental Entity regarding the Transactions, and permit the other party to
review and discuss in advance, and consider in good faith the views of the other party in connection with, any
proposed communication with any such Governmental Entity. If any party to this Agreement or any
Representative of such party receives a request for additional information or documentary material from any
Governmental Entity with respect to the Transactions, then such party will use reasonable best efforts to
make, or cause to be made, as promptly as practicable and after consultation with the other parties to this
Agreement, an appropriate response in substantial compliance with such request. No party shall participate
in any meeting or teleconference with any Governmental Entity (other than teleconferences with respect to
non-substantive or ministerial matters) in connection with this Agreement and Transactions unless it
consults with the other parties in advance and, to the extent not prohibited by such Governmental Entity,
gives the other parties the opportunity to attend and participate thereat. Each party shall furnish the other
parties with copies of all correspondence, filings and communications (and memoranda setting forth the
substance thereof) between it and any such Governmental Entity with respect to the Transactions, and
furnish the other parties with such necessary information and reasonable assistance as such other parties
may reasonably request in connection with its preparation of necessary filings or submissions of information
to any such Governmental Entity; provided, however, that materials provided pursuant to this Section 5.7 may
be redacted (i) to remove references concerning the valuation of Parent and Transactions or other
confidential information, (ii) as necessary to comply with contractual arrangements and (iii) as necessary to
address reasonable privilege concerns.
(c)          Subject to the terms and conditions herein provided and without limiting the foregoing, Parent and
Company shall use all commercially reasonable efforts to (i) file, as promptly as practicable, but in any event
no later than ten (10) business days after the date of this Agreement, all notifications required under the HSR
Act, if applicable; (ii) cooperate with each other in (A) determining whether any filings are required to be made
with, or consents, permits, authorizations, waivers or approvals are required to be obtained from, any third
parties or other Governmental Entities in connection with the execution and delivery of this Agreement and
the consummation of the Merger and the other Transactions contemplated hereby, (B) timely making all such
filings and timely seeking all such consents, permits, authorizations or approvals, (C) assuring that all such
filings are in material compliance with the requirements of any applicable Law; (iii) ensure the prompt
expiration or termination of any applicable waiting period and clearance or approval by any relevant
Governmental Entity, including defense against, and the resolution of, any objections or challenges, in court
or otherwise, by any relevant Governmental Entity preventing consummation of the Merger or the other
Transactions; and (iii) use reasonable best efforts to take, or cause to be taken, all other actions and do, or
cause to be done, all other things advisable to consummate and make effective the Merger and the other
Transactions contemplated hereby as promptly as practicable. In the event that the parties receive a request
for information or documentary material pursuant to the HSR Act (a "Second Request"), the parties will use all
commercially reasonable efforts to respond to such Second Request as promptly as practicable, and counsel
for each of the parties will closely cooperate during the entirety of any such Second Request review process.
Section 5.8 Takeover Statutes. If any "moratorium," "control share acquisition," "fair price," "supermajority,"
"affiliate transactions" or "business combination statute or regulation" or other similar state anti-takeover
Laws and regulations may become, or may purport to be, applicable to the Merger or any of the other
Transactions, each party shall grant such approvals and take such actions as are reasonably necessary so
that the Transactions may be consummated as promptly as practicable on the terms contemplated hereby
and otherwise act to eliminate or minimize the effects of such statute or regulation on the Transactions.
Section 5.9 Public Announcements. The parties shall use reasonable best efforts to develop a joint
communications plan and each party shall use all commercially reasonable efforts to ensure that all press
releases and other public statements with respect to the Transactions, to the extent they have not been
previously issued or disclosed, shall be consistent with such joint communications plan. Unless otherwise
required by applicable Law or by obligations pursuant to any listing agreement with or rules of any securities
exchange, each party shall consult with each other before issuing any press release or public statement with
respect to the Transactions and, subject to the requirements of applicable Law or the rules of any securities
exchange, shall not issue any such press release or public statement prior to such consultation. The parties
agree to issue a mutually acceptable initial joint press release announcing this Agreement.
A-42
Table of Contents
Section 5.10 Directors and Officers Insurance. For a period of six (6) years from the Effective Time, Parent
shall cause to be maintained in effect the coverage provided by the policies of directors’ and officers’ liability
insurance and fiduciary liability insurance in effect as of the date hereof by Company and its Subsidiaries with
respect to matters existing or arising on or before the Effective Time; provided, however, that Parent shall not
be required to pay, in respect of any year after the Effective Time, annual premiums in excess of 200% of the
last annual premium paid by Company prior to the date hereof in respect of the coverages (the "Maximum
Amount") required to be obtained pursuant hereto, but in such case shall purchase as much coverage as
reasonably practicable for such amount. If Company elects, in its sole discretion, then Company may, prior to
the Effective Time, purchase a "tail policy" with respect to acts or omissions occurring or alleged to have
occurred prior to the Effective Time that were committed or alleged to have been committed by such its
directors and officers, in their capacity as such; provided that in no event shall the cost of such policy, if
purchased by Company, exceed six (6) times the Maximum Amount and, if such a "tail policy" is purchased,
Parent shall have no further obligations under this Section 5.10.
Section 5.11 Control of Operations. Without in any way limiting any party’s rights or obligations under this
Agreement, the parties understand and agree that (a) nothing contained in this Agreement shall give either
Parent or Company, directly or indirectly, the right to control or direct the other Party's operations prior to
Effective Time and (b) prior to the Effective Time, each of Parent and Company shall exercise, consistent with
the terms and conditions of this Agreement, complete control and supervision over its operations.
Section 5.12 Section 16 Matters. Prior to the Effective Time, Parent and Company shall take all such steps as
may be required to cause any acquisitions of Parent Common Stock (including derivative securities with
respect to Parent Common Stock) resulting from the Transactions by each individual who is subject to the
reporting requirements of Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act with respect to Parent or will become subject to
such reporting requirements with respect to Parent, to be exempt under Rule 16b-3 promulgated under the
Exchange Act.
Section 5.13 Transaction Litigation. Subject to applicable Law, Company shall give Parent the opportunity to
participate in Company's defense or settlement of any stockholder litigation against Company and/or its
directors or executive officers relating to the Transactions, including the Merger. Company agrees that,
except to the extent permitted pursuant to Section 5.1(b)(xiv), it shall not settle or offer to settle any litigation
commenced prior to or after the date of this Agreement against Company or its directors, executive officers or
similar persons by any stockholder of Company relating to this Agreement or the Transactions without the
prior written consent of Parent (such consent not to be unreasonably withheld).
Section 5.14 Initial Board of Directors of Parent. As of the Effective Time, Parent shall take all such action as
may be reasonably required to increase the size of its Board of Directors to seven members and to appoint
two of the Company Designees to serve as directors, with the remaining five directors to be designated by
Parent. The initial directors of Parent as of the Effective Date shall continue to serve as such until their
successors are duly elected and qualified, or until their earlier death, resignation or removal.
ARTICLE VI.
CONDITIONS TO THE MERGER
Section 6.1 Conditions to Each Party’s Obligation to Effect the Merger. The respective obligations of each
party to effect the Merger shall be subject to the fulfillment (or waiver by all parties, to the extent permissible
under applicable Law) at or prior to the Effective Time of the following conditions:
(a)          The Company Stockholder Approval shall have been obtained.
(b)          No injunction by any court or other tribunal of competent jurisdiction shall have been entered and
shall continue to be in effect and no Law shall have been adopted or be effective, in each case that prohibits
the consummation of either Merger or any of the other Transactions.
A-43
Table of Contents
(c)          The Form S-4 shall have been declared effective by the SEC under the Securities Act and no stop
order suspending the effectiveness of the Form S-4 shall have been issued by the SEC and no proceedings
for that purpose shall have been initiated by the SEC.
(d)           The exchange of all outstanding shares of the Parent’s Series A Preferred Stock for 7,000,000 shares
of Parent Common Stock shall have occurred.
Section 6.2 Conditions to Obligation of Company to Effect the Merger. The obligation of Company to effect the
Merger is further subject to the fulfillment (or waiver by Company) at or prior to the Effective Time of the
following conditions:
(a)          Except for the impact of any of the actions taken by the Parent or its Subsidiaries described in
Section 5.2(c), (i) the representations and warranties of Parent set forth in this Agreement qualified by Material
Adverse Effect shall be true and correct both at and as of the date of this Agreement and at and as of the
Closing Date as though made at and as of the Closing Date, (ii) the representations and warranties of Parent
set forth in Section 4.1(b) and Section 4.1(c) shall be true and correct at and as of the date of this Agreement,
except for any de minimis inaccuracies, and (iii) the other representations and warranties of Parent set forth in
this Agreement shall be true and correct in all material respects both at and as of the date of this Agreement
and at and as of the Closing Date as though made at and as of the Closing Date, provided, however, that
representations and warranties that are made as of a particular date or period shall be true and correct (in the
manner set forth in clauses (i), (ii) and (iii), as applicable) only as of such date or period.
(b)          Parent shall have in all material respects performed all obligations and complied with all covenants
required by this Agreement to be performed or complied with by it prior to the Effective Time.
(c)          No Material Adverse Effect shall have occurred with respect to Parent and its Subsidiaries, taken as a
whole, since the date of this Agreement.
(d)          No action, suit, or proceeding shall be pending or threatened before any Governmental Entity or
before any arbitrator in which an unfavorable injunction, judgment, order, decree, ruling, or charge
(collectively, “Restraints”) would (A) prevent consummation of any of the transactions contemplated by this
Agreement or (B) cause any of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement to be rescinded following
consummation; provided, that this Section 6.2(d) shall not constitute a condition to the obligations of
Company to consummate the Merger if Company and/or any of its Subsidiaries file suit or institute
proceedings with respect to, obtain, or otherwise affirmatively seek to obtain, directly or indirectly, any such
Restraints.
(e)          Parent shall have provided Company with evidence reasonably satisfactory to Company that Parent
has not less than $5,000,000 cash on hand.
(f)          Concurrently with the execution of this Agreement, Alan Gaines shall have resigned as a director and
Executive Chairman of the Company and joined Parent’s Board of Directors.
(g)          Parent shall have timely made all advances under the Parent Loan Agreement that Company shall
have become entitled to receive pursuant to the express terms of the Parent Loan Agreement (including,
without limitation, the conditions precedent to such advances).
(h)          Parent shall have delivered to Company a certificate, dated the Closing Date and signed by the Chief
Executive Officer or another senior officer of Parent, certifying to the effect that the conditions set forth in this
Section 6.2 have been satisfied.
A-44
Table of Contents
Section 6.3 Conditions to Obligation of Parent and Merger Sub to Effect the Merger. The obligation of Parent
and Merger Sub to effect the Merger is further subject to the fulfillment (or the waiver by Parent) at or prior to
the Effective Time of the following conditions:
(a)          (i) The representations and warranties of Company set forth in this Agreement qualified by Material
Adverse Effect shall be true and correct both at and as of the date of this Agreement and at and as of the
Closing Date as though made at and as of the Closing Date, (ii) the representations and warranties of
Company set forth in Section 3.2(a) and Section 3.2(b) shall be true and correct at and as of the date of this
Agreement, except for any de minimis inaccuracies, and (iii) the other representations and warranties of
Company set forth in this Agreement shall be true and correct in all material respects both at and as of the
date of this Agreement and at and as of the Closing Date as though made at and as of the Closing Date;
provided, however, that representations and warranties that are made as of a particular date or period shall be
true and correct (in the manner set forth in clauses (i), (ii) and (iii), as applicable) only as of such date or
period.
(b)          Company shall have in all material respects performed all obligations and complied with all covenants
required by this Agreement to be performed or complied with by it prior to the Effective Time.
(c)          The Company shall have in all materials respects performed all obligations and complied with all
covenants contained in the Parent Loan Agreement.
(d)          There shall have not occurred a Material Adverse Effect with respect to the Company and its
Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, since the date of this Agreement.
(e)          No action, suit, or proceeding shall be pending or threatened before any Governmental Entity or
before any arbitrator in which an unfavorable injunction, judgment, order, decree, ruling, or charge
(collectively, “Restraints”) would (A) prevent consummation of any of the transactions contemplated by this
Agreement, (B) cause any of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement to be rescinded following
consummation, (C) affect adversely the right of Parent to own the capital stock of the Surviving Corporation
and to control the Surviving Corporation and its Subsidiaries after giving effect to the transactions
contemplated by this Agreement, or (D) affect adversely the right, before or following the Closing, of any of
the Surviving Corporation and its Subsidiaries to own its assets and to operate its businesses (and no such
injunction, judgment, order, decree, ruling, or charge shall be in effect); provided, that this Section 6.3(e) shall
not constitute a condition to the obligations of Parent and Merger Sub to consummate the Merger if Parent
and/or any of its Subsidiaries file suit or institute proceedings with respect to, obtain, or otherwise
affirmatively seek to obtain, directly or indirectly, any such Restraints.
(f)          Those Approvals designed as Requisite Approvals in Section 3.3(b) of the Company Disclosure
Schedule and those Parent Approvals designated as Requisite Approvals in Section 4.2(b) of the Parent
Disclosure Schedule have been obtained; provided, that this Section 6.3(f) shall not constitute a condition to
the obligations of Parent and Merger Sub to consummate the Merger if Parent or any of its Subsidiaries fail to
make any filing with or give any notice, or to use its commercially reasonable efforts to obtain any Requisite
Approval.
(g)          The Company shall have provided to Parent evidence satisfactory to Parent that the Company’s
liabilities (excluding the Parent Loan obligations, capital leases, deferred rent obligations (currently less than
$36,000) and plugging and abandonment liabilities) immediately prior to the Closing do not exceed
$6,500,000; provided that such $6,500,000 limit may be increased by up to an aggregate amount of $500,000 in
field-related payables so long as there are corresponding field-related receivables and/or deposits.
(h)          The Company shall have either extended the maturity/payment dates for a period of one year beyond
the Effective Time (until June 30, 2016 in the case of Mr. Lew), or reached an accommodation with the holders
of the Company’s outstanding promissory notes, in a manner acceptable to Parent.
(i)          Company’s CEO shall have entered into a consulting agreement, in form and substance satisfactory to
Parent, and shall have resigned as an officer and director of the Company, effective as of the Effective Time.
(j)          The Company shall have fully paid and satisfied the judgment in favor of Nostra Terra Oil & Gas, Inc.
and such judgment shall be fully discharged and all liens terminated.
A-45
Table of Contents
(k)          The holders of not more than 5% of the outstanding shares of the Company Common Stock shall
have taken the steps required by the Appraisal Provisions of the NRS to obtain payment for the fair value of
their shares (“Dissenters’ Rights”).
(l)          Company shall have delivered to Parent a certificate, dated the Closing Date and signed by its Chief
Executive Officer or another senior officer of Company, certifying to the effect that the conditions set forth in
this Section 6.3 have been satisfied.
Section 6.4 Frustration of Closing Conditions. No party may rely, either as a basis for not consummating the
Transactions or terminating this Agreement and abandoning the Transactions, on the failure of any condition
set forth in Section 6.1, Section 6.2 or Section 6.3, as the case may be, to be satisfied if such failure was
caused by such party’s material breach of this Agreement.
ARTICLE VII.
TERMINATION
Section 7.1 Termination or Abandonment. Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, this
Agreement may be terminated and abandoned at any time prior to the Effective Time, whether before or after
any approval of the matters presented in connection with the Transactions by the stockholders of Company:
(a)          by the mutual written consent of Parent and Company;
(b)          by Parent or Company, if the Merger shall not have been consummated on or prior to September 30,
2014 (the "End Date"); provided, however, that if all of the conditions to Closing, other than the conditions set
forth in Section 6.1(a) or Section 6.1(c), shall have been satisfied or shall be capable of being satisfied at such
time, the End Date may be extended by either Company or Parent from time to time by written notice to the
other party up to a date not beyond November 30, 2014, the latest of any of which dates shall thereafter be
deemed to be the End Date; and provided, further, that the right to terminate this Agreement pursuant to this
Section 7.1(b) shall not be available to a party if the failure of the Closing to occur by such date shall be due to
the material breach by such party of any representation, warranty, covenant or other agreement of such party
set forth in this Agreement;
(c)          by Parent or Company, if an injunction shall have been entered permanently restraining, enjoining or
otherwise prohibiting the consummation of the Transactions and such injunction shall have become final and
nonappealable; provided, however, that the right to terminate this Agreement under this Section 7.1(c) shall
not be available to a party if such injunction was due to the failure of such party to perform any of its
obligations under this Agreement;
(d)          by Parent or Company, if the Company Stockholders’ Meeting (including any adjournments or
postponements thereof) shall have concluded and Company Stockholder Approval shall not have been
obtained;
(e)          by Company, if Parent shall have breached or failed to perform any of its representations, warranties,
covenants or other agreements contained in this Agreement, which breach or failure to perform (i) if it
occurred or was continuing to occur on the Closing Date, would result in a failure of a condition set forth in
Section 6.2(a) or Section 6.2(b) and (ii) by its nature, cannot be cured prior to the End Date or, if such breach
or failure is capable of being cured by the End Date, Parent does not diligently attempt or ceases to diligently
attempt to cure such breach or failure after receiving written notice from Company describing such breach or
failure in reasonable detail (provided that Company is not then in material breach of any representation,
warranty, covenant or other agreement contained herein, which would itself result in a failure of a condition
set forth in Section 6.3(a), Section 6.3(b), or Section 6.3(c) and provided further that a breach or failure to
perform by Parent described in Section 7.1(i) shall be a basis for termination by the Company under that
Section, but not under this Section 7.1(e));
A-46
Table of Contents
(f)           by Parent, if Company shall have breached or failed to perform any of its representations, warranties,
covenants or other agreements contained in this Agreement or the Parent Loan Agreement, which breach or
failure to perform (i) if it occurred or was continuing to occur on the Closing Date, would result in a failure of a
condition set forth in Section 6.3(a), Section 6.3(b), or Section 6.3(c) and (ii) by its nature, cannot be cured
prior to the End Date or, if such breach or failure is capable of being cured by the End Date, Company does
not diligently attempt or ceases to diligently attempt to cure such breach or failure after receiving written
notice from Parent describing such breach or failure in reasonable detail (provided that Parent is not then in
material breach of any representation, warranty, covenant or other agreement contained herein, which would
itself result in a failure of a condition set forth in Section 6.2(a) or Section 6.2(b));
(g)          by Parent, prior to receipt of the Company Stockholder Approval, (i) in the event of a Company
Adverse Recommendation Change or (ii) in the event of a Willful Breach by the Company of Section 5.4;
(h)          by Company, prior to receipt of the Company Stockholder Approval and if Company has complied in
all material respects with its obligations under Section 5.4, in order to enter into a definitive agreement with
respect to a Takeover Proposal (which definitive agreement shall be entered into concurrently with, or
promptly following, the termination of this Agreement pursuant to this Section 7.1(h)); provided that any such
purported termination by Company pursuant to this Section 7.1(h) shall be void and of no force or effect
unless Company pays the Termination Fee in accordance with Section 7.3(a); and
(i)           by Company if (A) all of the conditions to the obligations of Parent and Merger Sub to consummate
the Merger set forth in Section 6.1 and Section 6.3 have been satisfied or waived by Parent and Merger Sub in
writing (other than those conditions that by their nature are to be satisfied at the Closing, provided the
Company is then able to satisfy such conditions), and the Company has certified to Parent in writing that
such conditions have been satisfied and the Company is prepared to satisfy those conditions at the Closing
and (B) Parent and Merger Sub shall have breached their obligation to cause the Merger to be consummated
within 10 business days after the date the Closing is required to take place pursuant to Section 1.2.
Section 7.2 Effect of Termination. In the event of termination of this Agreement pursuant to Section 7.1, this
Agreement shall terminate (except for the provisions of Section 7.3 and ARTICLE VIII), and there shall be no
other liability on the part of any party to any other party except as provided in Section 7.3 and, subject to
Section 7.3(h) and Section 7.3(i), any liability arising out of or the result of, fraud or any willful or intentional
breach of any covenant or agreement occurring prior to termination or as provided for in the Confidentiality
Agreement, in which case the aggrieved party shall be entitled to all rights and remedies available at law or in
equity.
Section 7.3 Termination Fees; Expenses.
(a)          If this Agreement is terminated by Company pursuant to Section 7.1(h), then Company shall pay to
Parent the Company Termination Fee and Parent's Expenses, by wire transfer to the account designated by
Parent in immediately available funds, upon termination of this Agreement and as a condition to the
effectiveness of such termination.
(b)          If this Agreement is terminated by Company pursuant to Section 7.1(d) and prior to the receipt by
Company of the Company Stockholder Approval, any person (other than Parent or any of its affiliates) shall
have made a Takeover Proposal, which shall have been publicly announced or publicly disclosed or
otherwise publicly communicated to the Board of Directors of Company, then Company shall pay to Parent
the Parent Expenses, by wire transfer to the account designated by Parent in immediately available funds,
and, if within twenty-four months after such termination of this Agreement, Company shall have
consummated, or shall have entered into an agreement to consummate (which may be consummated after
such 24-month period), a Takeover Proposal, then Company shall pay to Parent an amount equal to the
Company Termination Fee, by wire transfer to the account designated by Parent in immediately available
funds, on the earlier of the public announcement of Company's entry into such agreement or the
consummation of any such Takeover Proposal.
(c)          If this Agreement is terminated (i) by Parent pursuant to Section 7.1(g), (ii) by Company pursuant to
Section 7.1(b) and, at the time of such termination, (A) the Company Stockholder Approval shall not have
been obtained and (B) Parent would have been permitted to terminate this Agreement pursuant to Section
7.1(g), or (iii) by Parent (1) pursuant to Section 7.1(f) due to a breach of Company's covenants contained in
this Agreement or the Parent Loan Agreement and, at the time of such breach, a Takeover Proposal shall
have been announced or disclosed or otherwise communicated to the Board of Directors of Company and
not have been withdrawn or (2) pursuant to Section 7.1(f) due to a breach of Company's covenants contained
in Section 5.6(b), then Company shall pay to Parent the Company Termination Fee, by wire transfer to such
account designated by Parent in immediately available funds, in the case of any termination by Parent, within
two business days of such termination, and in the case of any termination by Company, prior to or
concurrently with such termination.
A-47
Table of Contents
(d)          If this Agreement is terminated by Parent pursuant to Section 7.1(f) due to a breach of Company's
covenants contained in this Agreement or the Parent Loan Agreement (other than due to a breach for which
the Termination Fee is payable under Section 7.3(c)), then Company shall pay to Parent the Company
Termination Fee, by wire transfer to the account designated by Parent in immediately available funds, within
two business days following such termination, and Parent's Expenses.
(e)          If this Agreement is terminated by the Company pursuant to Section 7.1(i), then the Parent shall pay to
the Company the Parent Termination Fee, either by wire transfer to the account designated by Company in
immediately available funds, within two business days following such termination or, at Parent’s election, by
applying such amount to the reduction of the principal, interest, and other amounts payable by Company
under the Parent Loan Agreement (it being understood that if the Parent elects to make such a reduction, the
Parent Loan Agreement shall otherwise remain payable in accordance with its terms).
(f)            For purposes of this Agreement, the term:
(i)          "Parent Expenses " shall mean Parent's actual, itemized out-of-pocket expenses in connection with
the negotiation, preparation, and execution of this Agreement and obtaining approval of its Board of
Directors for the transactions contemplated herein, not to exceed $300,000;
(ii)         "Company Termination Fee" shall mean a cash amount equal to $3,000,000; and
(iii)“Parent Termination Fee” shall mean a cash amount equal to $1,000,000.
(g)          Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement, (i) if the Company Termination Fee shall
become due and payable in accordance with Section 7.3, or if Parent Expenses shall become due and
payable in accordance with Section 7.3, then from and after such termination and payment of the Termination
Fee and Parent Expenses pursuant to and in accordance with Section 7.3, Company shall have no further
liability of any kind for any reason in connection with this Agreement or the termination contemplated hereby,
except in the case of fraud or willful misconduct by Company and (ii) if the Parent Termination Fee shall
become due and payable in accordance with Section 7.3, then from and after such termination and payment
of the Parent Termination Fee pursuant to and in accordance with Section 7.3, Parent and Merger Sub shall
have no further liability of any kind for any reason in connection with this Agreement or the termination
contemplated hereby, except in the case of fraud by Parent or Merger Sub.
(h)           Each of the parties hereto acknowledges that the Company Termination Fee, the Parent Termination
Fee, and the Parent Expenses reimbursement are not intended to be a penalty, but rather are liquidated
damages in a reasonable amount that will compensate the parties in the circumstances in which such fees
and/or expense reimbursements are due and payable and, in each case, which do not involve fraud or willful
misconduct, for the efforts and resources expended and opportunities foregone while negotiating this
Agreement and in reliance on this Agreement and on the expectation of the consummation of the
Transactions, which amount would otherwise be impossible to calculate with precision. In no event shall
Parent be entitled to more than one payment of the Company Termination Fee and Parent Expense
reimbursement, and in no event shall Company be required to pay Parent an amount in excess of the
Company Termination Fee and Parent Expense reimbursement pursuant to all provisions of this ARTICLE VII,
in connection with a termination of this Agreement pursuant to which such Company Termination Fee and/or
Parent Expense reimbursement are payable. In no event shall Company be entitled to more than one payment
of the Parent Termination Fee, and in no event shall Parent be required to pay Company an amount in excess
of the Parent Termination Fee pursuant to all provisions of this ARTICLE VII, in connection with a termination
of this Agreement pursuant to which such Parent Termination Fee is payable.
A-48
Table of Contents
(i)           Each of the parties acknowledges that the agreements contained in this Section 7.3 are an integral
part of the Transactions, and that, without these agreements, the parties would not enter into this
Agreement. Accordingly, if any party fails to pay in a timely manner any amount due pursuant to this Section
7.3, then (i) such party shall reimburse the other party that should have received such amount for all costs
and expenses (including disbursements and reasonable fees of counsel) incurred in the collection of such
overdue amount, including in connection with any related Actions commenced and (ii) such party shall pay to
the other party that should have received such amount interest on such amount from and including the date
payment of such amount was due to but excluding the date of actual payment at the prime rate set forth in
The Wall Street Journal in effect on the date such payment was required to be made plus 3%.
ARTICLE VIII.
MISCELLANEOUS
Section 8.1 Expenses. Except as set forth in Section 7.3, whether or not the Merger is consummated, all costs
and expenses incurred in connection with the Merger, this Agreement and the Transactions shall be paid by
the party incurring or required to incur such expenses.
Section 8.2 Counterparts; Effectiveness. This Agreement may be executed in two or more counterparts, each
of which shall be an original, with the same effect as if the signatures thereto and hereto were upon the same
instrument, and shall become effective when one or more counterparts have been signed by each of the
parties and delivered (by telecopy, electronic delivery or otherwise) to the other parties. Signatures to this
Agreement transmitted by facsimile transmission, by electronic mail in "portable document format" (".pdf")
form, or by any other electronic means intended to preserve the original graphic and pictorial appearance of a
document, will have the same effect as physical delivery of the paper document bearing the original
signature.
Section 8.3 Governing Law. This Agreement, and all claims or causes of action (whether at Law, in contract or
in tort or otherwise) that may be based upon, arise out of or relate to this Agreement or the negotiation,
execution or performance hereof, shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the Laws of the
State of Delaware, without giving effect to any choice or conflict of law provision or rule (whether of the State
of Delaware or any other jurisdiction) that would cause the application of the Laws of any jurisdiction other
than the State of Delaware; provided that the Merger shall be governed by the laws of the State of Nevada.
Section 8.4 Jurisdiction; Specific Enforcement. The parties agree that irreparable damage would occur in the
event that any of the provisions of this Agreement were not performed, or were threatened to be not
performed, in accordance with their specific terms or were otherwise breached. It is accordingly agreed that,
in addition to any other remedy that may be available to it, including monetary damages, each of the parties
shall be entitled to an injunction or injunctions to prevent breaches of this Agreement and to enforce
specifically the terms and provisions of this Agreement exclusively in federal and state courts located in
Delaware (the “Delaware Courts”) and all such rights and remedies at law or in equity shall be cumulative,
except as may be limited by Section 7.3. The parties further agree that no party to this Agreement shall be
required to obtain, furnish or post any bond or similar instrument in connection with or as a condition to
obtaining any remedy referred to in this Section 8.4 and each party waives any objection to the imposition of
such relief or any right it may have to require the obtaining, furnishing or posting of any such bond or similar
instrument. In addition, each of the parties hereto irrevocably agrees that any legal action or proceeding with
respect to this Agreement and the rights and obligations arising hereunder, or for recognition and
enforcement of any judgment in respect of this Agreement and the rights and obligations arising hereunder
brought by the other party hereto or its successors or assigns, shall be brought and determined exclusively
in the Delaware Courts. Each of the parties hereto hereby irrevocably submits with regard to any such action
or proceeding for itself and in respect of its property, generally and unconditionally, to the personal
jurisdiction of the aforesaid courts and agrees that it will not bring any action relating to this Agreement or
any of the Transactions in any court other than the aforesaid courts. Each of the parties hereto hereby
irrevocably waives, and agrees not to assert, by way of motion, as a defense, counterclaim or otherwise, in
any action or proceeding with respect to this Agreement, (a) any claim that it is not personally subject to the
jurisdiction of the above named courts, (b) any claim that it or its property is exempt or immune from
jurisdiction of any such court or from any legal process commenced in such courts (whether through service
of notice, attachment prior to judgment, attachment in aid of execution of judgment, execution of judgment or
otherwise) and (c) to the fullest extent permitted by applicable Law, any claim that (i) the suit, action or
proceeding in such court is brought in an inconvenient forum, (ii) the venue of such suit, action or
proceeding is improper or (iii) this Agreement, or the subject matter hereof, may not be enforced in or by such
courts. To the fullest extent permitted by applicable Law, each of the parties hereto hereby consents to the
service of process in accordance with Section 8.6; provided, however, that nothing herein shall affect the
right of any party to serve legal process in any other manner permitted by Law. The terms of this
Section 8.4 shall not be deemed to be superseded, amended or modified in any respect by the terms of any
other provisions of this Agreement, but the parties agree that if a party has terminated this Agreement and
received the Company Termination Fee or Parent Termination Fee (or if the amounts payable under the
Parent Loan Agreement have been reduced by such amount), the applicable provision of Section 7.3(g) shall
apply.
A-49
Table of Contents
Section 8.5 WAIVER OF JURY TRIAL. EACH OF THE PARTIES HERETO IRREVOCABLY WAIVES ANY AND
ALL RIGHT TO TRIAL BY JURY IN ANY LEGAL PROCEEDING ARISING OUT OF OR RELATING TO THIS
AGREEMENT OR THE TRANSACTIONS CONTEMPLATED HEREBY.
Section 8.6 Notices. All notices and other communications hereunder shall be in writing and shall be deemed
given (a) upon personal delivery to the party to be notified; (b) when received when sent by email or facsimile
by the party to be notified, provided, however, that notice given by email or facsimile shall not be effective
unless either (i) a duplicate copy of such email or fax notice is promptly given by one of the other methods
described in this Section 8.6 or (ii) the receiving party delivers a written confirmation of receipt for such notice
either by email or fax or any other method described in this Section 8.6; or (c) when delivered by courier (with
confirmation of delivery); in each case to the party to be notified at the address, facsimile number, or email
address for such party set forth on the signature page hereto or such other address, facsimile number or
email address as such party shall specify by written notice so given, and such notice shall be deemed to have
been delivered as of the date so telecommunicated or personally delivered. Any party to this Agreement may
notify any other party of any changes to the address or any of the other details specified in this Section;
provided, however, that such notification shall only be effective on the date specified in such notice or five
business days after the notice is given, whichever is later. Rejection or other refusal to accept or the inability
to deliver because of changed address of which no notice was given shall be deemed to be receipt of the
notice as of the date of such rejection, refusal or inability to deliver.
Section 8.7 Assignment; Binding Effect. Neither this Agreement nor any of the rights, interests or obligations
hereunder shall be assigned or delegated by any of the parties hereto without the prior written consent of the
other parties; provided, however, that Parent may assign any of its rights hereunder to a wholly owned direct
or indirect Subsidiary of Parent without the prior written consent of Company or any other party hereto, but
no such assignment shall relieve Parent of any of its obligations hereunder. Subject to the first sentence of
this Section 8.7, this Agreement shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefit of the parties hereto and
their respective successors and assigns. Any purported assignment not permitted under this Section 8.7
shall be null and void.
Section 8.8 Severability. Any term or provision of this Agreement which is invalid or unenforceable in any
jurisdiction shall, as to that jurisdiction, be ineffective to the extent of such invalidity or unenforceability
without rendering invalid or unenforceable the remaining terms and provisions of this Agreement in any other
jurisdiction. If any provision of this Agreement is so broad as to be unenforceable, such provision shall be
interpreted to be only so broad as is enforceable.
Section 8.9 Entire Agreement. This Agreement together with the exhibits hereto, schedules hereto and the
Confidentiality Agreement constitute the entire agreement, and supersede all other prior agreements and
understandings, both written and oral, among the parties, or any of them, with respect to the subject matter
hereof and thereof, and this Agreement is not intended to grant standing to any person other than the parties
hereto.
Section 8.10 Amendments; Waivers. At any time prior to the Effective Time, any provision of this Agreement
may be amended or waived if, and only if, such amendment or waiver is in writing and signed, in the case of
an amendment, by each party hereto. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no failure or delay by any party hereto in
exercising any right hereunder shall operate as a waiver thereof nor shall any single or partial exercise
thereof preclude any other or further exercise of any other right hereunder.
A-50
Table of Contents
Section 8.11 Headings. Headings of the Articles and Sections of this Agreement are for convenience of the
parties only and shall be given no substantive or interpretive effect whatsoever. The table of contents to this
Agreement is for reference purposes only and shall not affect in any way the meaning or interpretation of this
Agreement.
Section 8.12 No Third-Party Beneficiaries. Each of Parent and Company agrees that (a) their respective
representations, warranties, covenants and agreements set forth herein are solely for the benefit of the other
party hereto, in accordance with and subject to the terms of this Agreement, and (b) after the Effective Time,
except for (i) the provisions of Section 5.10 and (ii) the right of Company's stockholders to receive the Merger
Consideration on the terms and conditions of this Agreement, this Agreement is not intended to, and does
not, confer upon any person other than the parties hereto any rights or remedies hereunder, including the
right to rely upon the representations and warranties set forth herein.
Section 8.13 Interpretation. When a reference is made in this Agreement to an Article or Section, such
reference shall be to an Article or Section of this Agreement unless otherwise indicated. Whenever the words
"include," "includes" or "including" are used in this Agreement, they shall be deemed to be followed by the
words "without limitation." The words "hereof," "herein" and "hereunder" and words of similar import when
used in this Agreement shall refer to this Agreement as a whole and not to any particular provision of this
Agreement, unless the context otherwise requires. All terms defined in this Agreement shall have the defined
meanings when used in any certificate or other document made or delivered pursuant thereto unless
otherwise defined therein. The definitions contained in this Agreement are applicable to the singular as well
as the plural forms of such terms and to the masculine as well as to the feminine and neuter genders of such
term. References in this Agreement to specific laws or to specific provisions of laws shall include all rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder, and any statute defined or referred to herein or in any agreement or
instrument referred to herein shall mean such statute as from time to time amended, modified or
supplemented, including by succession of comparable successor statutes. Each of the parties has
participated in the drafting and negotiation of this Agreement. If an ambiguity or question of intent or
interpretation arises, this Agreement must be construed as if it is drafted by all the parties, and no
presumption or burden of proof shall arise favoring or disfavoring any party by virtue of authorship of any of
the provisions of this Agreement.
Section 8.14 Definitions. All capitalized terms that appear in this Agreement and are not defined herein shall
have the respective meanings ascribed thereto in Appendix 1 hereto. References in this Agreement to
"Subsidiaries" of any party means any corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association, trust
or other form of legal entity of which (i) fifty percent (50%) or more of the voting power of the outstanding
voting securities are on the date hereof directly or indirectly owned by such party or (ii) such party or any
Subsidiary of such party is a general partner or managing member on the date hereof. References in this
Agreement (except as specifically otherwise defined) to "affiliates" means, as to any person, any other person
which, directly or indirectly, controls, or is controlled by, or is under common control with, such person. As
used in this definition, "control" (including, with its correlative meanings, "controlled by" and "under
common control with") means the possession, directly or indirectly, of the power to direct or cause the
direction of management or policies of a person, whether through the ownership of securities or partnership
or other ownership interests, by contract or otherwise. References in this Agreement (except as specifically
otherwise defined) to "person " means an individual, a corporation, a partnership, a limited liability company,
an association, a trust or any other entity, group (as such term is used in Section 13 of the Exchange Act) or
organization, including a Governmental Entity, and any permitted successors and assigns of such person. As
used in this Agreement, "knowledge" means (i) with respect to Parent, the actual knowledge of the individuals
listed in Section 8.14(a) of Parent Disclosure Schedule and (ii) with respect to Company, the actual knowledge
of the individuals listed on Section 8.14(a) of the Company Disclosure Schedule. As used in this Agreement,
"business day" means any day other than a Saturday, Sunday or other day on which the banks in New York
are authorized by Law to remain closed.
[Signatures begin on following page.]
A-51
Table of Contents
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be duly executed and delivered as
of the date first above written.
/s/ Stephen P. Funk
Stephen P. Funk
Chief Executive Officer
"Parent:"
 
STRATEX OIL & GAS HOLDINGS, INC, a Colorado
corporation
 
By
Name:
Title:
 
Address, Facsimile No., & Email for Notices:
 
30 Echo Lake Road
Watertown, CT 06795
Facsimile No.:
Email: sfunk@stratexoil.com
 
With a copy to:
 
Buchanan Ingersoll & Rooney
/s/ Stephen P. Funk
Stephen P. Funk
President
"Merger Sub:"
  
 
 RICHFIELD ACQUISITION CORP., a Nevada
corporation
  
 By
 Name:
 Title:
  
 Address, Facsimile No., & Email for Notices:
 
 30 Echo Lake Road
 Watertown, CT 06795
 Facsimile No.:
 Email: sfunk@stratexoil.com
  
 With a copy to:
  
 Buchanan Ingersoll & Rooney
1290 Avenue of the Americas
 Floor 30
 New York, NY 10104
 Attn: Matthew S. Cohen
 Facsimile No.: (212) 440-4401
1290 Avenue of the Americas
Floor 30
New York, NY 10104
Attn: Matthew S. Cohen
Facsimile No.: (212) 440-4401
[Signatures continued on following page.]
A-52
Table of Contents
Signature Page to Agreement and Plan of Merger
/s/ Douglas C. Hewitt, Sr.
"Company:"
  
 
  
RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY, a Nevada corporation  
 
  
  
By
  
Name: Douglas C. Hewitt, Sr.
  
Title:
 
  
Address, Facsimile No., & Email for Notices:
President & Chief Executive Officer
15 W. South Temple
Suite 1050
Salt Lake City, Utah 84101
Facsimile No.: (801) 519-6703
Signature Page to Agreement and Plan of Merger
A-53
Table of Contents
Appendix 1
Definitions
For purposes of the foregoing Agreement, the following terms shall have the following respective meanings
(such definitions to be equally applicable to both the singular and plural forms of the terms herein defined):
"Contract" means any contract, note, bond, mortgage, indenture, deed of trust, license, lease, agreement,
arrangement, commitment or other instrument or obligation, whether oral or written.
“Company Designees” means John McFadden, Joseph Tate, Thomas Grimm, Glenn MacNeil, or Wendell Lew,
two of which are to be selected by the Company pursuant to Section 5.14 of this Agreement.
"Derivative" means a derivative transaction within the coverage of Statement of Financial Accounting
Standard No. 133, including any swap transaction, option, hedge, warrant, forward purchase or sale
transaction, futures transaction, cap transaction, floor transaction or collar transaction relating to one or more
currencies, commodities, bonds, equity securities, loans, interest rates, credit-related events or conditions or
any indexes, or any other similar transaction (including any option with respect to any of these transactions)
or combination of any of these transactions, including collateralized mortgage obligations or other similar
instruments or any debt or equity instruments evidencing or embedding any such types of transactions, and
any related credit support, collateral, transportation or other similar arrangements related to such transaction.
"Environmental Law" means any Law relating to the protection, preservation or restoration of the
environment (including air, surface water, groundwater, drinking water supply, surface land, subsurface land,
plant and animal life or any other natural resource), or any exposure to or release of, or the management of
(including the use, storage, recycling, treatment, generation, transportation, processing, handling, labeling,
production or disposal of any Hazardous Materials), in each case as in effect as of the date of this Agreement.
"ERISA Affiliate" means, with respect to any entity, trade or business, any other entity, trade or business that
is, or was at the relevant time, a member of a group described in Section 414(b), (c), (m) or (o) of the Code or
Section 4001(b)(1) of ERISA that includes or included the first entity, trade or business, or that is, or was at the
relevant time, a member of the same "controlled group" as the first entity, trade or business pursuant to
Section 4001(a)(14) of ERISA.
"good and defensible title" means such title that is free from reasonable doubt to the end that a prudent
person engaged in the business of purchasing and owning, developing, and operating producing or non-
producing oil and gas properties in the geographical areas in which they are located, with knowledge of all of
the facts and their legal bearing, would be willing to accept the same acting reasonably.
“Governmental Entity” means any federal, state, foreign, provincial, local or other governmental, regulatory or
administrative agency, commission, department, board, governmental subdivision, court, tribunal, arbitrating
body or other authority.
"Hazardous Materials" means all substances defined as Hazardous Substances, Oils, Pollutants or
Contaminants in the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan, 40 C.F.R. § 300.5, or
defined as such by, or regulated as such under, any Environmental Law, including any regulated pollutant or
contaminant (including any constituent, raw material, product or by-product thereof), petroleum or natural gas
hydrocarbons or any liquid or fraction thereof, asbestos or asbestos-containing material, polychlorinated
biphenyls, lead paint, any hazardous, industrial or solid waste, and any toxic, radioactive, infectious or
hazardous substance, material or agent.
"Hydrocarbons" means crude oil, natural gas, condensate, drip gas and natural gas liquids (including
coalbed gas) and other liquids or gaseous hydrocarbons or other substances (including minerals) produced
or associated therewith.
A-54
Table of Contents
"IT Assets" means the computers, software, servers, routers, hubs, switches, circuits, networks, data
communications lines and all other information technology infrastructure and equipment of Parent and its
Subsidiaries that are required in connection with the operation of the business of Parent and its Subsidiaries.
"Material Adverse Effect" means an event, change, effect, development or occurrence that has had, or would
be reasonably likely to have, a material adverse effect on the business, financial condition or continuing
results of operations of a party or its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, other than any event, change, effect,
development or occurrence resulting from or arising out of: (1) changes in general economic, financial or
other capital market conditions (including prevailing interest rates), (2) any changes or developments
generally in the industries in which such party or any of its Subsidiaries conducts its business, (3) the
announcement or the existence of, compliance with or performance under, this Agreement or the
Transactions, including the impact thereof on the relationships, contractual or otherwise, of such party or any
of their respective Subsidiaries with employees, labor unions, customers, suppliers or partners, and including
any lawsuit, action or other proceeding with respect to any of the Transactions, (4) any taking of any action at
the request of the other party; (5) any changes or developments in prices for oil, natural gas or other
commodities or such party's raw material inputs and end products, (6) any adoption, implementation,
promulgation, repeal, modification, reinterpretation or proposal of any rule, regulation, ordinance, order,
protocol or any other Law of or by any national, regional, state or local Governmental Entity, or market
administrator, (7) any changes in GAAP or accounting standards or interpretations thereof, (8) earthquakes,
any weather-related or other force majeure event or natural disasters or outbreak or escalation of hostilities or
acts of war or terrorism, (9) any failure by such party to meet any financial projections or forecasts or
estimates of revenues, earnings or other financial metrics for any period (provided that the exception in this
clause (9) shall not prevent or otherwise affect a determination that any event, change, effect, development or
occurrence underlying such failure has resulted in, or contributed to, a Material Adverse Effect so long as it is
not otherwise excluded by this definition) or (10) any changes in the share price or trading volume of the such
party's stock or its credit ratings (provided that the exception in this clause (10) shall not prevent or otherwise
affect a determination that any event, change, effect, development or occurrence underlying such change has
resulted in, or contributed to, a Material Adverse Effect so long as it is not otherwise excluded by this
definition); except, in each case with respect to clauses (1), (2), (6), (7) and (8), to the extent disproportionately
affecting such party and its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, relative to other similarly situated companies in
the industries in which such and its Subsidiaries operate.
"Oil and Gas Contracts" means any of the following Contracts to which the applicable person or any of its
Subsidiaries is a party (other than, in each case, an Oil and Gas Lease): all farm-in and farm-out agreements,
areas of mutual interest agreements, joint venture agreements, development agreements, production sharing
agreements, operating agreements, unitization, pooling and communitization agreements, declarations and
orders, divisions orders, transfer orders, royalty deeds, oil and gas sales agreements, exchange agreements,
gathering and processing Contracts and agreements, drilling, service and supply Contracts, geophysical and
geological Contracts, land broker, title attorney and abstractor Contracts and all other Contracts relating to
Hydrocarbons or revenues therefrom and claims and rights thereto, and, in each case, interests thereunder.
"Oil and Gas Interests" means (A) direct and indirect interests in and rights with respect to Hydrocarbons and
related properties and assets of any kind and nature, direct or indirect, including working and leasehold
interests and operating rights and royalties, overriding royalties, production payments, net profit interests,
carried interests, and other non-working interests and non-operating interests; (B) Hydrocarbons or revenues
therefrom; (C) all Oil and Gas Leases and the leasehold estates created thereby and the lands covered by the
Oil and Gas Leases or included in units with which the Oil and Gas Leases may have been pooled or united;
(D) all Oil and Gas Contracts; (E) surface interests, fee interests, reversionary interests, reservations and
concessions; (F) all easements, surface use agreements, rights of way, licenses and permits, in each case, in
connection with Oil and Gas Leases, the drilling of Wells or the production, gathering, processing, storage,
disposition, transportation or sale of Hydrocarbons, (G) all rights and interests in, under or derived from
unitization and pooling agreements in effect with respect to clauses (A) and (C) above and the units created
thereby which accrue or are attributable to the interests of the holder thereof; (H) all interests in machinery
equipment (including Wells, well equipment and machinery), oil and gas production, gathering, transmission,
treating, processing and storage facilities (including tanks, tank batteries, pipelines, flow lines, gathering
Systems and metering equipment), pumps, water plants, electric plants, gasoline and gas platforms,
processing plants, separation plants, refineries, testing and monitoring equipment, in each case, in
connection with Oil and Gas Leases, the drilling of Wells or the production, gathering, processing, storage,
disposition, transportation or sale of Hydrocarbons, and (I) all other interests of any kind or character
associated with, appurtenant to, or necessary for the operation of any of the foregoing.
A-55
Table of Contents
"Oil and Gas Leases" means all leases, subleases, licenses or other occupancy or similar agreements under
which Parent or any of its Subsidiaries leases, subleases or licenses or otherwise acquires or obtains
operating rights in and to Hydrocarbons or any other real property which is material to the operation of
Parent’s business.
"Order" means any charge, order, writ, injunction, judgment, decree, ruling, determination, directive, award or
settlement, whether civil, criminal or administrative and whether formal or informal.
“Parent Loan” means the loan to be made by Parent to Company pursuant to the Parent Loan Agreement.
“Parent Loan Agreement” means that certain Note and Security Agreement of even date herewith between
Parent, Company and certain Subsidiaries of Company, pursuant to which Parent agreed to advance up to
$3,000,000 subject to the terms contained therein.
"Permitted Lien" means (A) any Lien for Taxes or governmental assessments, charges or claims of payment
not yet delinquent, being contested in good faith or for which adequate accruals or reserves (based on good
faith estimates of management) have been set aside for the payment thereof, (B) vendors’, mechanics’,
materialmens’, carriers’, workers’, landlords’, repairmen’s, warehousemen’s, construction and other similar
Liens arising or incurred in the ordinary course of business or with respect to liabilities that are not yet due
and payable or, if due, are not delinquent or are being contested in good faith or for which adequate accruals
or reserves (based on good faith estimates of management) have been set aside for the payment thereof,
(C) Liens imposed or promulgated by applicable Law or any Governmental Entity with respect to real
property, including zoning, building or similar restrictions, (D) pledges or deposits in connection with
workers’ compensation, unemployment insurance, and other social security legislation, (E) Liens relating to
intercompany borrowings among Company and its wholly owned Subsidiaries, or (F) Liens arising under or
pursuant to the organizational documents of Company or any of its Subsidiaries.
"Production Burden" means all royalty interests, overriding royalty interests, production payments, net profit
interests or other similar interests that constitute a burden on, and are measured by or are payable out of, the
production of Hydrocarbons or the proceeds realized from the sale or other disposition thereof (including any
amounts payable to publicly traded royalty trusts), other than Taxes and assessments of Governmental
Entities.
"Release" means any release, spill, emission, discharge, leaking, pumping, injection, deposit, disposal,
dispersal, leaching or migration into the indoor or outdoor environment (including ambient air, surface water,
groundwater and surface or subsurface strata) or into or out of any property, including the movement of
Hazardous Materials through or in the air, soil, surface water, groundwater or property.
“Specified Additional Shares” means (1) up to 3,000,000 shares of Company Common Stock that are issued
by the Company, if any, after the date of this Agreement and prior to the close of business on the day
immediately preceding the Effective Time pursuant to the exercise for cash of those warrants identified in
Appendix I of the Company’s Disclosure Schedule in accordance with the terms of those warrants as in effect
on the date hereof and (2) up to 2,000,000 shares of Company Common Stock that are issued by the
Company, if any, after the date of this Agreement and prior to the close of business on the day immediately
preceding the Effective Time pursuant to the conversion of the convertible note identified in Appendix I of the
Company’s Disclosure Schedule in accordance with the terms of that convertible note as in effect on the date
hereof.
"Superior Proposal" means a bona fide, unsolicited written Takeover Proposal (A) that if consummated would
result in a third party (or in the case of a merger in which Parent issues stock to such third party, the
stockholders of such third party) acquiring, directly or indirectly, 75% or more of the outstanding Company
Common Stock or more than 75% of the consolidated assets (based on the fair market value thereof) of
Company and its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, (B) that the Board of Directors of Company determines in
good faith, after consultation with its outside financial advisor and outside legal counsel, is reasonably
capable of being completed, taking into account all financial, legal, regulatory and other aspects of such
proposal, including all conditions contained therein and the person making such Takeover Proposal and
(C) that the Board of Directors of Company determines in good faith, after consultation with its outside
financial advisor and outside legal counsel (taking into account at the time of determination any changes to
this Agreement irrevocably offered by Parent in response to such Takeover Proposal, and all financial, legal,
regulatory and other aspects of such Takeover Proposal, including all conditions contained therein and the
person making such proposal, and this Agreement and any other factors deemed relevant by the Board of
Directors of Company), is more favorable to the stockholders of Company than the Merger.
A-56
Table of Contents
"Systems" means the refined petroleum product, crude oil, natural gas, liquefied natural gas, natural gas
liquid and other pipelines, lateral lines, pumps, pump stations, storage facilities, terminals, processing plants
and other related operations, assets, machinery and equipment that are owned by Company or any of its
Subsidiaries and used for the conduct of the business of Company or any of its Subsidiaries as presently
conducted.
"Takeover Proposal" means any bona fide proposal or offer made by a third party (other than any offer or
proposal by Parent or its affiliates) for or with respect to any acquisition, whether by a merger, consolidation,
tender offer, exchange offer, business combination, recapitalization, binding share exchange, joint venture or
other similar transaction, of (A) more than 25% or more of Company's consolidated assets (based on the fair
market value thereof), or (B) more than 25% of the outstanding Company Common Stock or securities of
Company representing more than 25% of the voting power of Company.
"Tax" or "Taxes" means any and all federal, state, local or foreign taxes, imposts, levies, duties, fees or other
assessments, including all net income, gross receipts, branch profits, capital, sales, use, ad valorem, value
added, transfer, registration, franchise, profits, inventory, capital stock, license, withholding, payroll,
employment, social security, unemployment, disability, excise, severance, stamp, occupation, premium,
windfall profits, environmental, real property, personal property, alternative, add-on minimum and estimated
taxes, customs duties, and other taxes of any kind whatsoever, including any and all interest, penalties,
additions to tax or additional amounts imposed by any Taxing Authority in connection with respect thereto,
whether disputed or not.
"Taxing Authority" means, with respect to any Tax, the Governmental Entity that imposes such Tax, and the
agency (if any) charged with the collection of such Tax for such Governmental Entity.
"Tax Return" means any return, report or similar filing (including any attached schedules, supplements and
additional or supporting material) filed or required to be filed with respect to Taxes, including any information
return, claim for refund, or declaration of estimated Taxes (and including any amendments with respect
thereto).
"Units" means all pooled, communitized or unitized acreage that includes all or a part of any Oil and Gas
Lease.
"Wells" means all oil and/or gas wells, whether producing, operating, shut-in or temporarily abandoned,
located on an Oil and Gas Leases or Unit or otherwise associated with an Oil and Gas Interest of the
applicable person or any of its Subsidiaries, together with all oil, gas and mineral production from such well.
"Willful Breach" means a material breach, or failure to perform, that is the consequence of an act or omission
of the Company or a Representative or a Subsidiary of Company with the knowledge that the taking of, or
failure to take, such act would, or would be reasonably expected to, cause a material breach of this
Agreement.
A-57
Table of Contents
AMENDMENT NO. 1 TO
AGREEMENT AND PLAN OF MERGER
This Amendment No. 1 to Agreement and Plan of Merger (this “Amendment”) is entered into as of July 17,
2014 by and among STRATEX OIL & GAS HOLDINGS, INC., a Colorado corporation (the “Parent”),
RICHFIELD ACQUISITION CORP., a Nevada corporation (“Merger Sub”), and RICHFIELD OIL & GAS
COMPANY, a Nevada corporation (the “Company”).
RECITAL
A.                  Parent, Merger Sub, and the Company entered into the Agreement and Plan of Merger dated as of
May 6, 2014 (the “Merger Agreement”), pursuant to which the parties agreed to effect a merger (the “Merger”)
of Merger Sub with and into the Company in accordance with the Merger Agreement and the Nevada Revised
Statutes, with the Company to be the surviving company.
B.                  The parties desire to amend the Merger Agreement to, among other things, (i) provide for
additional time to complete the Merger and (ii) modify some of the conditions to the obligation of the parties to
complete the merger.
C.                  The Board of Directors of Parent and Merger Sub have unanimously (i) determined that the Merger
Agreement, as amended pursuant to this Amendment, is advisable and in the best interests of Parent, Merger
Sub and Parent’s stockholders, and (ii) approved the execution, delivery, and performance of this
Amendment.
D.                  The Board of Directors of the Company has unanimously (i) determined that the Merger
Agreement, as amended pursuant to this Amendment, is advisable and in the best interests of Parent and its
stockholders, (ii) approved the execution, delivery, and performance of this Amendment, and (iii) resolved to
recommend adoption of the Merger Agreement, as amended by this Amendment, by the stockholders of the
Company.
AGREEMENT
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing and the covenants and agreements contained herein,
and intending to be legally bound, the parties hereto agree as follows:
1.             Defined Terms. All references to the “Merger Agreement” contained herein and in the Merger
Agreement shall be references to the Merger Agreement, as amended by this Amendment. Capitalized terms
used herein and not defined herein shall have the meanings given to those terms in the Merger Agreement.
2.             Amendments to Merger Agreement. The parties hereby amend the Merger Agreement as follows:
(a)               Recital C of the Merger Agreement shall be amended by adding the parenthetical “(the “Company
Recommendation”)” to the end thereof.
(b)               Section 6.3(e) of the Merger Agreement shall be revised to read in its entirety as follows:
“(e)       Parent shall have provided Company with evidence reasonably satisfactory to Company that Parent
has no less than $2,000,000 cash on hand.”
(c)               Section 6.2(g) of the Merger Agreement shall be revised to read in its entirety as follows:
“(g)          The Company shall have provided to Parent evidence satisfactory to Parent that the
Company’s liabilities (excluding the Parent Loan obligations, capital leases, deferred rent obligations
(currently less than $36,000), any accrued liability for employee severance compensation which has been
approved in writing by Parent (it being understood that Parent shall have no obligation to approve any such
compensation) and plugging & abandonment liabilities) immediately prior to the Closing do not exceed
$6,650,000; provided that such $6,650,000 limit may be increased by up to $500,000 in field-related payables
so long as there are corresponding field-related receivables and/or deposits.
A-58
Table of Contents
(d)              Section 6.3(k) of the Merger Agreement shall be revised to read in its entirety as follows:
“(k) The holders of not more than 10% of the outstanding shares of the Company Common Stock shall have
taken the steps required by the Appraisal Provisions of the NRS to obtain payment for the fair value of their
shares (“Dissenters’ Rights”).”
(e)                 Section 7.1(b) of the Merger Agreement shall be amended by replacing the date “September 30,
2014” with the date “December 1, 2014 “ and by replacing the date “November 30, 2014” with the date
“January 30, 2015”.
(f)                  The definition of “Parent Loan Agreement” in Appendix I to the Merger Agreement shall be
revised to read in its entirety as follows:
“Parent Loan Agreement” means that certain Note and Security Agreement dated May 6, 2014 between
Parent, Company and certain Subsidiaries of the Company, as amended on July 17, 2014 and as it may be
amended from time-to-time thereafter.”
3.Miscellaneous.
(a)                 Counterparts; Effectiveness. This Amendment may be executed in two or more counterparts,
each of which shall be an original, with the same effect as if the signatures thereto and hereto were upon the
same instrument, and shall become effective when one or more counterparts have been signed by each of
the parties and delivered (by telecopy, electronic delivery or otherwise) to the other parties. Signatures to this
Amendment transmitted by facsimile transmission, by electronic mail in "portable document format" (".pdf")
form, or by any other electronic means intended to preserve the original graphic and pictorial appearance of a
document, will have the same effect as physical delivery of the paper document bearing the original
signature.
(b)                 Governing Law. This Amendment, and all claims or causes of action (whether at law, in contract or
in tort or otherwise) that may be based upon, arise out of or relate to this Amendment or the negotiation,
execution or performance hereof, shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the Laws of the
State of Delaware, without giving effect to any choice or conflict of law provision or rule (whether of the State
of Delaware or any other jurisdiction) that would cause the application of the laws of any jurisdiction other
than the State of Delaware; provided that the Merger shall be governed by the laws of the State of Nevada.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Amendment to be duly executed and delivered
as of the date first above written.
"Parent:"
 
STRATEX OIL & GAS HOLDINGS, INC, a Colorado
corporation
 
By
Name:
Title:
/s/ Stephen P. Funk
Stephen P. Funk
Chief Executive Officer
A-59
Table of Contents
ANNEX B
"Merger Sub:"
Richfield Acquisition Corp., a Nevada corporation
President
/s/ Stephen P. Funk
By
 Name: Stephen P. Funk
 Title:
  
 “Company:"
  
 RICHFIELD OIL & GAS COMPANY, a Nevada
corporation
  
 By
/s/ Douglas C. Hewitt
 Name: Douglas C. Hewitt, Sr.
 Title:
President & Chief Executive Officer
RIGHTS OF DISSENTING OWNERS
NRS 92A.300  Definitions.  As used in NRS 92A.300 to 92A.500, inclusive, unless the context otherwise
requires, the words and terms defined in NRS 92A.305 to 92A.335, inclusive, have the meanings ascribed to
them in those sections.
NRS 92A.305  “Beneficial stockholder” defined.  “Beneficial stockholder” means a person who is a
beneficial owner of shares held in a voting trust or by a nominee as the stockholder of record.
NRS 92A.310  “Corporate action” defined.  “Corporate action” means the action of a domestic
corporation.
NRS 92A.315  “Dissenter” defined.  “Dissenter” means a stockholder who is entitled to dissent from a
domestic corporation’s action under NRS 92A.380 and who exercises that right when and in the manner
required by NRS 92A.400 to 92A.480, inclusive.
NRS 92A.320  “Fair value” defined.  “Fair value,” with respect to a dissenter’s shares, means the value
of the shares determined:
1.  Immediately before the effectuation of the corporate action to which the dissenter objects, excluding
any appreciation or depreciation in anticipation of the corporate action unless exclusion would be
inequitable;
2.  Using customary and current valuation concepts and techniques generally employed for similar
businesses in the context of the transaction requiring appraisal; and
3.  Without discounting for lack of marketability or minority status.
NRS 92A.325  “Stockholder” defined.  “Stockholder” means a stockholder of record or a beneficial
stockholder of a domestic corporation.
NRS 92A.330  “Stockholder of record” defined.  “Stockholder of record” means the person in whose
name shares are registered in the records of a domestic corporation or the beneficial owner of shares to the
extent of the rights granted by a nominee’s certificate on file with the domestic corporation.
NRS 92A.335  “Subject corporation” defined.  “Subject corporation” means the domestic corporation
which is the issuer of the shares held by a dissenter before the corporate action creating the dissenter’s
rights becomes effective or the surviving or acquiring entity of that issuer after the corporate action becomes
effective.
NRS 92A.340  Computation of interest.  Interest payable pursuant to NRS 92A.300 to 92A.500, inclusive,
must be computed from the effective date of the action until the date of payment, at the rate of interest most
recently established pursuant to NRS 99.040.
NRS 92A.350  Rights of dissenting partner of domestic limited partnership.  A partnership agreement of
a domestic limited partnership or, unless otherwise provided in the partnership agreement, an agreement of
merger or exchange, may provide that contractual rights with respect to the partnership interest of a
dissenting general or limited partner of a domestic limited partnership are available for any class or group of
partnership interests in connection with any merger or exchange in which the domestic limited partnership is
a constituent entity.
NRS 92A.360  Rights of dissenting member of domestic limited-liability company.  The articles of
organization or operating agreement of a domestic limited-liability company or, unless otherwise provided in
the articles of organization or operating agreement, an agreement of merger or exchange, may provide that
contractual rights with respect to the interest of a dissenting member are available in connection with any
merger or exchange in which the domestic limited-liability company is a constituent entity.
B-1
Table of Contents
NRS 92A.370  Rights of dissenting member of domestic nonprofit corporation.
1.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection 2, and unless otherwise provided in the articles or bylaws,
any member of any constituent domestic nonprofit corporation who voted against the merger may, without
prior notice, but within 30 days after the effective date of the merger, resign from membership and is thereby
excused from all contractual obligations to the constituent or surviving corporations which did not occur
before the member’s resignation and is thereby entitled to those rights, if any, which would have existed if
there had been no merger and the membership had been terminated or the member had been expelled.
2.  Unless otherwise provided in its articles of incorporation or bylaws, no member of a domestic
nonprofit corporation, including, but not limited to, a cooperative corporation, which supplies services
described in chapter 704 of NRS to its members only, and no person who is a member of a domestic nonprofit
corporation as a condition of or by reason of the ownership of an interest in real property, may resign and
dissent pursuant to subsection 1.
NRS 92A.380  Right of stockholder to dissent from certain corporate actions and to obtain payment for
shares.
1.  Except as otherwise provided in NRS 92A.370 and 92A.390 and subject to the limitation in paragraph
(f), any stockholder is entitled to dissent from, and obtain payment of the fair value of the stockholder’s
shares in the event of any of the following corporate actions:
(a) Consummation of a plan of merger to which the domestic corporation is a constituent entity:
(1) If approval by the stockholders is required for the merger by NRS 92A.120 to 92A.160, inclusive, or
the articles of incorporation, regardless of whether the stockholder is entitled to vote on the plan of merger; or
(2) If the domestic corporation is a subsidiary and is merged with its parent pursuant to NRS 92A.180.
(b) Consummation of a plan of conversion to which the domestic corporation is a constituent entity as the
corporation whose subject owner’s interests will be converted.
(c) Consummation of a plan of exchange to which the domestic corporation is a constituent entity as the
corporation whose subject owner’s interests will be acquired, if the stockholder’s shares are to be acquired in
the plan of exchange.
(d) Any corporate action taken pursuant to a vote of the stockholders to the extent that the articles of
incorporation, bylaws or a resolution of the board of directors provides that voting or nonvoting stockholders
are entitled to dissent and obtain payment for their shares.
(e) Accordance of full voting rights to control shares, as defined in NRS 78.3784, only to the extent
provided for pursuant to NRS 78.3793.
(f) Any corporate action not described in this subsection that will result in the stockholder receiving
money or scrip instead of a fraction of a share except where the stockholder would not be entitled to receive
such payment pursuant to NRS 78.205, 78.2055 or 78.207. A dissent pursuant to this paragraph applies only
to the fraction of a share, and the stockholder is entitled only to obtain payment of the fair value of the fraction
of a share.
2.  A stockholder who is entitled to dissent and obtain payment pursuant to NRS 92A.300 to 92A.500,
inclusive, may not challenge the corporate action creating the entitlement unless the action is unlawful or
fraudulent with respect to the stockholder or the domestic corporation.
3.  Subject to the limitations in this subsection, from and after the effective date of any corporate action
described in subsection 1, no stockholder who has exercised the right to dissent pursuant to NRS 92A.300 to
92A.500, inclusive, is entitled to vote his or her shares for any purpose or to receive payment of dividends or
any other distributions on shares. This subsection does not apply to dividends or other distributions payable
to stockholders on a date before the effective date of any corporate action from which the stockholder has
dissented. If a stockholder exercises the right to dissent with respect to a corporate action described in
paragraph (f) of subsection 1, the restrictions of this subsection apply only to the shares to be converted into
a fraction of a share and the dividends and distributions to those shares.
NRS 92A.390  Limitations on right of dissent: Stockholders of certain classes or series; action of
stockholders not required for plan of merger.
1.  There is no right of dissent with respect to a plan of merger, conversion or exchange in favor of
stockholders of any class or series which is:
(a) A covered security under section 18(b)(1)(A) or (B) of the Securities Act of 1933, 15 U.S.C. § 77r(b)(1)(A)
or (B), as amended;
(b) Traded in an organized market and has at least 2,000 stockholders and a market value of at least
$20,000,000, exclusive of the value of such shares held by the corporation’s subsidiaries, senior executives,
directors and beneficial stockholders owning more than 10 percent of such shares; or
(c) Issued by an open end management investment company registered with the Securities and Exchange
Commission under the Investment Company Act of 1940, 15 U.S.C. §§ 80a-1 et seq., as amended, and which
may be redeemed at the option of the holder at net asset value,  Ê unless the articles of incorporation of the
corporation issuing the class or series or the resolution of the board of directors approving the plan of
merger, conversion or exchange expressly provide otherwise.
B-2
Table of Contents
2.  The applicability of subsection 1 must be determined as of:
(a) The record date fixed to determine the stockholders entitled to receive notice of and to vote at the
meeting of stockholders to act upon the corporate action requiring dissenter’s rights; or
(b) The day before the effective date of such corporate action if there is no meeting of stockholders.
3.  Subsection 1 is not applicable and dissenter’s rights are available pursuant to NRS 92A.380 for the
holders of any class or series of shares who are required by the terms of the corporate action requiring
dissenter’s rights to accept for such shares anything other than cash or shares of any class or any series of
shares of any corporation, or any other proprietary interest of any other entity, that satisfies the standards set
forth in subsection 1 at the time the corporate action becomes effective.
4.  There is no right of dissent for any holders of stock of the surviving domestic corporation if the plan of
merger does not require action of the stockholders of the surviving domestic corporation under NRS
92A.130.
5.  There is no right of dissent for any holders of stock of the parent domestic corporation if the plan of
merger does not require action of the stockholders of the parent domestic corporation under NRS 92A.180.
NRS 92A.400  Limitations on right of dissent: Assertion as to portions only to shares registered to
stockholder; assertion by beneficial stockholder.
1.  A stockholder of record may assert dissenter’s rights as to fewer than all of the shares registered in
his or her name only if the stockholder of record dissents with respect to all shares of the class or series
beneficially owned by any one person and notifies the subject corporation in writing of the name and address
of each person on whose behalf the stockholder of record asserts dissenter’s rights. The rights of a partial
dissenter under this subsection are determined as if the shares as to which the partial dissenter dissents and
his or her other shares were registered in the names of different stockholders.
2.  A beneficial stockholder may assert dissenter’s rights as to shares held on his or her behalf only if the
beneficial stockholder:
(a) Submits to the subject corporation the written consent of the stockholder of record to the dissent not
later than the time the beneficial stockholder asserts dissenter’s rights; and
(b) Does so with respect to all shares of which he or she is the beneficial stockholder or over which he or
she has power to direct the vote.
NRS 92A.410  Notification of stockholders regarding right of dissent.
1.  If a proposed corporate action creating dissenter’s rights is submitted to a vote at a stockholders’
meeting, the notice of the meeting must state that stockholders are, are not or may be entitled to assert
dissenter’s rights under NRS 92A.300 to 92A.500, inclusive. If the domestic corporation concludes that
dissenter’s rights are or may be available, a copy of NRS 92A.300 to 92A.500, inclusive, must accompany the
meeting notice sent to those record stockholders entitled to exercise dissenter’s rights.
2.  If the corporate action creating dissenter’s rights is taken by written consent of the stockholders or
without a vote of the stockholders, the domestic corporation shall notify in writing all stockholders entitled to
assert dissenter’s rights that the action was taken and send them the dissenter’s notice described in NRS
92A.430.
NRS 92A.420  Prerequisites to demand for payment for shares.
1.  If a proposed corporate action creating dissenter’s rights is submitted to a vote at a stockholders’
meeting, a stockholder who wishes to assert dissenter’s rights with respect to any class or series of shares:
(a) Must deliver to the subject corporation, before the vote is taken, written notice of the stockholder’s
intent to demand payment for his or her shares if the proposed action is effectuated; and
(b) Must not vote, or cause or permit to be voted, any of his or her shares of such class or series in favor
of the proposed action.
2.  If a proposed corporate action creating dissenter’s rights is taken by written consent of the
stockholders, a stockholder who wishes to assert dissenter’s rights with respect to any class or series of
shares must not consent to or approve the proposed corporate action with respect to such class or series.
3.  A stockholder who does not satisfy the requirements of subsection 1 or 2 and NRS 92A.400 is not
entitled to payment for his or her shares under this chapter.
B-3
Table of Contents
NRS 92A.430  Dissenter’s notice: Delivery to stockholders entitled to assert rights; contents.
1.  The subject corporation shall deliver a written dissenter’s notice to all stockholders of record entitled
to assert dissenter’s rights in whole or in part, and any beneficial stockholder who has previously asserted
dissenter’s rights pursuant to NRS 92A.400.
2.  The dissenter’s notice must be sent no later than 10 days after the effective date of the corporate
action specified in NRS 92A.380, and must:
(a) State where the demand for payment must be sent and where and when certificates, if any, for shares
must be deposited;
(b) Inform the holders of shares not represented by certificates to what extent the transfer of the shares
will be restricted after the demand for payment is received;
(c) Supply a form for demanding payment that includes the date of the first announcement to the news
media or to the stockholders of the terms of the proposed action and requires that the person asserting
dissenter’s rights certify whether or not the person acquired beneficial ownership of the shares before that
date;
(d) Set a date by which the subject corporation must receive the demand for payment, which may not be
less than 30 nor more than 60 days after the date the notice is delivered and state that the stockholder shall
be deemed to have waived the right to demand payment with respect to the shares unless the form is
received by the subject corporation by such specified date; and
(e) Be accompanied by a copy of NRS 92A.300 to 92A.500, inclusive.
NRS 92A.440  Demand for payment and deposit of certificates; loss of rights of stockholder; withdrawal
from appraisal process.
1.  A stockholder who receives a dissenter’s notice pursuant to NRS 92A.430 and who wishes to exercise
dissenter’s rights must:
(a) Demand payment;
(b) Certify whether the stockholder or the beneficial owner on whose behalf he or she is dissenting, as the
case may be, acquired beneficial ownership of the shares before the date required to be set forth in the
dissenter’s notice for this certification; and
(c) Deposit the stockholder’s certificates, if any, in accordance with the terms of the notice.
2.  If a stockholder fails to make the certification required by paragraph (b) of subsection 1, the subject
corporation may elect to treat the stockholder’s shares as after-acquired shares under NRS 92A.470.
3.  Once a stockholder deposits that stockholder’s certificates or, in the case of uncertified shares makes
demand for payment, that stockholder loses all rights as a stockholder, unless the stockholder withdraws
pursuant to subsection 4.
4.  A stockholder who has complied with subsection 1 may nevertheless decline to exercise dissenter’s
rights and withdraw from the appraisal process by so notifying the subject corporation in writing by the date
set forth in the dissenter’s notice pursuant to NRS 92A.430. A stockholder who fails to so withdraw from the
appraisal process may not thereafter withdraw without the subject corporation’s written consent.
5.  The stockholder who does not demand payment or deposit his or her certificates where required, each
by the date set forth in the dissenter’s notice, is not entitled to payment for his or her shares under this
chapter.
NRS 92A.450  Uncertificated shares: Authority to restrict transfer after demand for payment.  The
subject corporation may restrict the transfer of shares not represented by a certificate from the date the
demand for their payment is received.
NRS 92A.460  Payment for shares: General requirements.
1.  Except as otherwise provided in NRS 92A.470, within 30 days after receipt of a demand for payment
pursuant to NRS 92A.440, the subject corporation shall pay in cash to each dissenter who complied with NRS
92A.440 the amount the subject corporation estimates to be the fair value of the dissenter’s shares, plus
accrued interest. The obligation of the subject corporation under this subsection may be enforced by the
district court:
(a) Of the county where the subject corporation’s principal office is located;
(b) If the subject corporation’s principal office is not located in this State, in the county in which the
corporation’s registered office is located; or
(c) At the election of any dissenter residing or having its principal or registered office in this State, of the
county where the dissenter resides or has its principal or registered office.
Ê The court shall dispose of the complaint promptly.
B-4
Table of Contents
2.  The payment must be accompanied by:
(a) The subject corporation’s balance sheet as of the end of a fiscal year ending not more than 16 months
before the date of payment, a statement of income for that year, a statement of changes in the stockholders’
equity for that year or, where such financial statements are not reasonably available, then such reasonably
equivalent financial information and the latest available quarterly financial statements, if any;
(b) A statement of the subject corporation’s estimate of the fair value of the shares; and
(c) A statement of the dissenter’s rights to demand payment under NRS 92A.480 and that if any such
stockholder does not do so within the period specified, such stockholder shall be deemed to have accepted
such payment in full satisfaction of the corporation’s obligations under this chapter.
NRS 92A.470  Withholding payment for shares acquired on or after date of dissenter’s notice: General
requirements.
1.  A subject corporation may elect to withhold payment from a dissenter unless the dissenter was the
beneficial owner of the shares before the date set forth in the dissenter’s notice as the first date of any
announcement to the news media or to the stockholders of the terms of the proposed action.
2.  To the extent the subject corporation elects to withhold payment, within 30 days after receipt of a
demand for payment pursuant to NRS 92A.440, the subject corporation shall notify the dissenters described
in subsection 1:
(a) Of the information required by paragraph (a) of subsection 2 of NRS 92A.460;
(b) Of the subject corporation’s estimate of fair value pursuant to paragraph (b) of subsection 2 of NRS
92A.460;
(c) That they may accept the subject corporation’s estimate of fair value, plus interest, in full satisfaction of
their demands or demand appraisal under NRS 92A.480;
(d) That those stockholders who wish to accept such an offer must so notify the subject corporation of
their acceptance of the offer within 30 days after receipt of such offer; and
(e) That those stockholders who do not satisfy the requirements for demanding appraisal under NRS
92A.480 shall be deemed to have accepted the subject corporation’s offer.
3.  Within 10 days after receiving the stockholder’s acceptance pursuant to subsection 2, the subject
corporation shall pay in cash the amount offered under paragraph (b) of subsection 2 to each stockholder
who agreed to accept the subject corporation’s offer in full satisfaction of the stockholder’s demand.
4.  Within 40 days after sending the notice described in subsection 2, the subject corporation shall pay in
cash the amount offered under paragraph (b) of subsection 2 to each stockholder described in paragraph (e)
of subsection 2.
NRS 92A.480  Dissenter’s estimate of fair value: Notification of subject corporation; demand for payment
of estimate.
1.  A dissenter paid pursuant to NRS 92A.460 who is dissatisfied with the amount of the payment may
notify the subject corporation in writing of the dissenter’s own estimate of the fair value of his or her shares
and the amount of interest due, and demand payment of such estimate, less any payment pursuant to NRS
92A.460. A dissenter offered payment pursuant to NRS 92A.470 who is dissatisfied with the offer may reject
the offer pursuant to NRS 92A.470 and demand payment of the fair value of his or her shares and interest
due.
2.  A dissenter waives the right to demand payment pursuant to this section unless the dissenter notifies
the subject corporation of his or her demand to be paid the dissenter’s stated estimate of fair value plus
interest under subsection 1 in writing within 30 days after receiving the subject corporation’s payment or offer
of payment under NRS 92A.460 or 92A.470 and is entitled only to the payment made or offered.
NRS 92A.490  Legal proceeding to determine fair value: Duties of subject corporation; powers of court;
rights of dissenter.
1.  If a demand for payment pursuant to NRS 92A.480 remains unsettled, the subject corporation shall
commence a proceeding within 60 days after receiving the demand and petition the court to determine the fair
value of the shares and accrued interest. If the subject corporation does not commence the proceeding within
the 60-day period, it shall pay each dissenter whose demand remains unsettled the amount demanded by
each dissenter pursuant to NRS 92A.480 plus interest.
2.  A subject corporation shall commence the proceeding in the district court of the county where its
principal office is located in this State. If the principal office of the subject corporation is not located in this
State, the right to dissent arose from a merger, conversion or exchange and the principal office of the
surviving entity, resulting entity or the entity whose shares were acquired, whichever is applicable, is located
in this State, it shall commence the proceeding in the county where the principal office of the surviving entity,
resulting entity or the entity whose shares were acquired is located. In all other cases, if the principal office of
the subject corporation is not located in this State, the subject corporation shall commence the proceeding in
the district court in the county in which the corporation’s registered office is located.
B-5
Table of Contents
3.  The subject corporation shall make all dissenters, whether or not residents of Nevada, whose
demands remain unsettled, parties to the proceeding as in an action against their shares. All parties must be
served with a copy of the petition. Nonresidents may be served by registered or certified mail or by
publication as provided by law.
4.  The jurisdiction of the court in which the proceeding is commenced under subsection 2 is plenary and
exclusive. The court may appoint one or more persons as appraisers to receive evidence and recommend a
decision on the question of fair value. The appraisers have the powers described in the order appointing
them, or any amendment thereto. The dissenters are entitled to the same discovery rights as parties in other
civil proceedings.
5.  Each dissenter who is made a party to the proceeding is entitled to a judgment:
(a) For the amount, if any, by which the court finds the fair value of the dissenter’s shares, plus interest,
exceeds the amount paid by the subject corporation; or
(b) For the fair value, plus accrued interest, of the dissenter’s after-acquired shares for which the subject
corporation elected to withhold payment pursuant to NRS 92A.470.
NRS 92A.500  Assessment of costs and fees in certain legal proceedings.
1.  The court in a proceeding to determine fair value shall determine all of the costs of the proceeding,
including the reasonable compensation and expenses of any appraisers appointed by the court. The court
shall assess the costs against the subject corporation, except that the court may assess costs against all or
some of the dissenters, in amounts the court finds equitable, to the extent the court finds the dissenters acted
arbitrarily, vexatiously or not in good faith in demanding payment.
2.  The court may also assess the fees and expenses of the counsel and experts for the respective
parties, in amounts the court finds equitable:
(a) Against the subject corporation and in favor of all dissenters if the court finds the subject corporation
did not substantially comply with the requirements of NRS 92A.300 to 92A.500, inclusive; or
(b) Against either the subject corporation or a dissenter in favor of any other party, if the court finds that
the party against whom the fees and expenses are assessed acted arbitrarily, vexatiously or not in good faith
with respect to the rights provided by NRS 92A.300 to 92A.500, inclusive.
3.  If the court finds that the services of counsel for any dissenter were of substantial benefit to other
dissenters similarly situated, and that the fees for those services should not be assessed against the subject
corporation, the court may award to those counsel reasonable fees to be paid out of the amounts awarded to
the dissenters who were benefited.
4.  In a proceeding commenced pursuant to NRS 92A.460, the court may assess the costs against the
subject corporation, except that the court may assess costs against all or some of the dissenters who are
parties to the proceeding, in amounts the court finds equitable, to the extent the court finds that such parties
did not act in good faith in instituting the proceeding.
5.  To the extent the subject corporation fails to make a required payment pursuant to NRS 92A.460,
92A.470 or 92A.480, the dissenter may bring a cause of action directly for the amount owed and, to the extent
the dissenter prevails, is entitled to recover all expenses of the suit.
6.  This section does not preclude any party in a proceeding commenced pursuant to NRS 92A.460 or
92A.490 from applying the provisions of N.R.C.P. 68 or NRS 17.115.
B-6
Table of Contents
ANNEX C
VOTING AGREEMENT
THIS VOTING AGREEMENT  is entered into as of  May 6, 2014, by and between Stratex Oil & Gas
Holdings, Inc., a Colorado corporation ("Parent"), Richfield Acquisition Corp., a Nevada corporation and
wholly-owned subsidiary of Parent ("Merger Sub"), and each of the undersigned stockholders (each a
"Stockholder" and collectively, the "Stockholders") of  Richfield Oil & Gas Company, a Nevada corporation
(the "Company").
RECITALS
A. Parent, Merger Sub and the Company are entering into an Agreement and Plan of Merger of even date
herewith (the "Merger Agreement") which provides (subject to the conditions set forth therein) among other
things, for the merger (the "Merger") of Merger Sub with and into the Company pursuant to the terms and
conditions of the Merger Agreement. Capitalized terms not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings
given to them in the Merger Agreement. Certain capitalized terms are defined in Section 5 herein.
B. In order to induce Parent and Merger Sub to enter into the Merger Agreement, each Stockholder, solely
in his, her, or its individual capacity as a Stockholder of the Company, is entering into this Voting Agreement
with respect to the shares of Common Stock, par value $0.001 per share, of the Company (“Company
Common Stock”) beneficially owned by such Stockholder and set forth below such Stockholder’s name on
the signature page to this Voting Agreement (the “Original Shares” and together with any additional shares of
Company Common Stock that such Stockholder purchases, acquires the right to vote or otherwise acquires
beneficial ownership (as defined in Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act) of after the execution of this
Agreement, the “Shares”).
AGREEMENT
The parties to this Voting Agreement, intending to be legally bound, agree as follows:
SECTION 1. VOTING OF SHARES
1.1.      Voting.    Each Stockholder hereby agrees to appear, or cause any transferee of such Stockholder
who is a holder of record of any Shares on any applicable record date (the "Record Holder") to appear, in
person or by proxy, for the purpose of obtaining a quorum at any annual or special meeting of stockholders
of the Company and at any adjournment thereof for the purpose of voting on the Merger Agreement and the
transactions contemplated thereby (a "Meeting"). Each Stockholder agrees that, during the period from the
date of this Voting Agreement through the Expiration Date, at any Meeting, however called, and in any action
by written consent of the stockholders of the Company, each Stockholder shall vote the Shares or cause the
Shares to be voted (to the extent such securities are entitled to be voted) in such Stockholder's capacity as a
stockholder:
(a)  in favor of the Merger and the approval and adoption of the Merger Agreement and the transactions
contemplated thereby (including any amendments or modifications of the terms thereof approved by the
Board of Directors of the Company and by Parent) in connection with any meeting of, or solicitation of
consents from, the stockholders of the Company at which or in connection with which the Merger or the
Merger Agreement are submitted for the consideration and vote of the stockholders of the Company;
(b)  against any action, proposal, transaction, or agreement that could reasonably be expected to result in a
breach of any representation, warranty, covenant or obligation of the Company in the Merger Agreement or
Stockholder under this Voting Agreement;
(c)  against any action, proposal, transaction, or agreement which could reasonably be expected to impede,
interfere with, delay, discourage, adversely affect or inhibit the timely consummation of the Merger or the
fulfillment of Parent’s, the Company’s or Merger Sub’s conditions under the Merger Agreement or change in
any manner the voting rights of any class of shares of the Company;
C-1
Table of Contents
(d) against approval or adoption of any extraordinary corporate transaction (other than the Merger, the Merger
Agreement or the transactions contemplated thereby) including, without limitation, any transaction involving
(i) the sale or transfer of all or substantially all of the capital stock of the Company, whether by merger,
consolidation or other business combination, (ii) a sale or transfer of all or substantially all of the assets of the
Company or its subsidiaries, (iii) a reorganization, recapitalization or liquidation of the Company or its
subsidiaries, or (iv) any amendment to the Company's governing instruments creating any new class of
securities of the Company or otherwise affecting the rights of any class of security as currently in effect; and
(e)  against the following actions (other than the Merger and the transactions contemplated by the Merger
Agreement): (i) any Takeover Proposal or (ii) any change in a majority of the members of the board of
directors of the Company.
1.2       Irrevocable Proxy.   Each Stockholder hereby appoints Parent and any designee of Parent, and
each of them individually, such Stockholder’s proxies and attorneys-in-fact, with full power of substitution
and resubstitution, to vote or act by written consent during the term of this Agreement with respect to the
Shares in accordance with Section 1.1. This proxy and power of attorney is given to secure the performance
of the duties of Stockholder under this Agreement. Stockholder shall take such further action or execute
such other instruments as may be necessary to effectuate the intent of this proxy. This proxy and power of
attorney granted by such Stockholder shall be irrevocable during the term of this Agreement, shall be
deemed to be coupled with an interest sufficient in law to support an irrevocable proxy and shall revoke any
and all prior proxies granted by Stockholder with respect to the Shares. The power of attorney granted by
Stockholder herein is a durable power of attorney and shall survive the dissolution, bankruptcy, death or
incapacity of Stockholder. The proxy and power of attorney granted hereunder shall terminate upon the
termination of this Agreement.
SECTION 2. PROHIBITED TRANSFERS
2.1.      Transfer and Encumbrance.  Each Stockholder agrees that during the term of this Agreement,
such Stockholder will not, directly or indirectly, Transfer  any of the Shares or enter into any contract, option
or other agreement with respect to, or consent to, a Transfer of, any of the Shares or Stockholder's voting or
economic interest therein. Any attempted Transfer of Shares or any interest therein and any such contract,
option or other agreement of in violation of this Section 2.1 shall be null and void.
2.2.      Transfer of Voting Rights.    Each Stockholder agrees that, during the term of this Voting
Agreement, such Stockholder shall ensure that: (a) none of the Shares are deposited into a voting trust; and
(b) no proxy is granted (other than as set forth in Section 1.2), and no voting agreement or similar agreement
is entered into, with respect to any of the Shares.
2.3.      Stop-Transfer Instructions.    Each Stockholder agrees and consents to the entry of stop-transfer
instructions by the Company against the transfer of any Shares consistent with the terms of Section 2.1.
SECTION 3. REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF STOCKHOLDERS
Each Stockholder hereby, severally and not jointly, represents and warrants to Parent as follows:
3.1.      Authorization, Etc.    Such Stockholder has the legal capacity and absolute and unrestricted right,
power, authority and capacity to execute and deliver this Voting Agreement and to perform such
Stockholder’s obligations hereunder. This Voting Agreement has been duly executed and delivered by such
Stockholder and constitutes a legal, valid and binding obligation of such Stockholder, enforceable against
such Stockholder in accordance with its terms.
C-2
Table of Contents
3.2.      No Conflicts or Consents.
(a)  The execution and delivery of this Voting Agreement by such Stockholder do not, and the
performance by such Stockholder of such Stockholder’s obligations under this Voting Agreement by such
Stockholder will not: (i) conflict with or violate any law, rule, regulation, order, decree or judgment applicable
to such Stockholder or by which such Stockholder or any of such Stockholder’s properties is or may be
bound or affected; or (ii) result in or constitute (with or without notice or lapse of time) any breach of or default
under, or give to any other Person (with or without notice or lapse of time) any right of termination,
amendment, acceleration or cancellation of, or result (with or without notice or lapse of time) in the creation of
any Lien or restriction on any of the Shares pursuant to, any contract to which such Stockholder is a party or
by which such Stockholder or any of such Stockholder’s affiliates or properties is or may be bound or
affected.
(b)  The execution and delivery of this Voting Agreement by such Stockholder do not, and the
performance of this Voting Agreement by such Stockholder will not, require any consent or approval of any
Person. No consent of such Stockholder’s spouse, if any, is necessary under “community property” or other
laws in order for such Stockholder to enter into and perform its obligations under this Voting Agreement.
3.3.     Title To Securities.    As of the date of this Voting Agreement: (a) such Stockholder holds of record
free and clear of any Liens or restrictions the number of outstanding shares of Company Common Stock
reflected on such Stockholder’s signature page for this Voting Agreement as being Owned by such
Stockholder under the heading "Shares Held of Record"; (b) such Stockholder holds (free and clear of any
Encumbrances or restrictions the options, warrants and other rights to acquire shares of Company Common
Stock reflected on such Stockholder’s signature page for this Voting Agreement as being Owned by such
Stockholder under the heading "Options, Warrants and Other Rights"; (c) such Stockholder Owns the
additional securities of the Company reflected on such Stockholder’s signature for this Voting Agreement  as
being Owned by such Stockholder under the heading "Additional Securities Beneficially Owned"; and
(d) such Stockholder does not directly or indirectly Own any shares of Company Common Stock or other
securities of the Company, or any option, warrant or other right to acquire (by purchase, conversion or
otherwise) any shares of Company Common Stock or other securities of the Company, other than the shares
and options, warrants and other rights reflected on such Stockholder’s signature page for this Voting
Agreement as being Owned by such Stockholder.  Except for this Voting Agreement, there are no options,
warrants or other rights, agreements, arrangements or commitments of any character to which such
Stockholder is a party relating to the pledge, disposition, or voting of any of the Shares.
SECTION 4. MISCELLANEOUS
4.1.      Term. The term of this Agreement shall commence on the date hereof and end on the Expiration
Date.
4.2.      Survival of Representations, Warranties and Agreements. All representations, warranties,
covenants and agreements made by the Stockholders in this Voting Agreement shall survive until the
Expiration Date.
4.3.      Expenses. All costs and expenses incurred in connection with the transactions contemplated by
this Voting Agreement shall be paid solely by the party incurring such costs and expenses.
4.4.      Notices. Any notice or other communication required or permitted to be delivered to any party
under this Voting Agreement shall be in writing and shall be deemed properly delivered, given and received
when actually delivered (by hand, by registered mail, by courier or express delivery service or by facsimile) to
the address or facsimile number set forth beneath the name of such party below (or to such other address or
facsimile telephone number as such party shall have specified in a written notice given to the other parties
hereto); provided, however, that a written notice delivered via facsimile shall be deemed delivered only if at the
time of, or shortly after, such facsimile transmission the party giving the notice confirms by telephone the
actual receipt by the other party of such facsimile transmission:
IF TO PARENT:
STRATEX OIL & GAS HOLDINGS, INC.
30 Echo Lake Road,
Watertown, CT   06795
Attention: Stephen Funk
WITH A COPY TO (WHICH COPY SHALL NOT CONSTITUTE NOTICE):
Buchanan Ingersoll & Rooney PC
1290 Avenue of the Americas, 30th Floor
New York, New York 10104
Telephone: 212.440.4478
Fax:  212.440.4401
matt.cohen@bipc.com
IF TO ANY STOCKHOLDER:
at the address set forth below such Stockholder's signature on the signature page hereof
C-3
Table of Contents
4.5.      Waiver of Appraisal Rights.    Each Stockholder hereby irrevocably and unconditionally waives,
and agrees to cause to be waived and to prevent the exercise of, any rights of appraisal, any dissenters'
rights (including under Section 92A.380 of the Nevada Revised Statutes) and any similar rights relating to the
Merger or any related transaction that such Stockholder or any other Person may have by virtue of the
ownership of any Shares
4.6.      No Solicitation.    Each Stockholder, solely in his capacity as a stockholder, agrees that, during the
period from the date of this Voting Agreement through the Expiration Date, such Stockholder shall not,
directly or indirectly: (i) solicit, initiate, encourage, induce or facilitate the making, submission or
announcement of any Takeover Proposal (as defined in the Merger Agreement) or take any action that could
reasonably be expected to lead to a Takeover Proposal; (ii) except in the circumstances specified in
Section 5.4(b) of the Merger Agreement, furnish any information regarding the Company or any direct or
indirect subsidiary of the Company to any Person in connection with or in response to a Takeover Proposal;
or (iii) except in the circumstances specified in Section 5.4(b) of the Merger Agreement, engage in
discussions or negotiations with any Person with respect to any Takeover Proposal. Each Stockholder shall
immediately cease and discontinue any existing discussions with any Person that relate to any Takeover
Proposal.
4.7.      Severability.    If any provision of this Voting Agreement or any part of any such provision is held
under any circumstances to be invalid or unenforceable in any jurisdiction, then (a) such provision or part
thereof shall, with respect to such circumstances and in such jurisdiction, be deemed amended to conform to
applicable laws so as to be valid and enforceable to the fullest possible extent, (b) the invalidity or
unenforceability of such provision or part thereof under such circumstances and in such jurisdiction shall
not affect the validity or enforceability of such provision or part thereof under any other circumstances or in
any other jurisdiction, and (c) the invalidity or unenforceability of such provision or part thereof shall not
affect the validity or enforceability of the remainder of such provision or the validity or enforceability of any
other provision of this Voting Agreement. Each provision of this Voting Agreement is separable from every
other provision of this Voting Agreement, and each part of each provision of this Voting Agreement is
separable from every other part of such provision.
4.8.      Entire Agreement.    This Voting Agreement and any other documents delivered by the parties in
connection herewith constitute the entire agreement between the parties with respect to the subject matter
hereof and thereof and supersede all prior agreements and understandings between the parties with respect
thereto. No addition to or modification of any provision of this Voting Agreement shall be binding upon either
party unless made in writing and signed by both parties.
4.9.      Assignment; Binding Effect.    Except as provided herein, neither this Voting Agreement nor any of
the interests or obligations hereunder may be assigned or delegated by any Stockholder or Parent without
the prior written consent of the non-assigning parties, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, and
any attempted or purported assignment or delegation of any of such interests or obligations shall be void.
Subject to the preceding sentence, this Voting Agreement shall be binding upon, and inure to the benefit of,
the Stockholders and their respective heirs, estate, executors, personal representatives, successors and
assigns (as the case may be), and shall be binding upon, and inure to the benefit of, Parent and its
successors and assigns. Without limiting any of the restrictions set forth in Section 2 or elsewhere in this
Voting Agreement, this Voting Agreement shall be binding upon any Person to whom any Shares are
Transferred. Nothing in this Voting Agreement is intended to confer on any Person (other than Parent and its
successors and assigns) any rights or remedies of any nature. Each Stockholder specifically agrees that the
obligation of such Stockholder hereunder shall not be terminated by operation of law, whether by death or
incapacity of such Stockholder or otherwise.
C-4
Table of Contents
4.10.     Specific Performance.    The parties agree that irreparable damage would occur in the event that
any provision of this Voting Agreement was, or is, not performed in accordance with its specific terms or was,
or is, otherwise breached. Each Stockholder agrees that, in the event of any breach or threatened breach by
such Stockholder of any covenant or obligation contained in this Voting Agreement, Parent and Merger Sub
shall be entitled (in addition to any other remedy that may be available to it, including monetary damages) to
(a) a decree or order of specific performance to enforce the observance and performance of such covenant or
obligation, and (b) an injunction restraining such breach or threatened breach. Each Stockholder further
agrees that neither Parent nor any other Person shall be required to obtain, furnish or post any bond or
similar instrument in connection with or as a condition to obtaining any remedy referred to in this Section 4.9,
and each Stockholder irrevocably waives any objection to the imposition of such relief or any right he may
have to require the obtaining, furnishing or posting of any such bond or similar instrument.
4.11.     Non-Exclusivity.    The rights and remedies of Parent under this Voting Agreement are not
exclusive of or limited by any other rights or remedies which it may have, whether at law, in equity, by contract
or otherwise, all of which shall be cumulative (and not alternative). Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, the rights and remedies of Parent under this Voting Agreement, and the obligations and liabilities
of Stockholder under this Voting Agreement, are in addition to their respective rights, remedies, obligations
and liabilities under common law requirements and under all applicable statutes, rules and regulations.
Nothing in this Voting Agreement shall limit any of Stockholder's obligations, or the rights or remedies of
Parent, under any agreement between Parent and Stockholder; and nothing in any such agreement shall limit
any of Stockholder's obligations, or any of the rights or remedies of Parent, under this Voting Agreement.
4.12.    Governing Law; Venue.
(a)  This Voting Agreement shall be construed in accordance with, and governed in all respects by, the laws of
the State of Nevada (without giving effect to principles of conflicts of laws).
(b)  Any legal action or other legal proceeding relating to this Voting Agreement or the enforcement of any
provision of this Voting Agreement may be brought or otherwise commenced in any state or federal court
located in the State of Nevada. Stockholder and Parent each:
(i)  expressly and irrevocably consents and submits to the exclusive jurisdiction and venue of any state court
of competent jurisdiction located in the State of Nevada or any United States District Court located in the
State of Nevada and the applicable courts of appeals therefrom, in connection with any such legal
proceeding;
(ii)  agree that if any action is commenced in a state court, then subject to applicable law, no party shall object
to the removal of such action to any federal court located in the State of Nevada;
(iii)  agrees that service of any process, summons, notice or document by U.S. mail addressed to him at the
address set forth in Section 4.4 shall constitute effective service of such process, summons, notice or
document for purposes of any such legal proceeding;
(iv)  agrees that each state and federal court located in the State of Nevada, shall be deemed to be a
convenient forum; and
(v)  agrees not to assert (by way of motion, as a defense or otherwise), in any such legal proceeding
commenced in any state or federal court located in the State of Nevada, any claim by either Stockholder or
Parent that it is not subject personally to the jurisdiction of such court, that such legal proceeding has been
brought in an inconvenient forum, that the venue of such proceeding is improper or that this Voting
Agreement or the subject matter of this Voting Agreement may not be enforced in or by such court.
Nothing contained in this Section 4.12 shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect the right of either party to
commence any legal proceeding or otherwise proceed against the other party in any other forum or
jurisdiction.
C-5
Table of Contents
(c)  EACH PARTY IRREVOCABLY WAIVES THE RIGHT TO A JURY TRIAL IN CONNECTION WITH ANY
LEGAL PROCEEDING RELATING TO THIS VOTING AGREEMENT OR THE ENFORCEMENT OF ANY
PROVISION OF THIS VOTING AGREEMENT.
4.13.    Counterparts.    This Voting Agreement may be executed by the parties in separate counterparts, each
of which when so executed and delivered shall be an original, but all such counterparts shall together
constitute one and the same instrument.
4.14     Captions.    The captions contained in this Voting Agreement are for convenience of reference only,
shall not be deemed to be a part of this Voting Agreement and shall not be referred to in connection with the
construction or interpretation of this Voting Agreement.
4.15     Waiver.    No failure on the part of Parent to exercise any power, right, privilege or remedy under this
Voting Agreement, and no delay on the part of Parent in exercising any power, right, privilege or remedy
under this Voting Agreement, shall operate as a waiver of such power, right, privilege or remedy; and no
single or partial exercise of any such power, right, privilege or remedy shall preclude any other or further
exercise thereof or of any other power, right, privilege or remedy. Parent shall not be deemed to have waived
any claim available to Parent arising out of this Voting Agreement, right, privilege or remedy of Parent under
this Voting Agreement, unless the waiver of such claim, power, right, privilege or remedy is expressly set forth
in a written instrument duly executed and delivered on behalf of Parent; and any such waiver shall not be
applicable or have any effect except in the specific instance in which it is given.
4.16     Construction.
(a)  For purposes of this Voting Agreement, whenever the context requires: the singular number shall include
the plural, and vice versa; the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders; the feminine
gender shall include the masculine and neuter genders; and the neuter gender shall include masculine and
feminine genders.
(b)  The parties agree that any rule of construction to the effect that ambiguities are to be resolved against the
drafting party shall not be applied in the construction or interpretation of this Voting Agreement.
(c)  As used in this Voting Agreement, the words "include" and "including," and variations thereof, shall not
be deemed to be terms of limitation, but rather shall be deemed to be followed by the words "without
limitation."
(d)  Except as otherwise indicated, all references in this Voting Agreement to "Schedules," "Sections" and
"Exhibits" are intended to refer to Schedules of this Voting Agreement, Sections of this Voting Agreement
and Exhibits to this Voting Agreement.
4.17     Stockholder Capacity.    No person executing this Voting Agreement who is a director or officer of the
Company makes any agreement or understanding herein in his capacity as such director or officer. Without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, each Stockholder executes this Voting Agreement solely in such
Stockholder’s capacity as Owner of Shares and nothing contained in this Agreement shall create any
obligation of any Stockholder who is a party hereto to act or refrain from acting as a director or officer in any
manner inconsistent with such Stockholder's fiduciary duties as a director or officer of the Company.
4.18     Amendment.    This Agreement shall not be amended, altered or modified except by an instrument in
writing duly executed and delivered on behalf of each of the parties hereto.
C-6
Table of Contents
SECTION 5. CERTAIN DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this Voting Agreement:
(a)  "Company Common Stock" shall mean the common stock, par value $0.001 per share, of the Company.
(b)  "Expiration Date" shall mean the earliest to occur of (i) the date upon which the Merger Agreement is
terminated in accordance with its terms or (ii) the Effective Time.
(c)  Each Stockholder shall be deemed to "Own" or to have acquired "Ownership" of a security if such
Stockholder is the: (i) record owner of such security; or (ii) "beneficial owner" (within the meaning of
Rule 13d-3 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) of such security; provided, however, that each
Stockholder shall not be deemed to Own a security solely because of such Stockholder's status as an
executive officer, director, partner or member of a Person that owns such security.
(d)  "Person" shall mean any (i) individual, (ii) corporation, limited liability company, partnership or other
entity, or (iii) governmental body.
A Person shall be deemed to have effected a "Transfer" of a security if such Person directly or indirectly:
(i) sells, assigns, pledges, mortgages, encumbers, grants an option with respect to, transfers or disposes of
such security or any interest in such security; (ii) enters into an agreement or commitment contemplating the
possible sale of, assignment of, pledge of, mortgage of, encumbrance of, grant of an option with respect to,
transfer of or disposition of such security or any interest therein; or (iii) reduces such Person's beneficial
ownership interest in or risk relating to any such security.
[SIGNATURE PAGE TO FOLLOW]
C-7
Table of Contents
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, Parent, Merger Sub and each Stockholder have caused this Voting Agreement to be
executed as of the date first written above.
PARENT:
  
 STRATEX OIL & GAS HOLDINGS, INC.
  
 By:
Name: Stephen Funk
  
 Title:
Chief Executive Officer
MERGER SUB:
  
 Richfield Acquisition Corp.
  
 By:
  
 Name: Stephen Funk
  
 Title:
President
Stockholder Signature:                               
Stockholder Name:
                               
                               
Address:
Shares Held of Record:
                               
Warrants Held of Record:
C-8
Table of Contents
PART II – INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN THE PROSPECTUS
Item 20. Indemnification of Directors and Officers.
The Colorado Revised Statutes authorize a Colorado corporation to indemnify directors and officers. Also,
Stratex’s bylaws provide that the company must indemnify its directors and officers, former directors or
officers, or any person that served at its request as a director or officer of another corporation in which
Stratex owns shares or of which it is a creditor and the personal representatives of all such persons, against
expenses actually and necessarily incurred in connection with the defense of any action, suit, or proceeding
in which they, or any of them, were made parties, or a party, by reason of their position, except where the
individual is adjudged to be liable for negligence or misconduct in the performance of any duty owed to
Stratex.
In addition, Stratex has entered into employment agreements with its key executive officers that provides that
the executive will be indemnified by Stratex to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law against all debts,
judgments, costs, charges or expenses incurred or sustained by the executive in connection with any action
,suit or proceeding to which the executive may be made a party by reason of his being or having been an
officer of Stratex, or because of actions taken by the executive which were believed by the executive to be in
the best interests of Stratex. The executive is entitled to be covered by any directors’ and officers’ liability
insurance policies which Stratex maintains, subject to any limitations of such policies.
Item 21. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.
(a)         The exhibits listed below in the “Exhibit Index” are filed as part, or are incorporated by reference in,
this registration statement.
Item 22. Undertakings.
(a)The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes:
(1)
To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment to this registration
statement:
(i)To include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933.
(ii)
To reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of the registration statement (or the
most recent post-effective amendment thereof) which, individually or in the aggregate, represent a fundamental
change in the information set forth in the registration statement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or
decrease in volume of securities offered (if the total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed that which
was registered) and any deviation from the low or high end of the estimated maximum offering range may be
reflected in the form of prospectus filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission pursuant to Rule 424(b) if,
in the aggregate, the changes in volume and price represent no more than a 20 percent change in the maximum
aggregate offering price set forth in the “Calculation of Registration Fee” table in the effective registration
statement.
(iii)
To include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously disclosed in the
registration statement or any material change to such information in the registration statement.
(2)
That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each such post-effective
amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the
offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(3)
To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities being registered which
remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
(4)
That, for the purpose of determining liability under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser, if the registrant is
subject to Rule 430C, each prospectus filed pursuant to Rule 424(b) as part of a registration statement relating to
an offering, other than registration statements relying on Rule 430B or other than prospectuses filed in reliance on
Rule 430A, shall be deemed to be part of and included in the registration statement as of the date it is first used
after effectiveness; provided, however, that no statement made in a registration statement or prospectus that is part
of the registration statement or made in a document incorporated or deemed incorporated by reference into the
registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement will, as to a purchaser with a time of
contract of sale prior to such first use, supersede or modify any statement that was made in the registration
statement or prospectus that was part of the registration statement or made in any such document immediately
prior to such date of first use.
II-1
Table of Contents
(5)
That, for the purpose of determining liability of the registrant under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser in
the initial distribution of the securities, the undersigned registrant undertakes that in a primary offering of securities
of the undersigned registrant pursuant to this registration statement, regardless of the underwriting method used to
sell the securities to the purchaser, if the securities are offered or sold to such purchaser by means of any of the
following communications, the undersigned registrant will be a seller to the purchaser and will be considered to
offer or sell such securities to such purchaser:
(i)
Any preliminary prospectus or prospectus of the undersigned registrant relating to the offering required to be filed
pursuant to Rule 424;
(ii)
Any free writing prospectus relating to the offering prepared by or on behalf of the undersigned registrant or used or
referred to by the undersigned registrant;
(iii)
The portion of any other free writing prospectus relating to the offering containing material information about the
undersigned registrant or its securities provided by or on behalf of the undersigned registrant; and
(iv)Any other communication that is an offer in the offering made by the undersigned registrant to the purchaser.
(b)
(1) The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes as follows: that prior to any public reoffering of the securities
registered hereunder through use of a prospectus which is a part of this registration statement, by any person or
party who is deemed to be an underwriter within the meaning of Rule 145(c), the issuer undertakes that such
reoffering prospectus will contain the information called for by the applicable registration form with respect to
reofferings by persons who may be deemed underwriters, in addition to the information called for by the other
items of the applicable form.
 
(2) The registrant undertakes that every prospectus (i) that is filed pursuant to paragraph (1) immediately
preceding, or (ii) that purports to meet the requirements of section 10(a)(3) of the Act and is used in connection with
an offering of securities subject to Rule 415, will be filed as a part of an amendment to the registration statement
and will not be used until such amendment is effective, and that, for purposes of determining any liability under the
Securities Act, each such post-effective amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to
the securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona
fide offering thereof.
(c)
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 may be permitted to directors,
officers and controlling persons of the registrant pursuant to the foregoing provisions, or otherwise, the registrant
has been advised that in the opinion of the Securities and Exchange Commission such indemnification is against
public policy as expressed in the Securities Act of 1933 and is, therefore, unenforceable. In the event that a claim
for indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by the registrant of expenses incurred or paid by
a director, officer or controlling person of the registrant in the successful defense of any action, suit or proceeding)
is asserted by such director, officer or controlling person in connection with the securities being registered, the
registrant will, unless in the opinion of its counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a
court of appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by it is against public policy as
expressed in the Securities Act of 1933 and will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
(e)
The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes to respond to requests for information that is incorporated by
reference into the joint proxy statement/prospectus pursuant to Item 4, 10(b), 11 or 13 of this form, within one
business day of receipt of such request, and to send the incorporated documents by first class mail or other equally
prompt means. This includes information contained in documents filed subsequent to the effective date of the
registration statement through the date of responding to the request.
(f)
The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes to supply by means of a post-effective amendment all information
concerning a transaction, and the company being acquired involved therein, that was not the subject of and
included in the registration statement when it became effective.
II-2
Table of Contents
SIGNATURES
SIGNATURES AND POWER OF ATTORNEY FOR STRATEX OIL & GAS HOLDINGS, INC.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc. has duly caused
this registration statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the
City of Watertown, State of Connecticut, on August 25, 2014.
STATEX OIL & GAS HOLDINGS, INC.
 
  
 By:
/S/ Stephen P. Funk  
 Name: Stephen P. Funk      
 Title: Chief Executive Officer
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby
constitutes and appoints Stephen P. Funk, Matthew Cohen, and each of them, his true and lawful attorneys-
in-fact and agents, with full power of substitution and resubstitution, for him and in his name, place and stead,
in any and all capacities, to sign any and all amendments to this Registration Statement (including post-
effective amendments), and to sign any registration statement for the same offering covered by this
Registration Statement that is to be effective upon filing pursuant to Rule 462(b) promulgated under the
Securities Act of 1933, and all post-effective amendments thereto and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto,
and other documents in connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto
said attorneys-in-fact and agents full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing
requisite and necessary to be done in and about the premises, as fully to all intents and purposes as he or
she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents, or
their substitute or substitutes, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, this Registration Statement has been
signed by the following persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
Title
/S/ Stephen P. Funk
Chief Executive Officer; Director
Stephen P. Funk
(Principal Executive Officer; Principal Financial Officer; and Principal
 
Accounting Officer )
/S/ Alan D. Gaines
Chairman; Director
Alan D. Gaines
 
/S/ Frederic L.
Saalwachter
Frederick L.
Saalwachter
Director
/S/ Michael J. Thurz
Director
Michael J. Thurz
II-3
Table of Contents
EXHIBIT INDEX
Date
  
August 25,
 
2014
August 25,
 
2014
 
  
August 25,
 
2014
August 25,
 
2014
2.1
2.2
Description
Exhibit
Number
 
  
Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated May 6, 2014, by and among Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc., Richfield
 
Acquisition Corp., and Richfield Oil & Gas Company (included as Annex A to the proxy
statement/prospectus that forms a part of this Registration Statement on Form S-4)
  
Amendment No. 1 to Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated July 17, 2014, by and among Stratex Oil & Gas
 
Holdings, Inc., Richfield Acquisition Corp., and Richfield Oil & Gas Company (included as Annex A to this
proxy statement/prospectus that forms a part of this Registration Statement on Form S-4)
  
 Opinion of Buchanan Ingersoll & Rooney PC*
  
 Opinion of Buchanan Ingersoll & Rooney PC regarding certain tax matters*
  
Amended and Restated Note and Security Agreement, dated July 17, 2014, executed by Richfield Oil & Gas
5.1
 
8.1
Amended and Restated Note and Security Agreement, dated July 17, 2014, executed by Richfield Oil & Gas
Company, Hewitt Energy Group, Inc., Hewitt Operating, Inc., HOI Kansas Property Series, LLC, and HOI
 
Utah Property Series, LLC in favor of Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc. (previously filed as Exhibit 10.1 to
Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.’s Form 8-K filed July 23, 2014)
  
Form of Voting Agreement (previously filed as Exhibit 10.2 to Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.’s Form 8-K
 
filed May 7, 2014)
  
Form of Lock-Up Agreement (previously filed as Exhibit 10.3 to Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.’s Form 8-K
 
filed May 7, 2014)
  
Employment Agreement, dated May 5, 2014, between Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc. and Alan Gaines
 
(previously filed as Exhibit 10.4 to Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.’s Form 8-K filed May 7, 2014)
  
Consent Mahoney Sabol & Company, LLP, independent registered public accounting firm for Stratex Oil &
 
Gas Holdings, Inc.
  
Consent of Mantyla McReynolds LLC, independent registered public accounting firm for Richfield Oil & Gas
 
Company
  
Consent of Pinnacle Energy Services, L.L.C., independent petroleum engineers for Richfield Oil & Gas
 
Company
  
Consent of LaRoche Petroleum Consultants, Ltd., independent petroleum engineers for Stratex Oil & Gas
 
Holdings, Inc.
  
 Consent of Buchanan Ingersoll & Rooney PC (included in Exhibit 5.1) *
  
 Power of Attorney (included in signature page)
  
 Form of Proxy for Richfield Oil & Gas Company, Inc.*
  
Reserves and Engineering Evaluation, dated April 4, 2014, from Pinnacle Energy Services, L.L.C.
 
(previously filed as Exhibit 99.7 to Richfield Oil & Gas Company’s Form 10-K filed April 4, 2014)
  
Engineering Report, dated February 20, 2014, from LaRoche Petroleum Consultants, Ltd. (previously filed
 
as Exhibit 99.3 to Stratex Oil & Gas Holdings, Inc.’s Form 10-K filed March 31, 2014)
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
23.1
23.2
23.3
23.4
23.5
 
24.1
 
99.1
99.2
99.3
* To be filed by amendment.
II-4