
424B2 1 d757332d424b2.htm 424B2 424B2
Table of Contents
Prospectus Supplement
Filed Pursuant to Rule 424(b)(2)
to Prospectus dated July 14, 2014
Registration No. 333-196686
9,600,000 Units
URANERZ ENERGY CORPORATION
We  are  offering  and  selling  up  to  9,600,000  shares  of  our  common  stock  (which  we  refer  to  as  the  “Shares”)  and
warrants  to  purchase  up  to  an  additional  4,800,000  shares  of  our  common  stock  pursuant  to  this  prospectus
supplement and the accompanying base prospectus. We are offering the Shares and warrants in units (which we refer
to as the “Units”) each consisting of one Share and one half of one transferable warrant. Each whole warrant (which
we refer to as a “Warrant”) is exercisable to purchase one additional share of our common stock (which we refer to as
a “Warrant Share”) at a price of $1.60 per Warrant Share, subject to adjustment and early termination, for a period of
30 months following the closing of this offering. See “Description of Securities Distributed.” The Units will be sold at a
negotiated  price  of  $1.25  per  Unit.  The  Units  will  not  be  issued  or  certificated.  The  Shares  and  Warrants  are
immediately  separable  and  will  be  issued  separately.  This  prospectus  supplement  also  registers  rights  to  purchase
shares of our common stock pursuant to our shareholder rights plan effective August 25, 2010, which are attached to
each Share and Warrant Share and will only separate and become exercisable following a separation event, as more
fully described below under the section heading “Description of Securities Distributed — Rights Plan.” We are offering
and selling Units pursuant to a placement agency agreement dated July 17, 2014 (which we refer to as the “Agency
Agreement”), as more fully described under the section entitled “Plan of Distribution” on page S-22 of this prospectus
supplement,  between  us,  Haywood  Securities  Inc.  and  Cantor  Fitzgerald  Canada  Corporation,  as  co-lead  placement
agents (which we refer to as the “Lead Agents”), and H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC and Laurentian Bank Securities Inc.
(together with the Lead Agents, the “Agents”). H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC will only be offering the Units in the United
States.
Our shares of common stock are traded on the NYSE MKT LLC (which we refer to as the “NYSE MKT”) and on the
Toronto  Stock  Exchange  (which  we  refer  to  as  the  “TSX”)  under  the  symbol  “URZ,”  and  on  the  Frankfurt  Exchange
under the symbol “U9E.” On July 16, 2014, the closing price of our shares of common stock was $1.42 per share on
the NYSE MKT, Cdn$1.53 per share on the TSX and €1.005 per share on the Frankfurt Exchange. We intend to apply
to the NYSE MKT and the TSX for the listing of the Shares and Warrant Shares. Listing of the Shares and Warrant
Shares will be subject to us fulfilling all the listing requirements of each of the NYSE MKT and TSX, respectively. All
amounts in this prospectus supplement, unless otherwise specified, are expressed in United States dollars.
There  is  no  market  through  which  the  Warrants  may  be  sold  and  purchasers  may  not  be  able  to  resell  the
Warrants  purchased  under  this  prospectus  supplement  and  the  accompanying  base  prospectus.  We  do  not
intend  to  apply  for  listing  of  the  Warrants  on  any  securities  exchange.  This  may  affect  the  pricing  of  the
Warrants in the secondary market, the transparency and availability of trading prices and the liquidity of the
securities. See “Risk Factors” beginning on page S-11 of this prospectus supplement.
Investing in the Units involves risks that are described in the “Risk Factors” section beginning on page S-11
of  this  prospectus  supplement  and  on  page  8  of  the  accompanying  base  prospectus  and  in  the  documents
incorporated by reference herein and therein.
Per Unit (1)
Total (2)
Per Unit (1)
Total (2)
Public offering price
Agents’ fees
Proceeds, before expenses, to
us
$
1.25    $12,000,000
$ 0.075    $
720,000
$ 1.175    $11,280,000
(1) This table is based on the sale of 9,600,000 Shares and does not reflect proceeds from the exercise of Warrants.
(2) The Agents will receive compensation in addition to the Agents’ fee. See “Plan of Distribution” for a description of
compensation payable to the Agents.
The  Agents  are  not  required  to  purchase  or  sell  any  Units  offered  hereby  nor  are  they  required  to  sell  any  specific
number or dollar amount of Units, but will use their commercially reasonable efforts to arrange for the sale of all of the
Units  offered  hereby.  Because  there  is  no  minimum  offering  amount  required  as  a  condition  to  the  closing  of  this
offering, the actual offering amount, Agents’ fees, and proceeds before expenses to us are presently not determinable
and may be substantially less than the maximum amounts set forth above.
We  and  the  Agents  expect  the  Shares  and  Warrants  offered  hereby  to  be  available  for  delivery  in  book-entry  form
through the facilities of The Depository Trust Company at closing, which is anticipated to be on or about July 25, 2014
or  such  other  date  as  may  be  agreed  upon  between  us  and  the  Lead  Agents.  Under  Rule  15c6-1  under  the  U.S.
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “U.S. Exchange Act”), trades in the secondary market generally
are required to settle in three business days, unless the parties expressly agree otherwise, we anticipate a settlement
cycle of T+5 business days. Accordingly, purchasers who wish to trade prior to the delivery date may be required to
specify  an  alternate  settlement  cycle  at  the  time  of  the  trade  to  prevent  a  failed  settlement.  Investors  who  wish  to
trade prior to the delivery date should consult their own advisors.
Neither the United States Securities Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) nor any state securities commission
has  approved  or  disapproved  of  these  securities  or  determined  if  this  prospectus  supplement  or  the
accompanying  base  prospectus  is  truthful  or  complete.  Any  representation  to  the  contrary  is  a  criminal
offense.
Haywood Securities Inc.
H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC
Cantor Fitzgerald Canada Corporation
Laurentian Bank Securities Inc.
The date of this prospectus supplement is July 17, 2014
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT SUMMARY
RISK FACTORS
S-1
S-2
S-4
S-11
USE OF PROCEEDS
CONSOLIDATED CAPITALIZATION
DIVIDEND POLICY
DILUTION
DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES DISTRIBUTED
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
MATERIAL U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
WHERE TO FIND ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
BASE PROSPECTUS
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
SUMMARY
RISK FACTORS
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
USE OF PROCEEDS
RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON SHARES
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
DESCRIPTION OF SUBSCRIPTION RECEIPTS
DESCRIPTION OF UNITS
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
INTERESTS OF NAMED EXPERTS AND COUNSEL
TRANSFER AGENT AND REGISTRAR
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
S-i
Table of Contents
S-13
S-14
S-15
S-15
S-15
S-22
S-25
S-31
S-32
S-32
S-32
1
2
8
17
18
20
20
21
21
25
27
30
31
32
36
36
36
36
36
This document is in two parts. The first part is this prospectus supplement, which describes the specific terms of this
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
offering of our Units and also adds to and updates information contained in the accompanying base prospectus and
the documents incorporated by reference herein and therein. The second part is the accompanying base prospectus,
which  gives  more  general  information  about  securities  we  may  offer  from  time  to  time,  some  of  which  may  not  be
applicable  to  this  offering.  To  the  extent  there  is  a  conflict  between  information  contained  in  this  prospectus
supplement  and  information  contained  in  the  accompanying  base  prospectus  or  any  document  incorporated  by
reference herein or therein or the information in each free writing prospectus, if any, the information in this prospectus
supplement shall control and you should rely on the information contained in this prospectus supplement. However, if
any statement in one of these documents is inconsistent with a statement in another document having a later date—
for  example,  a  document  incorporated  by  reference  into  this  prospectus  supplement  or  the  accompanying  base
prospectus—the statement in the document having the later date modifies or supersedes the earlier statement.
This prospectus supplement relates to a registration statement on Form S-3 that we filed with the SEC utilizing a shelf
registration  process.  Under  this  shelf  registration  process,  we  may,  from  time  to  time,  offer  and  sell  any  of  the
securities  or  any  combination  of  the  securities  described  in  the  accompanying  base  prospectus  in  one  or  more
offerings.  You  should  read  this  prospectus  supplement,  the  accompanying  base  prospectus,  the  documents
incorporated  by  reference  herein  and  therein  and  each  free  writing  prospectus,  if  any.  We  have  also  filed  this
prospectus  supplement  and  the  accompanying  base  prospectus  with  the  securities  regulatory  authorities  in  each  of
the provinces of Canada, except Quebec, pursuant to the multi-jurisdictional disclosure system (which Canadian-filed
prospectus  supplement  and  accompanying  prospectus  we  refer  to  as  the  “Canadian  Prospectus”).  The  securities
qualified  under  the  Canadian  Prospectus  may  be  offered  and  sold  in  each  of  the  provinces  of  Canada,  other  than
Quebec, subject to any applicable securities laws.
You should rely only on the information contained in or incorporated by reference into this prospectus supplement and
the accompanying base prospectus and each free writing prospectus, if any, related to this offering. We have not, and
the  Agents  have  not,  authorized  any  other  person  to  provide  you  with  additional  or  different  information.  If  anyone
provides you with additional or different information, you should not rely on it. You should assume that the information
appearing  in  this  prospectus  supplement,  the  accompanying  base  prospectus,  any  free  writing  prospectus  and  the
documents  incorporated  by  reference  into  this  prospectus  supplement  and  the  accompanying  base  prospectus  and
each free writing prospectus, if any, is accurate only as of the respective dates of such documents regardless of the
time of delivery of such documents or of any sale of securities hereunder. Our business, financial condition, results of
operations  and  prospects  may  have  changed  since  those  dates.  It  is  important  for  you  to  read  and  consider  all
information  contained  in  this  prospectus  supplement  and  the  accompanying  base  prospectus,  including  the
documents  incorporated  by  reference  herein  and  therein,  in  making  your  investment  decision.  You  should  also  read
and  consider  the  information  in  the  documents  to  which  we  have  referred  you  under  the  captions  “Where  To  Find
Additional  Information”  and  “Documents  Incorporated  by  Reference”  in  this  prospectus  supplement  and  under  the
sections  entitled,  “Where  You  Can  Find  More  Information”  and  “Documents  Incorporated  by  Reference”  in  the
accompanying base prospectus, and any additional information you may need to make your investment decision.
We and the Agents are offering to sell, and are seeking offers to buy, the Units only in jurisdictions where such offers
and sales are permitted. The distribution of this prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus and
the offering of the Units in certain jurisdictions or to certain persons within such jurisdictions may be restricted by law.
Persons outside the United States who come into possession of this prospectus supplement and the accompanying
base prospectus must inform themselves about and observe any restrictions relating to the offering of the Units and
the distribution of this prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus outside the United States. This
prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus do not constitute, and may not be used in connection
with, an offer to sell, or a solicitation of an offer to buy, any securities offered by this prospectus supplement and the
accompanying base prospectus by any person in any jurisdiction in which it is unlawful for such person to make such
an offer or solicitation.
The  industry  and  market  data  and  other  statistical  information  contained  in  this  prospectus  supplement,  the
accompanying  base  prospectus,  any  free  writing  prospectus  related  to  the  offering  and  in  the  documents  we
incorporate  by  reference  herein  or  therein  are  based  on  management’s  own  estimates,  independent  publications,
government publications, reports by market research firms or other published independent sources, and, in each case,
are believed by management to be reasonable estimates. Although we believe these sources are reliable, we have not
independently verified the information.
Unless  stated  otherwise  or  the  context  otherwise  requires,  references  in  this  prospectus  supplement  and  the
accompanying base prospectus to the “Company,” “Uranerz,” “we,” “us” or “our” refer to Uranerz Energy Corporation.
S-1
Table of Contents
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This prospectus supplement, the accompanying base prospectus and the documents incorporated herein and therein
by  reference  and  any  free  writing  prospectus  contain  “forward-looking-statements”  within  the  meaning  of  the  Private
Securities  Litigation  Reform  Act  of  1995  and  applicable  Canadian  securities  laws.  Such  forward-looking  statements
concern  our  anticipated  results  and  developments  in  our  operations  in  future  periods,  planned  exploration  and,  if
warranted,  development  of  our  properties,  plans  related  to  our  business  and  other  matters  that  may  occur  in  the
future.  These  statements  relate  to  analyses  and  other  information  that  are  based  on  forecasts  of  future  results,
estimates of amounts not yet determinable and assumptions of management.
Any  statements  that  express  or  involve  discussions  with  respect  to  predictions,  expectations,  beliefs,  plans,
projections, objectives, assumptions or future events or performance (often, but not always, using words or phrases
such  as  “expects”  or  “does  not  expect,”  “is  expected,”  “anticipates”  or  “does  not  anticipate,”  “plans,”  “estimates”  or
“intends,” or stating that certain actions, events or results “may,” “could,” “would,” “might” or “will” be taken, occur or
be achieved) are not statements of historical fact and may be forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements
are subject to a variety of known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors which could cause actual events
or results to differ from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements, including, without limitation:
—  risks related to our limited operating history;
—  risks related to the probability that our properties contain reserves;
—  risks related to our past losses and expected losses in the near future;
—  risks related to our need for qualified personnel for exploring for, starting and operating a mine;
—  risks related to our lack of known reserves;
—  risks related to the fluctuation of uranium prices;
—  risks related to the public acceptance of nuclear power;
—  risks related to environmental laws and regulations and environmental risks;
—
risks related to using our in-situ recovery mining process;
risks related to using our in-situ recovery mining process;
—  risks related to exploration and, if warranted, development of our properties;
—  risks related to our ability to acquire necessary mining licenses or permits;
—  risks related to our ability to make property payment obligations;
—  risks related to obtaining the necessary access rights;
—  risks related to potential environmental liabilities;
—  risks related to requirements for personnel with expertise in putting a mineral deposit into production;
—  risks related to the competitive nature of the mining industry;
—  risks related to our dependence on key personnel;
—  risks related to requirements for new personnel;
—  risks related to securities regulations;
—  risks related to stock price and volume volatility;
—  risks related to dilution;
—  risks related to our lack of dividends;
—  risks related to our ability to access capital markets;
—  risks related to recent market events;
—  risks related to our issuance of additional shares of common stock;
S-2
Table of Contents
—  risks related to acquisition and integration issues;
—  risks related to defects in title to our mineral properties;
—  risks related to the construction and delay in construction of the Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project;
—  risks  related  to  our  ability  to  achieve  targeted  extraction  or  production  rates  at  our  Nichols  Ranch  ISR
Uranium Project;
—  risks related to higher than expected operating costs at our Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project;
—  risks related to our outstanding notes; and
—  risks related to our securities.
For  a  more  detailed  discussion  of  such  risks  and  other  important  factors  that  could  cause  actual  results  to  differ
materially from those in such forward-looking statements please see the section entitled “Risk Factors” beginning on
page  S-11  of  this  prospectus  supplement  and  on  page  8  of  the  accompanying  base  prospectus  and,  to  the  extent
applicable, the “Risk Factors” sections in our annual report on Form 10-K and our quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, and
any further amendments thereto, as filed with the SEC and the Canadian securities authorities that are incorporated
by  reference  herein  and  therein.  Although  we  have  attempted  to  identify  important  factors  that  could  cause  actual
results to differ materially from those described in forward-looking statements, there may be other factors that cause
results not to be as anticipated, estimated or intended. There can be no assurance that these statements will prove to
be  accurate  as  actual  results  and  future  events  could  differ  materially  from  those  anticipated  in  the  statements.
Except as required by law, we assume no obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements, whether as a
result  of  new  information,  future  events  or  otherwise.  Investors  should  review  our  subsequent  reports  filed  with  the
SEC and the Canadian securities authorities on Forms 10-K, 10-Q and 8-K and any amendments thereto. We qualify
all forward-looking statements by these cautionary statements.
S-3
Table of Contents
PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT SUMMARY
The following is a summary of the material features of the offering. It should be read together with the more detailed
information and financial data and statements contained elsewhere in this prospectus supplement, the accompanying
base prospectus, any free writing prospectus filed by us, if any, and the documents incorporated by reference herein
and therein, including the information under “Risk Factors” beginning on page S-11 of this prospectus supplement and
page 8 of the accompanying base prospectus.
Business of the Company
Uranerz  Energy  Corporation  was  incorporated  under  the  laws  of  the  State  of  Nevada  on  May  26,  1999.  On  July  5,
2005, we changed our name from Carleton Ventures Corp. to Uranerz Energy Corporation.
Our  principal  business  office  and  our  operations  office  is  located  at  1701  East  “E”  Street,  PO  Box  50850,  Casper,
Wyoming 82605-0850, USA and our phone number there is 307-265-8900. We also maintain an administrative office
located at Suite 1410—800 West Pender Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6C 2V6, and our telephone
number there is 604-689-1659.
General
We are a United States based uranium company focused on commercial in-situ recovery (“ISR”)  uranium  extraction
and  production.  ISR  is  a  mining  process  that  uses  a  “leaching  solution”  to  extract  uranium  from  underground
sandstone-hosted uranium deposits; it is the generally accepted extraction technology used in the Powder River Basin
area of Wyoming. We control a large strategic land position in the central Powder River Basin. Our management team
has  specialized  expertise  in  the  ISR  uranium  mining  method,  and  a  record  of  licensing,  constructing,  and  operating
ISR uranium projects.
Our Powder River Basin properties include:
—  our 100% owned properties that totaled 20,121 acres as of March 31, 2014; and
  —  our 81% interest in Arkose Mining Venture properties that totaled 59,107 acres as of March 31, 2014.
Our 100% owned properties are comprised of unpatented mineral lode claims, state leases and fee (private) mineral
leases, summarized as follows:
Property Composition
Unpatented Lode Mining Claims
State Leases
Fee (private) Mineral Leases
Total
(1) Subject to various royalties.
Ownership
Interest (1)  
   
100%  
100%  
   
100%
Number of
Claims/
Leases
826    
3    
41
Acreage
16,520 
   1,360 
   2,241 
   
 
  20,121
Our 100% owned properties in the Powder River Basin include the following property units:
Property
Jane Dough
No. Claims
Acreage
Jane Dough
Collins Draw
North Rolling Pin
Hank
Nichols Ranch
Willow Creek
West North-Butte
East Nichols
North Nichols
Total
Table of Contents
22    
32    
54    
66    
36    
11    
125    
44    
107    
    
497
440  
640  
1,080  
1,320  
720  
220  
2,500  
880  
2,140  
 
9,940
S-4
The Arkose Mining Venture properties are comprised of unpatented lode mining claims, state leases and fee (private)
mineral leases, summarized as follows:
Property Composition
Unpatented Lode Mining Claims
State Leases
Fee (private) Mineral Leases
Total
(1) Subject to various royalties.
Ownership Interest
(1)
81%
81%
81%
Number of Claims/
Leases
2,641
3
61
Acreage
(2)
43,207
  2,080
   13,820 
  59,107
(2) We anticipate terminating our lease on approximately 2,615.40 acres during late July 2014.
Through a combination of claim staking, purchasing and leasing, we have also acquired interests in projects that lie
within the Powder River Basin but outside of the specific project areas discussed above. These additional properties
include the Verna Ann, Niles Ranch and Reno Creek projects. However, due to our focus on other activities, we have
not yet made any decisions on these projects.
Information regarding the location of and access to our Wyoming properties, together with the history of operations,
present  condition  and  geology  of  each  of  our  significant  properties,  is  presented  in  Item  2  of  our  Annual  Report  on
Form  10-K  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2013,  as  filed  with  the  SEC  on  March  14,  2014  under  the  heading
“Description  of  Properties.”  None  of  our  properties  has  proven  or  probable  reserves  pursuant  to  the  SEC’s  Industry
Guide 7 and all are exploratory in nature.
We  are  principally  focused  on  the  exploitation  of  our  properties  in  the  Powder  River  Basin  but  we  continually
investigate other uranium opportunities as they arise.
In  anticipation  of  receiving  all  the  approvals  necessary  to  begin  uranium  extraction,  we  commenced  a  marketing
program  for  conditional  sales  of  uranium  from  our  Nichols  Ranch  ISR  Uranium  Project.  In  2009,  we  entered  into  a
sales  agreement  with  Exelon  Generation  Company,  LLC  for  the  sale  of  uranium  over  a  five-year  period  at  defined
pricing.  That  agreement  was  subsequently  amended  to  defer  the  delivery  schedule  by  a  year  and  adjust  the  pricing
terms. On January 25, 2013 we entered into a second supply agreement with Exelon for the sale of uranium over an
additional  five-year  period  commencing  in  2016,  at  defined  pricing  adjustable  for  inflation.  In  August  of  2009,  we
entered into what was then our second contract for the sale of uranium to a U.S. utility, also over five years, with a
pricing  structure  that  contains  references  to  both  spot  and  term  prices  and  includes  floor  and  ceiling  prices.  That
agreement was also subsequently amended to defer the original five-year delivery period by a year, reduce the annual
volumes to be supplied, and adjust the pricing terms. These three long-term contracts for the sale of uranium are with
two  of  the  largest  nuclear  utilities  in  the  U.S.  These  three  agreements  do  not  individually  represent  a  substantial
portion of our targeted uranium extraction and our business is not substantially dependent on these agreements.
The  Nichols  Ranch  ISR  Uranium  Project  currently  includes  our  Nichols  Ranch  Unit  and  our  Hank  Unit.  Under  the
licensed plan, a processing plant has been built at Nichols Ranch and a satellite processing facility would be built at
Hank. In March 2010, we commenced preparation of the environmental permit and license applications for the Jane
Dough  Unit,  which  is  adjacent  to  the  area  currently  being  developed  at  the  Nichols  Ranch  Unit  and  will  share  its
infrastructure. This will provide us with the option to revise our original plan of operations by bringing our Jane Dough
Unit into extraction before the Hank Unit of our Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project. Due to the close proximity, Jane
Dough fluids can be delivered directly to our Nichols Ranch processing facility by pipeline, thus eliminating the need
for larger capital outlay to build a satellite processing facility at Hank. Our Jane Dough Unit includes the Doughstick,
South  Doughstick  and  North  Jane  properties.  Additional  units  may  be  added  to  the  mine  plan  as  we  assess  our
geological data. We plan to continue the exploration and strategic planning of our other Wyoming Powder River Basin
properties  through  a  number  of  strategies  including  acquisitions  or  exchanges  with  other  ISR  uranium  mining
companies in the area.
In  December  2010,  we  received  a  Permit  to  Mine  from  the  Wyoming  Department  of  Environmental  Quality  –  Land
Quality  Division  (“WDEQ-LQD”).  In  July  2011,  we  received  our  Source  Material  License  from  the  United  States
Nuclear Regulatory Commission and immediately began construction of our Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project.
Table of Contents
S-5
In  November  2011,  we  signed  a  processing  agreement  with  Cameco  Resources  (“Cameco”),  a  wholly-owned  U.S.
subsidiary of Cameco Corporation, the world’s largest publicly-traded uranium company. Under the agreement we will
deliver  uranium-loaded  resin  from  our  Nichols  Ranch  ISR  Uranium  Project  to  Cameco’s  Smith  Ranch  Highland
uranium  mine  for  final  processing  into  dried  uranium  concentrate  packaged  for  shipping  to  a  converter.  Cameco’s
Smith Ranch Highland mine is located in the Powder River Basin approximately 25 miles south of our Nichols Ranch
Unit. Extraction at the Jane Dough Unit is compatible with this plan. The agreement is for a fixed term with a variable
starting date dependent on the commencement of uranium extraction. Under the agreement, we and Cameco stipulate
both a minimum quantity of pounds and a maximum quantity of pounds which will be delivered by us and processed
by Cameco. It is our expectation that in its initial few years of extraction, all resins extracted at Nichols Ranch will be
processed by Cameco under this agreement. In the event that we fail to deliver the minimum quantities stipulated by
the agreement, we will be required to compensate Cameco a stipulated sum of liquidated damages.
In September 2012, we submitted an application to the Wyoming Business Council for a $20,000,000 loan under the
Wyoming  Industrial  Development  Revenue  Bond  Program  (the  “Bond  Financing”).  The  loan  was  received  in
December  2013,  and  has  a  seven  year  term  with  an  interest  rate  of  5.75%  per  annum.  We  are  required  to  make
interest-only payments during the first year, and in the following years the debt will be amortized to include payments
of principal and interest. The Loan can be repaid earlier than its maturity date if we so choose. The Loan is secured by
a charge on certain assets of the Company.
On June 6, 2013, we entered into a Note Purchase Agreement, dated as of May 31, 2013, by and among us, Deans
Knight  Capital  Management  Ltd.  (“Deans  Knight”)  and  the  investors  in  the  Notes  (the  “Investors”),  (the  “Note
Purchase Agreement”). Pursuant to the Note Purchase Agreement, the Investors agreed to lend to the Company $6
million (the “Loan”) in exchange for senior notes of the Company equal to the outstanding principal balance of the loan
(the “Notes”). Pursuant to the terms of the Note Purchase Agreement, the Notes matured on the earlier of: (i) 30 days
from the execution and delivery of documentation in connection with the Bond Financing, and (ii) December 31, 2013.
The Notes bore interest from the date of issue at 6.0% per annum increasing to 10.0% per annum on August 16, 2013
as the Notes were not repaid prior to August 15, 2013. As additional consideration for the Loan, we agreed to issue to
the  Investors  1,600,000  non-transferable  common  stock  purchase  warrants,  each  warrant  entitling  the  Investors  to
purchase from us a share of our common stock at an exercise price of $1.60. The warrants expire 30 months from the
date of issue, subject to acceleration. The Notes were repaid upon the closing of the Bond Financing.
During the first quarter of 2014, the Company completed the construction of the processing facility, the installation of
two  deep  disposal  wells  and  the  installation  of  the  initial  mine  wellfield  at  Nichols  Ranch.  Standard  Operating
Procedures  were  prepared  and  operating  personnel  were  hired  and  trained.  A  United  States  Nuclear  Regulatory
Commission  (“NRC”)  pre-operational  field  inspection  was  conducted  in  January  2014,  with  the  final  start-up
authorization received in April.  Uranerz  commenced  uranium  mining  operations  at  Nichols  Ranch  in  April  2014  upon
receipt  of  the  NRC  authorization.  The  commissioning  phase  of  mine  operations  at  Nichols  Ranch  is  nearing
completion as the head grade, or concentration of uranium in the recovery solution, is continuing to increase on the
expected  profile.  The  Company  made  its  first  uranium-loaded  resin  delivery  to  Cameco’s  Smith  Ranch  uranium
processing  facilities  in  mid-June,  with  further  deliveries  of  uranium-loaded  resin  being  sent  to  Cameco  for  toll
processing on a routine basis.
In May 2014, we submitted the source material license amendment application for our Jane Dough Unit to the NRC.
We  are  applying  to  add  the  Jane  Dough  Unit  as  an  amendment  to  the  existing  license  for  the  Nichols  Ranch  ISR
Uranium  Project.  We  intend  to  continue  the  permitting  and  licensing  of  the  Jane  Dough  Unit  so  that  it  can  be
sequenced as described above while uranium extraction is ongoing at the Nichols Ranch Unit.
The Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium  Project  is  licensed  for  a  recovery  level  of  up  to  two  million  pounds  of  uranium  per
year with initial annual recovery dependent upon the extraction efficiency in our first wellfield and market factors. The
project  will  also  serve  as  a  platform  to  advance  our  other  Powder  River  Basin  properties  with  potential  enhanced
economics  for  adjacent  and  satellite  projects.  Cameco  and  Uranium  One,  two  of  the  largest  ISR  uranium  mining
companies in the world, are continuing to extract uranium near the Uranerz properties in the Powder River Basin.
Table of Contents
Overview of Uranium Market
S-6
The  primary  commercial  use  for  uranium  is  to  fuel  nuclear  power  plants  for  the  generation  of  electricity.  All  the
uranium produced from our mines will be used to generate electricity.
According  to  the  World  Nuclear  Association,  in  2013,  nuclear  power  plants  supplied  about  11%  of  global  generated
electricity. There are currently 434 operable reactors world-wide which will require approximately 145 million pounds of
U3O8 fuel in 2014, and there are currently 73 new reactors under construction with an additional 172 reactors on order
or in the planning stage and another 309 in the proposed stage.
The  world  continues  to  consume  more  uranium  than  it  produces  and  largely  due  to  increasing  energy  demands  in
Asia.  Historically  the  gap  between  demand  and  supply  has  been  filled  by  stock-piled  inventories  and  secondary
supplies; however, these are finite and are being drawn down. Until recently, one of the largest sources of secondary
supply was the uranium derived from Russia’s Highly Enrich Uranium program with the United States. However, all the
deliveries  from  this  source  were  completed  at  the  end  of  2013.  According  to  World  Nuclear  Association,  the  United
States currently has 100 operating reactors, 5 new reactors under construction and another 22 reactors in the planned
or proposed stage. According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration, the United States derived approximately
17% of its uranium from U.S. origin in 2013.
Uranium  is  not  traded  on  an  open  market  or  organized  commodity  exchange  such  as  the  London  Metal  Exchange
(although the New York Mercantile Exchange provides trading of cash-settled uranium futures contracts). Buyers and
sellers negotiate contracts privately  and  usually  directly.  Uranium  prices,  both  spot  prices  and  long-term  prices,  are
published by two independent market consulting firms, Tradetech and Ux Consulting, on a weekly basis.
The  spot  and  long-term  price  of  uranium  is  influenced  by  a  number  of  factors,  some  of  which  are  international.  For
example,  both  the  spot  and  long-term  price  of  uranium  was  impacted  by  the  accident  at  the  Fukushima  Daiichi
Nuclear Plant in Japan in March 2011. The events at Fukushima created heightened concerns regarding the safety of
nuclear plants and lead to closures of nuclear plants. These plant closures have created uncertainty in the market.
Most  nuclear  utilities  seek  to  purchase  a  portion  of  their  uranium  needs  through  long-term  supply  contracts  with
another  portion  being  bought  on  the  spot  market  in  the  short  term.  Like  sellers,  buyers  are  seeking  to  balance  the
security of long-term supply with the opportunity to take advantage of price fluctuations. For this reason both buyers
and  sellers  track  current  spot  and  long-term  prices  for  uranium  carefully,  make  considered  projections  as  to  future
price  changes,  and  then  negotiate  with  one  another  to  enter  into  a  contract  which  each  deems  favorable  to  their
respective interests.
The graph below shows the monthly spot uranium and long-term uranium price from 1969 until May 2014 as reported
by Ux Consulting.
S-7
Table of Contents
Recent Developments
Change in Control Severance Agreements
On May 1, 2014, we entered into new change in control severance agreements (the “Change in Control Severance
Agreements”)  with  four  of  our  executive  officers:  Executive  Chairman  Dennis  Higgs,  Chief  Executive  Officer  Glenn
Catchpole,  President  &  Chief  Operating  Officer  W.  Paul  Goranson,  and  Senior  Vice  President  &  Chief  Financial
Officer Benjamin Leboe. The new Change in Control Severance Agreements replace and supersede change in control
agreements  (the  “previous  agreements”)  between  the  Company  and  three  of  its  executive  officers:  Executive
Chairman  Dennis  Higgs,  Chief  Executive  Officer  Glenn  Catchpole  and  Senior  Vice  President,  Finance  &  Chief
Financial Officer Benjamin Leboe. Under the new Change in Control Severance Agreements, the executive officer will
be  entitled  to  certain  severance  benefits  if,  following  a  “change  of  control”  (as  defined  in  the  Change  in  Control
Severance  Agreement),  the  Company  terminates  the  executive’s  employment  without  “cause”,  as  defined  in  the
agreement,  or  the  executive  terminates  his  employment  with  the  Company  for  “good  reason”  (as  defined  in  the
Change in Control Severance Agreement). In such event, each executive officer would be entitled to receive his base
salary through to the date of termination, a pro-rated target bonus for the year of termination and two times his base
salary  and  target  bonus,  in  each  case  as  in  effect  on  the  date  of  the  change  in  control,  or  the  date  of  termination
(whichever is higher).
The new form of Change in Control Severance Agreement provides that each executive officer will be prohibited, for a
one year period after his termination, from soliciting employees or customers or suppliers of the Company and each
executive  officer  will  be  subject  to  confidentiality  restrictions.  Following  termination  of  employment  the  executive
officer will be required to sign a release of claims against the Company prior to receiving severance benefits under the
agreement.
Resignation of Senior Vice President, Legal & Corporate Secretary
On May 1, 2014, Sandra R. MacKay, Senior Vice President, Legal & Corporate Secretary and an executive officer of
our  Company,  tendered  her  resignation  from  employment  with  our  Company,  effective  June  15,  2014,  in  order  to
pursue another professional opportunity.
United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission Authorization
On  April  15,  2014,  the  NRC  issued  a  letter  of  authorization  to  our  Company  authorizing  us  to  commence  in-situ
uranium recovery operations at our Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project.
Option Surrender Agreements
Effective  February  15,  2014,  our  four  independent  directors  and  each  of  our:  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Executive
Chairman,  Senior  Vice  President,  Finance  &  Chief  Financial  Officer  and  Senior  Vice  President,  Legal  &  Corporate
Secretary, all of whom held options to purchase shares of common stock with exercise prices greater than $3.20 per
Common Share, previously granted to them pursuant to the our Amended 2005 Nonqualified Stock Option Plan (the
“Plan”) entered into option surrender agreements (“Surrender Agreements”) with our Company.
Pursuant to the Surrender Agreements, the independent directors and such executive officers agreed to surrender to
us,  for  no  consideration,  options  to  purchase  an  aggregate  of  1,814,000  shares  of  common  stock,  with  a  weighted
average exercise price of $3.43; such surrendered shares are available for future grant under the Plan.
Arkose Mining Venture Lease Terminations
Based  on  unfavorable  exploration  results,  the  Arkose  Mining  Venture  intends  to  give  notice  that  it  will  terminate  its
lease on approximately 2,615.40 acres in late July 2014.
Corporate Information
We were incorporated under the laws of the State of Nevada on May 26, 1999. On July 5, 2005, we changed our name
from Carleton Ventures Corp. to Uranerz Energy Corporation. Our executive and operations office is located at 1701
East  “E”  Street,  P.O.  Box  50850,  Casper,  Wyoming  USA  82605-0850.  Our  administrative  office  is  located  at  Suite
1410—800  West  Pender  Street,  Vancouver,  British  Columbia,  Canada  V6C  2V6.  The  telephone  number  for  our
executive office is (307) 265-8900. The telephone number for our administrative office is (604) 689-1659.
Table of Contents
S-8
The Offering
The  following  is  a  brief  summary  of  certain  terms  of  this  offering  and  is  not  intended  to  be  complete.  It  does  not
contain all of the information that will be important to a holder of Shares or Warrants. For a more complete description
of our securities, see the section entitled “Description of Securities Distributed” in this prospectus supplement.
Issuer:
Offering:
Amount:
Price to the Public:
Warrants:
Uranerz Energy Corporation
Up to 9,600,000 Units
Each Unit consists of one Share and one half of one Warrant
Up to $12,000,000
$1.25 per Unit
Each Warrant will entitle the holder to purchase one share of our common stock,
subject to adjustment and early termination, for a period of 30 months after the
closing of this offering at a price of $1.60.
The Warrants will be freely transferable, subject to the terms and conditions of
the Warrant Indenture (as defined herein).
Shares of Common Stock
Outstanding:
Placement Agents’ Fee:
Use of Proceeds:
Risk Factors:
Tax Considerations:
Table of Contents
Listing Symbol:
In  the  event  that  our  shares  of  common  stock  trade  on  the  NYSE  MKT  at  a
closing  price  of  greater  than  $2.75  per  share  for  a  period  of  20  consecutive
trading days at any time following the closing of this offering, we may accelerate
the  expiry  date  of  the  Warrants  by  giving  notice  via  a  press  release  to  the
holders  thereof  and  in  such  case  the  Warrants  will  expire  on  the  30th  day  after
the date on which such notice is given by us. See section entitled “Description
of Securities Distributed” in this prospectus supplement.
Prior to the offering: 86,268,806 shares of common stock(1)
After the offering: 95,868,806 shares of common stock(1)(2)
We have agreed to pay the Agents a fee of 6% of the aggregate gross proceeds
from  the  sale  of  Units.  See  the  section  entitled  “Plan  of  Distribution”  in  this
prospectus supplement.
The net proceeds from the sale of the Units in this offering are estimated to be
approximately  $10.97  million,  after  deducting  the  Agents’  fees  and  estimated
offering  expenses.  We  intend  to  use  the  net  proceeds  from  this  offering:  (i)  to
continue  development  and  operations  of  facilities  at  our  Nichols  Ranch  ISR
Project,  and  (ii)  for  working  capital  requirements  and/or  for  other  general
corporate purposes. We intend to use the net proceeds from the exercise of the
Warrants,  if  any,  for  working  capital  requirements  and/or  for  other  general
corporate  purposes.  See  the  section  entitled  “Use  of  Proceeds”  in  this
prospectus supplement.
Investing  in  the  Units  involves  risks  that  are  described  in  the  “Risk
Factors”  section  beginning  on  page  S-11  of  this  prospectus  supplement
and  on  page  8  of  the  accompanying  base  prospectus  and,  to  the  extent
applicable, the “Risk Factors” sections of our annual report on Form 10-K
and our quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, and any amendments thereto, as
filed with the SEC and Canadian securities authorities.
in
Purchasing  the  Shares  and  Warrants,  and  exercising  the  Warrants,  may  have
tax  consequences 
the  United  States  and  Canada.  This  prospectus
supplement, the accompanying base prospectus and the Canadian Prospectus
may  not  describe  these  consequences  fully.  Investors  should  read  the  tax
discussion  in  this  prospectus  supplement  under  the  section  “Material  U.S.
Federal Income Tax Consequences.”
S-9
Our  shares  of  common  stock  are  listed  for  trading  on  the  NYSE  MKT  and  the
TSX,  in  each  case  under  the  symbol  “URZ,”  and  on  the  Frankfurt  Exchange
under the symbol “U9E.”
There  is  no  market  through  which  the  Warrants  may  be  sold  and  purchasers
may  not  be  able  to  resell  the  Warrants  purchased  under  this  prospectus
supplement and the accompanying base prospectus.
(1) These  figures  do  not  include  8,261,648  shares  of  common  stock  reserved  for  issuance  pursuant  to  outstanding  stock  options,  which  are
exercisable  at  a  weighted  average  price  of  $1.73  per  share  nor  5,750,000  shares  of  common  stock  reserved  for  issuance  pursuant  to
outstanding warrants exercisable at a weighted average price of $1.60 per share.
To the extent any options are exercised, new options are issued under our equity incentive plans, or we otherwise issue additional shares of
common stock or securities exercisable for or convertible into shares of common stock, there will be further dilution to new investors. As of the
date of this prospectus supplement, there are 17,722,860 shares of common stock available for issuance under our equity incentive plans.
(2) This figure does not include the exercise of the Warrants.
Table of Contents
S-10
RISK FACTORS
Investing  in  our  Units  involves  a  high  degree  of  risk.  Prospective  investors  should  carefully  consider  the  following
risks, as well as the other information contained in this prospectus supplement, the accompanying base prospectus,
any  free  writing  prospectus  and  the  documents  incorporated  by  reference  herein  and  therein  before  investing  in  our
Units.  If  any  of  the  following  risks  actually  occurs,  our  business  could  be  harmed.  The  risks  and  uncertainties
described below are not the only ones faced by our Company. Additional risks and uncertainties, including those of
which  we  are  currently  unaware  or  that  are  currently  deemed  immaterial,  may  also  adversely  affect  our  business,
financial condition, cash flows, prospects and the price of our shares of common stock.
The  following  is  a  short  description  of  the  risks  and  uncertainties  which  are  more  fully  described  under  the  section
entitled “Risk Factors” in our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2013, filed with the
SEC on March 14, 2014, and in our quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the period ended March 31, 2014, as filed with
the  SEC  on  May  12,  2014,  both  of  which  are  incorporated  herein  by  reference,  see  “Documents  Incorporated  by
Reference” below.
Risks Related to Our Business
—  Our future performance is difficult to evaluate because we have a limited operating history.
—  Because  the  probability  of  an  individual  prospect  ever  having  reserves  is  remote,  our  properties  may  not
contain any reserves, and any funds spent on exploration may be lost.
—  We  have  losses  which  may  continue  into  the  future.  As  a  result,  we  may  have  to  suspend  or  cease
exploration activities.
—  Because  some  of  our  officers  and  directors  do  not  have  technical  training  or  experience  in  exploring  for,
starting,  and  operating  a  mine,  we  may  have  to  hire  qualified  personnel.  If  we  can’t  locate  qualified
personnel, we may have to suspend or cease exploration activity.
—  Our future profitability will be dependent on uranium prices.
—  Public acceptance of nuclear energy is uncertain.
—  Our operations are subject to environmental regulation and environmental risks.
—  We intend to extract uranium from our properties using the in-situ recovery mining process which may not be
successful.
—  We face risks related to exploration and mine construction, if warranted, on our properties.
—  Because  we  may  be  unable  to  meet  property  payment  obligations  or  be  able  to  acquire  or  maintain
necessary mining licenses, we may lose interests in our exploration properties.
—  Our mineral properties may be subject to defects in title.
—  Because  we  may  be  unable  to  secure  access  rights,  we  may  be  unable  to  explore  and/or  develop  our
properties.
—  Because  mineral  exploration  and  mine  construction  activities  are  inherently  risky,  we  may  be  exposed  to
environmental liabilities.
—  Our  recently  completed  in-situ  extraction  project  and  future  expansion  projects  are  subject  to  risks
associated with new mine operations, which may result in delays in the start-up of mining operations, delays
in extraction from existing operations and unanticipated costs.
S-11
Table of Contents
—  Acquisitions and integration issues may expose us to additional risks which could have a material adverse
effect on our business.
—  The mining industry is highly competitive.
Risks Related to Corporate and Financial Structure
—  There  could  be  problems  with  construction  and  operation  of  the  Nichols  Ranch  ISR  Uranium  Project  which
could result in cost overruns, extraction delays and require us to raise more capital to continue operations.
—  We  may  not  be  able  to  achieve  targeted  extraction  or  production  rates  at  our  Nichols  Ranch  ISR  Uranium
Project.
—  Operating costs at the Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project could be higher than anticipated.
—  We may be unable to timely pay our obligations under our outstanding note, which may  result  in  us  losing
some  of  our  assets  covered  by  the  mortgage  and  security  agreement  related  to  the  note  to  the  extent
necessary  to  cover  our  obligations  and  may  adversely  affect  our  assets,  results  of  operations  and  future
prospects.
—  We are dependent upon key management employees.
—  Our growth will require new personnel, which we will be required to recruit, hire, train and retain.
—  Legislation, including the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, may make it difficult for us to retain or attract officers
and directors.
—  Stock market price and volume volatility may negatively impact the trading price of our shares of common
stock.
—  Granting of options may negatively impact the value of our shares of common stock.
—  The issuance of additional shares of common stock may negatively impact the trading price of our shares of
common stock.
—  The value of an investment in our shares of common stock could decline substantially.
—  We do not intend to pay dividends in the foreseeable future.
—  We depend on our ability to successfully access the capital and financial markets. Any inability to access
the capital or financial markets may limit our ability to execute our business plan or pursue investments that
we may rely on for future growth.
—  Market  events  and  conditions,  including  disruptions  in  the  U.S.  and  international  credit  markets  and  other
financial  systems  and  the  deterioration  of  the  U.S.  and  global  economic  conditions,  could,  among  other
things, impede access to capital or increase the cost of capital, which would have an adverse effect on our
ability to fund our working capital and other capital requirements.
Additional Risk Factors
There can be no assurance as to the liquidity of the trading market for the Warrants or that a trading market
for the Warrants will develop.
There  is  currently  no  public  market  through  which  the  Warrants  may  be  sold  and  we  do  not  intend  to  apply  for  the
listing  of  the  Warrants  on  any  securities  exchange.  This  may  affect  the  pricing  of  the  Warrants  in  the  secondary
market,  the  transparency  and  availability  of  trading  prices,  the  liquidity  of  the  Warrants,  and  the  extent  of  issuer
regulation.
Table of Contents
S-12
USE OF PROCEEDS
The  net  proceeds  from  the  sale  of  the  Units  in  this  offering  are  estimated  to  be  approximately  $10.97  million,  after
deducting the Agents’ fees and estimated offering expenses.
We intend to allocate the net proceeds from the offering as follows:
—  approximately $6 million to continue development and operations of mining facilities, including wellfields, at
our Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project; and
—  to  use  any  remaining  net  proceeds  of  the  offering,  if  any,  for  working  capital  requirements  and/or  for  other
general corporate purposes.
We intend to use the net proceeds from the exercise of the Warrants, if any, for working capital requirements and/or
other general corporate purposes.
The  actual  amount  that  we  spend  in  connection  with  each  of  the  intended  uses  of  proceeds  may  vary  significantly
from  the  amounts  specified  above,  and  will  depend  on  a  number  of  factors,  including  those  described  in  the  “Risk
Factors”  section  beginning  on page  S-11  of  this  prospectus  supplement  and  page  8  of  the  accompanying  base
prospectus  and,  to  the  extent  applicable,  the  “Risk  Factors”  sections  in  our  annual  report  on  Form  10-K  and  our
quarterly reports on Form 10-Q as filed with the SEC and the Canadian securities authorities.
Until such time as the net proceeds of the offering are used as described above, we intend to invest the net proceeds
primarily in short-term bank guaranteed deposits or other substantially similar secure deposits.
Depending  on  opportunities,  economic  conditions  and  the  results  of  the  activities  described  above  we  may  use  a
portion of the use of proceeds allocated above to invest in property acquisitions or complete other corporate activities
designed  to  achieve  our  corporate  goals.  Estimated  costs  and  the  scope  of  activities  cannot  be  determined  at  this
time.
Table of Contents
S-13
CONSOLIDATED CAPITALIZATION
Since March 31, 2014, there have been no changes to our share capital, on a consolidated basis, except the following
stock issuances and stock option transactions:
—  Stock issued for services:      30,000
—  Stock options exercised:     119,032
—  Stock options expired:         175,500
—  Stock options granted:        79,000
The following table sets forth our cash and consolidated capitalization as at December 31, 2013 on an actual basis,
as at March 31, 2014 on an actual basis and as at March 31, 2014 as adjusted to give effect to the distribution of the
Units offered hereunder after deducting the placement agents’ fee and the estimated expenses of the offering payable
by  us  and  the  application  of  the  net  proceeds  from  this  offering  as  described  under  the  section  entitled  “Use  of
Proceeds.” The amount of proceeds we ultimately receive from this offering is dependent upon numerous factors and
subject  to  general  market  conditions.  Also,  as  there  is  no  minimum  offering  amount  required  as  a  condition  to  the
closing  of  this  offering,  the  actual  offering  amount,  Agents’  fees,  and  proceeds,  before  expenses,  to  us  may  be
substantially less than the maximum amounts. Accordingly, the amounts shown in the table “As at March 31, 2014
after giving effect to the issuance of the Units” column may differ from actual results.
The table should be read in conjunction with our audited annual consolidated financial statements for the year ended
December 31, 2013, our unaudited consolidated financial statements as at and for the three months ended March 31,
2014, including the notes thereto, and the management’s discussion and analysis thereof, incorporated in each case
by reference into this prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus.
As at
December 31,
As at
As at March 31, 2014 after
giving effect to the
2013(1)
March 31, 2014(2)
issuance of the Units(2)(3)
Cash
Outstanding share capital
(750,000,000 authorized common stock)
Additional Paid-in Capital
Deficit Accumulated During
the Exploration Stage
Total stockholder’s equity (deficit)
Non-controlling Interest
Total Equity (Deficit)
$11,915,676
$6,815,585
$17,780,585
$85,815
$86,120
$95,720
(85,815,074 shares)
(86,119,774 shares)
(95,719,774 shares)
$156,814,709
$157,544,806
$168,500,206
$(163,562,491)
$(6,661,967)
$113,488
$(6,548,479)
$(168,471,768)
$(10,840,842)
$104,408
$(10,736,434)
$(168,471,768)
$124,158
$104,408
$228,566
(1)
(2)
(3)
These figures do not include 11,245,380 shares of common stock reserved for issuance pursuant to outstanding stock options, which were
exercisable  at  a  weighted  average  price  of  $2.07  per  share  nor  7,875,000  shares  of  common  stock  reserved  for  issuance  pursuant  to
outstanding warrants exercisable at a weighted average price of $1.96 per share, in each case outstanding as of December 31, 2013.
These figures do not include 8,482,180 shares of common stock reserved for issuance pursuant to outstanding stock options, which were
exercisable  at  a  weighted  average  price  of  $1.73  per  share  nor  7,750,000  shares  of  common  stock  reserved  for  issuance  pursuant  to
outstanding warrants exercisable at a weighted average price of $1.96 per share, in each case outstanding as of March 31, 2014. To the
extent  any  options  are  exercised,  new  options  are  issued  under  our  equity  incentive  plans,  or  we  otherwise  issue  additional  shares  of
common stock or securities exercisable for or convertible into shares of common stock, there will be further dilution to new investors. As of the
date of this prospectus supplement, there are 17,722,860 shares of common stock available for issuance under our equity incentive plans.
Assumes all 9,600,000 Units are sold pursuant to the offering under this prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus.
These figures do not include the exercise of the Warrants.
Table of Contents
S-14
DIVIDEND POLICY
We have never declared or paid any cash dividends on our shares of common stock. We intend to retain our earnings,
if any, to finance the growth and development of our business and do not expect to pay cash dividends or to make
any other distributions in the near future. Our board of directors will review this policy from time to time having regard
to our financing requirements, financial condition and other factors considered to be relevant.
DILUTION
As  of  March  31,  2014,  we  had  a  net  tangible  book  value  of  $(10,736,434),  or  approximately  $(0.12)  per  share.  Net
tangible  book  value  represents  our  total  tangible  assets,  less  all  liabilities,  divided  by  the  number  of  shares  of  our
outstanding common stock. Without taking into account any changes in such net tangible book value after March 31,
2014, other than to give effect to our sale of 9,600,000 shares of common stock offered hereby (based on the public
offering price of $1.24 per Share, allocating $0.01 of the $1.25 price per Unit to the one half of one Warrant), the pro
forma  net  tangible  book  value  per  share  at  March  31,  2014  would  have  been  approximately  $0.002,  based  on  net
proceeds  from  this  offering  of  approximately  $10.97  million,  after  deducting  the  Agents’  fees  and  estimated  offering
expenses.  This  amount  represents  an  immediate  increase  in  net  tangible  book  value  of  $0.122  per  share  to  our
current  stockholders  and  an  immediate  decrease  in  net  tangible  book  value  of  $1.238  per  share  to  new  investors
purchasing Shares in this offering, as illustrated in the following table:
Public offering price per share
Net tangible book value per share as of March 31, 2014
Increase per share attributable to this offering
As adjusted net tangible book value per share after this offering
Net tangible book value dilution per share to new investors in this offering
$(0.12)    
   $0.122
$ 1.24
$0.002  
   $1.238
In the discussion and table above, we assume no exercise of outstanding options or of the Warrants. As of July 17,
2014,  there  were  outstanding  options  exercisable  to  purchase  a  total  of  8,261,648  shares  of  common  stock  at  a
weighted  average  exercise  price  of  $1.73  per  share  and  5,750,000  shares  of  common  stock  reserved  for  issuance
pursuant to outstanding warrants exercisable at a weighted average price of $1.60 per share.
Shares and Warrant Shares
DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES DISTRIBUTED
The  Shares  and  the  Warrant  Shares  will  have  all  of  the  characteristics,  rights  and  restrictions  of  our  shares  of
common  stock.  We  are  authorized  to  issue  750,000,000  shares  of  common  stock,  of  which  86,268,806  shares  are
issued and outstanding. Our shares of common stock are entitled to one vote per share on all matters submitted to a
vote of the stockholders, including the election of directors. Except as otherwise required by law, the holders of our
shares of common stock will possess all voting power. Generally, all matters to be voted on by stockholders must be
approved  by  a  majority  (or,  in  the  case  of  election  of  directors,  by  a  plurality)  of  the  votes  entitled  to  be  cast  by
holders of our common stock that are present in person or represented by proxy. Holders of our shares of common
stock representing 33 1/3% of our capital stock issued, outstanding and entitled to vote, represented in person or by
proxy, are necessary to constitute a quorum at any meeting of our stockholders. A vote by the holders of a majority of
our  outstanding  shares  of  common  stock  is  required  to  effectuate  certain  fundamental  corporate  changes  such  as
liquidation, merger or an amendment to our Articles of Incorporation. Our Articles of Incorporation do not provide for
cumulative voting in the election of directors.
The holders of our shares of common stock will be entitled to such cash dividends as may be declared from time to
time by our board of directors from funds available therefor.
Upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up, the holders of our shares of common stock will be entitled to receive pro
rata all assets available for distribution to such holders.
Table of Contents
S-15
In  the  event  of  any  merger  or  consolidation  with  or  into  another  company  in  connection  with  which  our  shares  of
common stock are converted into or exchangeable for shares of stock, other securities or property (including cash),
all holders of our shares of common stock will be entitled to receive the same kind and amount of shares of stock and
other securities and property (including cash).
Holders of our shares of common stock have no pre-emptive rights or conversion rights and there are no redemption
provisions applicable to our shares of common stock.
Warrants
The Warrants will be issued in registered form under, and will be governed by, an indenture to be dated as of the date
of  the  closing  of  this  offering  (which  we  refer  to  as  the  “Warrant  Indenture”)  between  us,  and  Corporate  Stock
Transfer, Inc. as warrant agent. Each whole Warrant will entitle the holder to purchase one share of our common stock
at an exercise price of $1.60, subject to adjustment and early termination, as described below. If not exercised, the
Warrants will expire 30 months from the date of the closing of this offering. The shares of common stock underlying
the Warrants, when issued upon exercise of the Warrants, will be fully paid and non-assessable, and we will pay any
transfer tax incurred as a result of the issuance of the underlying shares of common stock except for any tax payable
in respect of any transfer in a name other than the holder’s name.
In the event that our shares of common stock trade on the NYSE MKT at a closing price of greater than $2.75 per
share for a period of 20 consecutive trading days at any time following the closing of this offering, we may accelerate
the  expiry  date  of  the  Warrants  by  giving  notice  via  a  press  release  to  the  holders  thereof  and  in  such  case  the
Warrants will expire on the 30th day after the date on which such notice is given by us.
The Warrants contain provisions for cashless exercise in certain limited circumstances, as described below, and there
is  no  minimum  or  maximum  amount  that  may  be  exercised  at  any  one  time.  The  Warrants  may  be  transferred  or
assigned. We may require payment of a sum sufficient to cover any taxes or governmental or other charges that may
be imposed in connection with any registration of transfer or exchange of a Warrant certificate.
The  Warrant  Indenture  will  provide  for  adjustment  in  the  number  of  shares  of  common  stock  issuable  upon  the
exercise of the Warrants and/or the exercise price per share of common stock upon the occurrence of certain events,
including:
(a)
the  issuance  of  shares  of  common  stock  or  securities  exchangeable  for  or  convertible  into  shares  of
common stock at no additional cost to all or substantially all of the holders of the shares of common stock
by way of a stock dividend or other distribution;
(b)
the subdivision, redivision or change of the shares of common stock into a greater number of shares;
(c)
the  reduction,  combination  or  consolidation  of  the  shares  of  common  stock  into  a  lesser  number  of
shares;
(d)
(e)
(f)
the issuance to all or substantially all of the holders of the shares of common stock of rights, options or
warrants under which such holders are entitled, during a period expiring not more than 45 days after the
record  date  for  such  issuance,  to  subscribe  for  or  purchase  shares  of  common  stock,  or  securities
exchangeable for or convertible into shares of common stock, at a price per share of common stock to the
holder  (or  at  an  exchange  or  conversion  price  per  share  of  common  stock)  of  less  than  95%  of  the
“Current  Market  Price,”  as  defined  in  the  Warrant  Indenture,  for  the  shares  of  common  stock  on  such
record date;
the  issuance  or  distribution  to  all  or  substantially  all  of  the  holders  of  shares  of  common  stock  of
securities  of  our  Company  (including  securities  exchangeable  for  or  convertible  into  shares  of  common
stock), or other property or assets of our Company; and
an issuer bid or tender or exchange offer (other than an odd lot offer or a normal course issuer bid) made
by  the  Company  to  all  or  substantially  all  of  the  holders  of  the  shares  of  common  stock  for  all  or  any
portion of the shares of common stock where the cash and the value of any other consideration included
in  such  payment  per  share  of  common  stock  exceeds  the  “Current  Market  Price,”  as  defined  in  the
Warrant Indenture, per share of common stock on the trading day immediately preceding commencement
of the issuer bid or tender or exchange offer.
Table of Contents
S-16
The  Warrant  Indenture  will  also  provide  for  adjustment  in  the  class  and/or  number  of  shares  of  common  stock
issuable  upon  the  exercise  of  the  Warrants  and/or  exercise  price  per  share  of  common  stock  in  the  event  of  the
following additional events:
(a)
re-classification of the shares of common stock (other than as described above);
(b)
(c)
consolidation, amalgamations, arrangements or mergers of our Company with or into any other corporation
or other entity (other than consolidations, amalgamations, arrangements or mergers which do not result in
any  reclassification  of  the  outstanding  shares  of  common  stock  or  a  change  of  the  shares  of  common
stock into other shares); or
the  transfer  of  the  property  or  assets  of  our  Company  as  an  entirety  or  substantially  as  an  entirety  to
another corporation or entity (other than transfers of the property or assets of our Company which do not
result  in  any  reclassification  of  the  outstanding  shares  of  common  stock  or  a  change  of  the  shares  of
common stock into other shares).
No adjustment to the exercise price or the number of shares of common stock purchasable upon the exercise of the
Warrants will be required to be made unless the cumulative effect of such adjustment or adjustments would result in a
change  of  at  least  1%  in  the  prevailing  exercise  price  or  a  change  in  the  number  of  shares  of  common  stock
purchasable upon exercise by at least one one-hundredth of a share of common stock, as the case may be.
We will also covenant in the Warrant Indenture that, during the period in which the Warrants are exercisable, we will
give  notice  to  each  registered  holder  of  Warrants  of  certain  stated  events,  including  events  that  would  result  in  an
adjustment to the exercise price for the Warrants or the number of shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of
the Warrants, at least 14 days prior to the record date or effective date, as the case may be, of such event.
We are not required to issue fractional shares upon the exercise of the Warrants (and are not required to pay cash in
lieu of the issuance of fractional shares). The holders of the Warrants will not possess any rights as shareholders of
our Company until such holders exercise the Warrants.
For the life of the Warrants, subject to their terms, the holders of the Warrants have the opportunity to profit from a
rise  in  the  market  price  of  the  shares  of  common  stock  without  assuming  the  risk  of  ownership  of  the  underlying
shares of common stock. Furthermore, the terms on which we obtain additional capital during the life of the Warrants
may be adversely affected by the existence of these Warrants.
From  time  to  time,  we  and  the  warrant  agent,  without  the  consent  of  the  holders  of  Warrants,  may  amend  or
supplement  the  Warrant  Indenture  for  certain  purposes,  including  curing  defects  or  inconsistencies  or  making  any
change that, in the opinion of the warrant agent, does not prejudice the rights of the warrant agent or the holders of the
Warrants. In accordance with and subject to the terms of the Warrant Indenture, amendments or supplements to the
Warrant Indenture that so prejudice the interests of the holders of the Warrants may only be made by “extraordinary
resolution”, which will be defined in the Warrant Indenture as a resolution either (i) passed at a meeting of the holders
of  Warrants  at  which  there  are  holders  of  Warrants  present  in  person  or  represented  by  proxy  representing  at  least
25% of the aggregate number of shares of common stock which may be acquired pursuant to all the then outstanding
Warrants, and passed by the affirmative vote of holders of Warrants representing not less than 66 2/3% of the votes
cast  upon  such  resolution;  or  (ii)  adopted  by  an  instrument  in  writing  signed  by  the  holders  of  Warrants  entitled  to
acquire not less than 66 2/3% of the aggregate number of shares of common stock which may be acquired pursuant
to all the then outstanding Warrants.
It is a condition of the closing of this offering that we file with the SEC prior to the closing of the offering a prospectus
supplement relating to the offering of the Warrant Shares issuable from time to time upon exercise of the Warrants.
We  have  agreed  to  use  our  reasonable  best  efforts  to  maintain  the  registration  statement,  as  supplemented,  or
another  registration  statement  relating  to  these  shares  of  common  stock  effective  until  the  earlier  of  the  expiration
date  of  the  Warrants  and  the  date  on  which  no  Warrants  remain  outstanding  (provided,  however,  that  nothing  shall
prevent our amalgamation, arrangement, merger or sale, including any take-over bid, and any associated delisting or
deregistration  or  ceasing  to  be  a  reporting  issuer,  provided  that,  so  long  as  the  Warrants  are  still  outstanding  and
represent a right to acquire securities of the acquiring company, the acquiring company shall assume our obligations
under  the  Warrant  Indenture).  If  no  such  registration  statement  is  effective,  no  person  holding  Warrants  will  be
permitted to exercise Warrants, unless an exemption from the registration requirements of the U.S. Securities Act of
1933,  amended  (which  we  refer  to  as  the  “U.S.  Securities  Act”)  is  available.  During  any  such  period,  any  person
holding  Warrants  may  give  notice  to  us  of  their  desire  to  exercise  the  Warrants,  at  which  time  we  will,  at  our  sole
discretion,  either  (i)  redeem  the  Warrants  held  by  them  for  a  redemption  price  equal  to  the  difference  between  the
current market price (as applicable) per share of common stock and the exercise price, multiplied by the number of
Table of Contents
S-17
shares of common stock otherwise issuable upon the exercise of the Warrants or (ii) permit the cashless exercise of
the Warrants and issue such number of shares of common stock calculated pursuant to the provisions of the Warrant
Indenture, provided that such shares of common stock shall not be subject to any transfer restrictions in the United
States  or  Canada  (provided,  however,  that  nothing  shall  prevent  our  amalgamation,  arrangement,  merger  or  sale,
including any take-over bid, and any associated delisting or deregistration or ceasing to be a reporting issuer, provided
that, so long as the Warrants are still outstanding and represent a right to acquire securities of the acquiring company,
the acquiring company shall assume our obligations under the Warrant Indenture). If no such registration statement is
effective, we will notify the warrant agent in accordance with the provisions of the Warrant Indenture.
There  is  no  market  through  which  the  Warrants  may  be  sold  and  purchasers  may  not  be  able  to  resell  the
Warrants purchased in this offering. This may affect the pricing of the Warrants in the secondary market, the
transparency  and  availability  of  trading  prices,  the  liquidity  of  such  Warrants,  and  the  extent  of  issuer
regulation.
All  of  the  foregoing  statements  are  subject  to  the  more  detailed  provisions  of  the  Warrant  Indenture.  The  Warrant
Indenture will be included as an exhibit to our current report on Form 8-K that will be filed with the SEC in connection
with the consummation of this offering.
Rights Plan
Our board of directors previously declared a dividend distribution of one common stock purchase right (which we refer
to as a “Right”) for each outstanding share of our common stock, which distribution was payable on August 25, 2010
(which we refer to as the “Record Time”) pursuant to a shareholders rights plan effective August 25, 2010 (which we
refer to as the “Rights Plan”). Each Right entitles the registered holder to purchase one share of common stock from
us at a price of $8.75 per share (which we refer as the “Exercise Price”), subject to adjustment.
Each Right will be evidenced by the share of common stock and will trade only with such share, until the Separation
Time (as defined below), as discussed and defined below. No physical distribution of separate certificates evidencing
the Rights will be made until the Separation Time.
On July 10, 2013, our shareholders reconfirmed the Rights Plan at our annual meeting.
Issuance of Rights
Under  the  Rights  Plan,  we  issued  one  Right  in  respect  of  each  share  of  common  stock  outstanding  on  the  Record
Time and we will issue one Right in respect of each share of common stock which may be issued after the Record
Time  and  prior  to  the  earlier  of  the  Separation  Time  and  the  Expiration  Time  (as  defined  below).  We  may,  after  the
Separation Time but prior to the Expiration Time, issue one Right in respect of each share of common stock which is
issued  after  the  Record  Time  pursuant  to  the  exercise  of  securities  convertible  into  shares  of  our  common  stock
(which  we  refer  to  as  the  “Convertible  Securities”)  which  are  outstanding  as  of  the  date  of  the  first  public
announcement that any person or entity has become an Acquiring Person (as defined below) (which we refer to as the
“Stock Acquisition Date”).
Exercise Price and Adjustment of Exercise Price and Number of Rights
Each  Right  will  entitle  the  holder  thereof,  from  and  after  the  Separation  Time  and  prior  to  the  Expiration  Time,  to
purchase,  for  the  Exercise  Price,  one  share  of  our  common  stock.  The  Exercise  Price  and  the  number  of  Rights
outstanding are subject to adjustment if, after the Record Time and prior to the Expiration Time, we perform certain
actions that customarily trigger adjustments, including declaring or paying a dividend on our shares of common stock,
subdividing or changing the number of outstanding shares of our common stock into a greater number of shares and
combining or changing the number of outstanding shares of our common stock into a smaller number of shares.
Exercise of Rights and Transferability
Until the Separation Time, the Rights will not be exercisable and each Right will be evidenced by the certificate for the
associated share of common stock and will be transferable only together with, and will be transferred by a transfer of,
the  associated  share  of  common  stock.  From  and  after  the  Separation  Time  and  prior  to  the  Expiration  Time,  the
Rights will be exercisable and the registration and transfer of the Rights will be separate from and independent of the
shares of our common stock.
Table of Contents
S-18
Promptly following the Separation Time, Corporate Stock Transfer, Inc. (which we refer to as the “Rights Agent”) will
send to each holder of record of our common stock as of the Separation Time, or who subsequently becomes a holder
of  record  of  our  common  stock  upon  the  exercise  of  rights  attaching  to  Convertible  Securities  outstanding  at  the
Stock  Acquisition  Date,  a  rights  certificate  (which  we  refer  to  as  a  “Rights Certificate”)  representing  one  Right  for
each  share  of  our  common  stock.  The  Rights  may  be  exercised  in  whole  or  in  part  on  any  business  day  after  the
Separation Time and prior to the Expiration Time by submitting to the Rights Agent, a Rights Certificate together with
an election to exercise the applicable Rights and payment of the Exercise Price for each Right being exercised. Upon
receipt  of  the  foregoing,  the  Rights  Agent  will  direct  our  transfer  agent  to  issue  stock  certificates  to  the  holders
exercising their Rights, representing one share of our common stock for each Right exercised.
Flip-in Event
A  flip-in  event  (which  we  refer  to  as  a  “Flip-in  Event”)  occurs  when  any  person  or  entity  becomes  an  Acquiring
Person. If, prior to the Expiration Time, a Flip-in Event occurs, we will take such action as is necessary to ensure and
provide, within ten business days of the Flip-in Event or such longer period as may be required, that each Right will
thereafter constitute the right to purchase from us, upon payment of the Exercise Price and otherwise exercising the
applicable Right in accordance with the terms of the Rights Plan, that number of shares of our common stock having
an aggregate market price on the date of consummation or occurrence of the Flip-in Event equal to twice the Exercise
Price for an amount in cash equal to the Exercise Price.
Upon the occurrence of any Flip-in Event, any Rights that are or were beneficially owned on or after the earlier of the
Separation  Time  and  the  Stock  Acquisition  Date  by  an  Acquiring  Person  or  any  person  or  entity  acting  jointly  or  in
concert  with  an  Acquiring  Person  or  a  transferee  of  Rights  of  an  Acquiring  Person  or  of  any  person  or  entity  acting
jointly or in concert with an Acquiring Person who becomes a transferee in a transfer that our board of directors has
determined  is  part  of  a  plan,  arrangement  or  scheme  of  an  Acquiring  Person  will  become  null  and  void  without  any
further action, and any holder of those Rights will not have any right whatsoever to exercise those Rights under the
Rights Plan and will not have thereafter any right whatsoever with respect to those Rights.
Separation Time
Separation  Time  means  the  close  of  business  on  the  tenth  trading  day  after  the  earlier  of  (i)  the  Stock  Acquisition
Date, (ii) the date of the commencement of or first public announcement of the intent of any person (other than us or
any  of  our  subsidiaries)  to  commence  a  take-over  bid  (other  than  a  Permitted  Bid  or  Competing  Permitted  Bid  (as
such terms are defined below)), (iii) the date upon which a take-over bid ceases to be a Permitted Bid or Competing
Permitted Bid or (iv) such later time as may be determined by our board of directors acting in good faith.
Expiration Time
Expiration Time means the earlier of (i) the date our board of directors waives or redeems the Rights or (ii) the close of
the annual general meeting of our stockholders held in 2016.
Acquiring Person
Acquiring  Person  means  any  person  who  or  entity  which  is  the  beneficial  owner  of  20%  or  more  of  the  outstanding
shares of our common stock and our other voting securities (which we collectively refer to as our “Voting Shares”),
provided, however, that the term Acquiring Person does not include (i) us or any of our subsidiaries, (ii) any person
who or entity which becomes the beneficial owner of 20% or more of the outstanding shares of our common stock and
our  other  voting  securities  as  a  result  of  any  one  or  any  combination  of:  (A)  a  Voting  Share  Reduction  (as  defined
below);  (B)  a  Permitted  Bid  Acquisition  (as  defined  below);  (C)  an  Exempt  Acquisition  (as  defined  below);  (D)  a
Convertible Security Acquisition (as defined below); or (E) a Pro Rata Acquisition (as defined below), (iii) for the period
of 10 days after the date of the first public announcement of a take-over bid, any person who or entity which becomes
the beneficial owner of 20% or more of the outstanding Voting Shares as a result of that person or entity making or
proposing  to  make  a  take-over  bid,  (iv)  an  underwriter  or  member  of  a  banking  or  selling  group  that  becomes  the
beneficial owner of 20% or more of the outstanding Voting Shares in connection with a distribution of our securities or
(v) any employee or executive or director stock ownership or other employee or executive or director benefit plan, or
trust for the benefit of our employees or the employees of any of our subsidiaries or any
Table of Contents
S-19
person or entity organized, appointed or established by us for or pursuant to the terms of any such plan or trust. In
general:
(A)
a Voting Share Reduction means an acquisition or redemption by us or our subsidiaries of Voting Shares
which,  by  reducing  the  number  of  Voting  Shares  outstanding  or  which  may  be  voted,  increases  the
proportionate number of Voting Shares beneficially owned by any person or entity;
(B)
a  Permitted  Bid  Acquisition  means  an  acquisition  made  pursuant  to  a  Permitted  Bid  or  a  Competing
Permitted Bid;
(C)
an  Exempt  Acquisition  means  a  share  acquisition  in  respect  of  which  our  board  of  directors  has  waived
the application of the Rights Plan (i) which was made on or prior to the Record Time, (ii) which was made
pursuant to a dividend reinvestment plan, (iii) which was made pursuant to the receipt or exercise of rights
issued by us to all the holders of our common stock to subscribe for or purchase shares of our common
stock  or  Convertible  Securities,  provided  that  those  rights  are  acquired  directly  from  us;  (iv)  which  was
made  pursuant  to  a  distribution  by  us  of  shares  of  our  common  stock  or  Convertible  Securities  made
pursuant to a prospectus or (v) which was made pursuant to a distribution by us of shares of our common
stock or Convertible Securities by way of a private placement by us or upon the exercise by an individual
employee  of  stock  options  granted  under  a  stock  option  plan  of  ours  or  rights  to  purchase  securities
granted under a share purchase plan of ours where all necessary stock exchange approvals for the private
placement, stock option plan or share purchase plan have been obtained and the private placement, stock
option plan or share purchase plan complies with the terms and conditions of the approvals and the person
or  entity  does  not  become  the  beneficial  owner  of  more  than  25%  of  the  shares  of  our  common  stock
outstanding immediately prior to the distribution;
(D)
a  Convertible  Security  Acquisition  means  the  acquisition  of  shares  of  our  common  stock  upon  the
exercise of Convertible Securities received by a person or entity pursuant to a Permitted Bid Acquisition,
Exempt Acquisition or a Pro Rata Acquisition; and
(E)
a  Pro  Rata  Acquisition  means  an  acquisition  by  a  person  or  entity  of  beneficial  ownership  of  Voting
Shares as a result of: a dividend reinvestment acquisition; a stock dividend, a stock split or other event
pursuant to which a person or entity becomes the beneficial owner of Voting Shares on the same pro rata
basis as all other holders of Voting Shares; the acquisition or exercise by a person or entity of rights to
purchase Voting Shares distributed to that person or entity in the course of a distribution to all holders of
Voting Shares pursuant to a rights offering or pursuant to a prospectus; or a distribution of Voting Shares
or securities convertible into or exchangeable for Voting Shares (and the conversion or exchange of those
convertible  or  exchangeable  securities)  made  pursuant  to  a  prospectus  or  a  distribution  by  way  of  a
private placement; provided that the person or entity does not thereby acquire a greater percentage of the
Voting  Shares,  or  securities  convertible  into  or  exchangeable  for  Voting  Shares,  so  offered  than  the
person’s or entity’s percentage of Voting Shares beneficially owned immediately prior to the acquisition.
Permitted Bid and Competing Permitted Bid
A take-over bid will not trigger a Flip-in Event if it is a Permitted Bid or a Competing Permitted Bid.
A  Permitted  Bid  is  a  take-over  bid  made  by  way  of  a  take-over  bid  circular  which  also  complies  with  the  following
additional  provisions:  (i)  the  take-over  bid  is  made  for  any  and  all  Voting  Shares  to  all  holders  of  record  of  Voting
Shares wherever resident as registered on our books; (ii) the take-over bid contains, and the take up and payment for
securities tendered or deposited thereunder will be subject to, irrevocable and unqualified conditions that (A) no Voting
Shares will be taken up or paid for pursuant to the take-over bid prior to the close of business on a date which is not
earlier than the 60th day following the date of the take-over bid and unless at such date more than 50% of the Voting
Shares  held  by  independent  stockholders  have  been  deposited  pursuant  to  the  take-over  bid  and  not  withdrawn,
(B) unless the take-over bid is withdrawn, Voting Shares may be deposited pursuant to the take-over bid at any time
prior to the close of business on the date of first take up or payment and that any Voting Shares deposited pursuant
to the take-over bid may be withdrawn at any time prior to the close of business on that date and,
Table of Contents
S-20
(C) if as of a date not earlier than the 60th day following the date of the take-over bid more than 50% of the Voting
Shares held by independent stockholders have been deposited pursuant to the take-over bid and not withdrawn, the
offeror will make a public announcement of that fact and the take-over bid will remain open for deposits and tenders of
Voting Shares for not less than 10 business days from the date of the public announcement.
A  Competing  Permitted  Bid  is  a  take-over  bid  that  is  made  after  a  Permitted  Bid  has  been  made  and  prior  to  the
expiry of that Permitted Bid that satisfies the requirements for a Permitted Bid and that contains, and the take up and
payment for securities tendered or deposited thereunder are subject to, an irrevocable and unqualified condition that
no Voting Shares will be taken up or paid for pursuant to the take-over bid prior to the close of business on a date that
is no earlier than the later of (A) the earliest date on which Voting Shares may be taken up or paid for under any prior
Permitted Bid in existence on the date of that take-over bid and (B) the last day on which the take-over bid must be
open for acceptance after the date of the take-over bid under applicable legislation.
Agreement of Rights Holders
Every  holder  of  Rights,  by  accepting  the  same,  consents  and  agrees  with  us  and  the  Rights  Agent  and  with  every
other holder of Rights (i) to be bound by and subject to the provisions of the Rights Plan in respect of all Rights held,
(ii) that, prior to the Separation Time, each Right will be transferable only together with, and will be transferred by a
transfer of, the associated share of common stock, (iii) that, after the Separation Time, the Rights Certificate will be
transferable only upon registration of the transfer in the register for the Rights, (iv) that, prior to due presentment of a
Rights  Certificate  for  registration  of  transfer,  we,  the  Rights  Agent  and  any  agent  of  ours  or  the  Rights  Agent  may
deem and treat the person in whose name the Rights Certificate is registered as the absolute owner thereof and of the
Rights  evidenced  thereby  for  all  purposes  whatsoever,  and  neither  we  nor  the  Rights  Agent  will  be  affected  by  any
notice to the contrary, (v) that the holders of the Rights have waived their right to receive any fractional Rights or any
fractional  shares  upon  exercise  of  Rights,  (vi)  that,  without  the  approval  of  any  holder  of  Rights  and  upon  the  sole
authority of our board of directors acting in good faith, the Rights Plan may be supplemented or amended from time to
time  as  provided  for  in  the  Rights  Plan  and  (vii)  that  neither  we  nor  our  board  of  directors  nor  the  Rights  Agent  will
have  any  liability  to  any  holder  of  a  Right  or  any  other  person  or  entity  as  result  of  the  inability  of  us,  our  board  of
directors or the Rights Agent to perform any of their obligations under the Rights Plan by reason of any preliminary or
permanent injunction or other order, decree, notice of hearing or ruling issued by a court of competent jurisdiction or
by a governmental, regulatory or administrative agency or commission, or any statute, rule, regulation, or executive
order  promulgated  or  enacted  by  any  governmental  authority,  prohibiting  or  otherwise  inhibiting  or  restraining
performance of such obligation.
Rights Holders Not Stockholders
No holder of any Rights or Rights Certificate will be entitled to vote, receive dividends or be deemed for any purpose
the  holder  of  any  shares  of  our  common  stock  or  any  other  share  or  security  of  ours  which  may  at  any  time  be
issuable on the exercise of the Rights, nor will the Shareholder Rights Plan Agreement, made as of August 25, 2010
between the Company and Corporate Stock Transfer, Inc., or any Rights Certificate be construed or deemed to confer
upon the holder of any Right or Rights Certificate any of the rights, titles, benefits or privileges of a holder of shares of
our common stock or any of our other shares or securities or any right to vote at any meeting of our stockholders or to
receive notice of any meeting or other action affecting any holder of shares of our common stock or any of our other
shares or securities.
Redemption and Waiver
Our board of directors, acting in good faith, may, with the prior consent of the holders of Voting Shares or the holders
of Rights, at any time prior to the occurrence of a Flip-in Event, elect to redeem all but not less than all of the then
outstanding Rights at a redemption price of $0.0001 per Right (which we refer to as “Redemption Price”), subject to
adjustment. If our board of directors elects or is deemed to have elected to redeem the Rights subsequent to a Flip-in
Event  and  the  redemption  is  approved  by  the  holders  of  Voting  Shares  or  the  holders  of  Rights,  as  applicable,  the
right to exercise the Rights will, without further action and without notice, terminate and the only right thereafter of the
holders of the Rights will be to receive the Redemption Price.
Our board of directors may also waive certain provisions of the Rights Plan. Amongst other provisions, our board of
directors, acting in good faith, may, prior to the occurrence of a Flip-in Event, determine to waive the application of
Table of Contents
S-21
the Rights Plan to that particular Flip-in Event, provided that the Flip-in Event would occur by way of a takeover bid
made by means of a takeover bid circular delivered to all holders of Voting Shares. Our board of directors may also
waive the application of the Rights Plan in respect of the occurrence of any Flip-in Event if it has determined that a
person or entity became an Acquiring Person by inadvertence and without any intention to become, or knowledge that
it  would  become,  an  Acquiring  Person  under  the  Rights  Plan,  provided  that  within  10  days  after  any  waiver  by  our
board  of  directors,  the  person  or  entity  reduces  its  beneficial  ownership  of  Voting  Shares  such  that  the  person  or
entity is no longer an Acquiring Person.
Supplements and Amendments
We may make changes to the Rights Plan prior to or after the Separation Time to correct any clerical or typographical
error  or  to  maintain  the  validity  of  the  Rights  Plan  as  a  result  of  any  change  in  any  applicable  legislation,  rules  or
regulation  without  the  approval  of  the  holders  of  the  Voting  Shares  or  the  Rights.  We  may,  with  the  approval  of  the
holders of Voting Shares, at any time prior to the Separation Time, make changes to or rescind any of the provisions
of  the  Rights  Plan  and  the  Rights  (whether  or  not  the  action  would  materially  adversely  affect  the  interests  of  the
holders  of  the  Rights  generally).  We  may,  with  the  approval  of  the  holders  of  the  Rights,  at  any  time  after  the
Separation Time, make changes to or rescind any of the provisions of the Rights Plan and the Rights (whether or not
the action would materially adversely affect the interests of the holders of the Rights generally).
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
We  are  offering  the  Units  through  the  Agents.  Subject  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  Agency  Agreement,  the
Agents have agreed to act as the placement agents in connection with this offering. The Agents are not purchasing
any of the Units offered by this prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus, nor are they required
to arrange for the purchase or sale of any specific number or dollar amount of the Units. There is no requirement that
any minimum number of Units or dollar amount of securities be sold in this offering and there can be no assurance
that  we  will  sell  all  or  any  of  the  Units  being  offered.  Because  there  is  no  minimum  offering  amount  required  as  a
condition to closing this offering, we will close and sell that number of Units that have been placed as of the closing
date,  even  if  such  number  of  Units  is  less  than  the  maximum  amount  offered  under  this  prospectus  supplement.
Confirmations and definitive prospectuses  will  be  distributed  to  all  investors  who  agree  to  purchase  Units,  informing
them of the closing date of this offering. We currently anticipate that the closing of the offering will take place no later
than  July  25,  2014.  However,  if  and  when  the  offering  has  been  fully  subscribed,  we  and  the  Agents  may  agree  to
close the offering earlier than currently anticipated.
Subject  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  Agency  Agreement,  the  Agents  have  agreed  to  use  commercially
reasonable  efforts  to  severally  arrange  for  the  purchase  of  the  following  percentage  of  Units  offered  under  this
prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus at the public offering price on the cover page of this
prospectus supplement.
Agent
Haywood Securities Inc.
Cantor Fitzgerald Canada Corporation
H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC
Laurentian Bank Securities Inc.
Total
Number of Units 
 
45%  
40%  
 
7.5%  
 
7.5%  
 
 
100%
The offering is being made in the United States and in each of the provinces of Canada, except Quebec, pursuant to a
multi-jurisdictional disclosure system implemented by the United States and Canada. The Units will be offered in the
United  States  and  Canada  through  the  Agents  either  directly  or,  if  applicable,  through  their  respective  registered
broker-dealer affiliates. Subject to applicable law and the provisions of the Agency Agreement, the Agents may offer
the Units outside the United States and Canada. H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC will only be offering Units in the United
States.
The public offering price on the cover page of this prospectus supplement was determined based upon arm’s length
negotiations between us and the Lead Agents.
The  Agency  Agreement  provides  that  the  Agents’  obligation  to  place  the  Units  depends  on  the  satisfaction  of  the
conditions contained in the Agency Agreement including, but not limited to:
•
the representations and warranties made by us to the Agents are true;
the representations and warranties made by us to the Agents are true;
•
•
there is no material change in our business; and
we deliver customary closing documents to the Agents.
Additionally,  the  obligations  of  the  Agents  under  the  Agency  Agreement  may  be  terminated  at  the  discretion  of  the
Agents upon the occurrence of certain stated events. We have agreed to indemnify each Agent, the affiliates of each
Agent, each of the officers, directors, employees, partners, shareholders and agents of each Agent and each affiliate
of  each  Agent  and  each  other  person,  if  any,  who  controls  any  Agent  within  the  meaning  of  Section  15  of  the  U.S.
Securities Act or Section 20 of the U.S. Exchange Act against certain liabilities and expenses, related to the offering,
including liabilities under the U.S. Securities Act, the U.S. Exchange Act and Canadian securities laws. We have also
agreed to contribute to payments the Agents may be required to make in respect of such liabilities.
Table of Contents
S-22
The offering price for all investors in this offering will be payable in United States dollars, unless the Agents otherwise
agree. All of the proceeds of this offering will be paid to us in United States dollars.
Subscriptions for the Units will be received subject to rejection or allotment in whole or in part and the right is reserved
to  close  the  subscription  books  at  any  time  without  notice.  We  and  the  Agents  expect  the  Shares  and  Warrants
offered  hereby  to  be  available  for  delivery  in  book-entry  form  through  the  facilities  of  DTC  at  closing,  which  is
anticipated  to  be  on  or  about  July  25,  2014  or  such  other  date  as  may  be  agreed  upon  between  us  and  the  Lead
Agents.  No  certificate  evidencing  the  Shares  and  Warrants  will  be  issued  to  the  purchaser,  except  in  limited
circumstances,  and  registration  will  be  made  in  the  depositary  services  of  DTC.  The  purchaser  will  receive  only  a
customer  confirmation  from  the  Agents  or  other  registered  dealer  who  is  a  DTC  participant  and  through  whom  a
beneficial interest in the Shares and Warrants is purchased. Under Rule 15c6-1 under the U.S. Exchange Act, trades
in  the  secondary  market  generally  are  required  to  settle  in  three  business  days,  unless  the  parties  expressly  agree
otherwise. We anticipate a settlement cycle of T+5 business days. Accordingly, purchasers who wish to trade prior to
the delivery date may be required to specify an alternate settlement cycle at the time of the trade to prevent a failed
settlement. Investors who wish to trade prior to the delivery date should consult their own advisors.
Agents’ Compensation
We have agreed to pay a fee to the Agents in the amount equal to 6% of the gross proceeds of the sale of the Units,
if any, in consideration for services rendered. The aggregate commission payable to the Agents upon closing of the
offering  will  be  $720,000.  Because  there  is  no  minimum  offering  amount  required  as  a  condition  to  closing  in  this
offering, the actual total offering fees, if any, are not presently determinable and may be substantially less than the
maximum amount set forth herein.
We  will  also  reimburse  the  Agents  for  their  reasonable  fees  and  expenses,  including  the  reasonable  legal  fees  and
disbursements  of  legal  counsel  to  the  Agents.  We  estimate  that  our  share  of  the  total  expenses  of  the  offering,
excluding the Agents’ fee will be approximately $315,000, which includes an aggregate of approximately $142,500 in
reimbursable expenses paid to the Agents.
The  Agents  may  offer  selling  group  participation  to  one  or  more  registered  dealers  to  offer  and  sell  the  Units  in
jurisdictions where the Units may lawfully be offered for sale, which selling group members may or may not be offered
part of the fees derived from this offering.
No Sales of Similar Securities
We  and  our  executive  officers  and  directors  have  agreed  that,  other  than  the  Units  offered  hereby  and  subject  to
certain  exceptions,  including,  without  limitation,  the  issuance  by  us  of  shares  representing  up  to  10%  of  our
outstanding  common  stock  as  of  the  date  of  the  Agency  Agreement  in  connection  with  the  acquisition  of  any
business, property or asset from arms-length parties that is consistent with our business presently conducted and as
described  in  this  prospectus  supplement,  the  base  prospectus  and  the  documents  incorporated  by  reference  herein
and therein, for a period of 90 days from the closing date of this offering (the “Lock-Up Period”), we and they will not,
without the prior written consent of the Lead Agents, directly or indirectly, offer, sell, agree to offer or sell, solicit offers
to purchase, grant any call option or purchase any put option with respect to, pledge, borrow or otherwise dispose of
any shares of common stock or any securities convertible into, or exercisable or exchangeable for, shares of common
stock  or  other  such  equity  security,  and  will  not  establish  or  increase  any  “put  equivalent  position”  or  liquidate  or
decrease any “call equivalent position” (in each case within the meaning of Section 16 of the U.S. Exchange Act and
the rules and regulations thereunder), with respect to any shares of common stock or any securities convertible into,
or exercisable or exchangeable for, shares of common stock or other such equity security or otherwise enter into any
swap,  derivative  or  other  transaction  or  arrangement  that  transfers  to  another,  in  whole  or  in  part,  any  economic
consequence  of  ownership  of  any  shares  of  common  stock  or  any  securities  convertible  into,  or  exercisable  or
exchangeable  for,  shares  of  common  stock  or  other  such  equity  security,  whether  or  not  such  transaction  is  to  be
settled by delivery of any shares of common stock or any securities convertible into, or exercisable or exchangeable
for, shares of common stock or other such equity security, other securities, cash or other consideration.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if (1) during the last 17 days of the Lock-Up Period the Company issues an earnings
release or material news or a material event relating to the Company occurs; or (2) prior to the expiration of the Lock-
Up Period the Company announces that it will release earnings results during the 16-day period beginning on
Table of Contents
S-23
the last day of the Lock-Up Period, the restrictions imposed by the immediately preceding paragraph continue to apply
until  the  expiration  of  the  18-day  period  beginning  on  the  issuance  of  the  earnings  release  or  the  occurrence  of  the
material news or material event, as applicable, unless the Lead Agents waive, in writing, such extension.
Price Stabilization
Until the distribution of the Units is completed, SEC rules may limit the Agents from bidding for and purchasing our
shares of common stock. However, the Agents may engage in transactions that stabilize, maintain or otherwise affect
the  market  price  of  our  shares  of  common  stock,  such  as  bids  or  purchases  to  peg,  fix  or  maintain  that  price  in
accordance with Regulation M under the U.S. Exchange Act.
Pursuant to rules and policy statements of certain Canadian provincial and territorial securities regulatory authorities,
the Agents may not, at any time during the period ending on the date the selling process for the Units ends and all
stabilization arrangements relating to our shares of common stock are terminated, bid for or purchase of shares of our
common  stock  for  their  own  account  or  for  accounts  over  which  they  exercise  control  or  direction.  The  foregoing
restrictions  are  subject  to  certain  exceptions,  on  the  condition  that  the  bid  or  purchase  is  not  engaged  in  for  the
purpose of creating actual or apparent active trading in, or raising the price of, our shares of common stock. These
exceptions include bids or purchases permitted under the Universal Market Integrity Rules for Canadian Marketplaces
administered  by  the  Investment  Industry  Regulatory  Organization  of  Canada  relating  to  market  stabilization  and
passive market making activities and a bid or purchase made for and on behalf of a customer where the order was not
solicited  during  the  period  of  distribution.  Subject  to  the  foregoing,  in  connection  with  this  offering,  the  Agents  may
effect transactions that stabilize or maintain the market price of our shares of common stock at levels which might
not prevail on the open market. Such transactions, if commenced, may be discontinued at any time.
Purchases of shares of common stock to stabilize the price may cause the price of the shares of common stock to
be  higher  than  it  might  otherwise  be  in  the  absence  of  such  purchases.  No  representation  is  made  as  to  the
magnitude  or  effect  of  any  such  stabilization  or  other  activities.  The  Agents  are  not  required  to  engage  in  these
activities.
Stock Exchange Listing
The  outstanding  shares  of  common  stock  are  listed  on  the  TSX  and  NYSE  MKT.  We  intend  to  apply  to  have  the
Shares and Warrant Shares listed on the TSX and NYSE MKT. Listing will be subject to us fulfilling all of the listing
requirements of the TSX and NYSE MKT.
This prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus in electronic format may be made available on
Internet  sites  or  through  other  online  services  maintained  by  one  or  more  of  the  Agents,  or  by  their  affiliates.  Other
than any prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus made available in electronic format in this
manner,  the  information  on  any  website  containing  this  prospectus  supplement  and  the  accompanying  base
prospectus is not part of this prospectus supplement, the accompanying base prospectus, the registration statement
of  which  this  prospectus  supplement  forms  a  part,  or  the  Canadian  Prospectus,  and  such  information  has  not  been
approved or endorsed by us or any Agents in such capacity and should not be relied on by prospective investors.
The Agency Agreement will be included as an exhibit to a current report on Form 8-K that will be filed with the SEC in
connection with the consummation of this offering.
Some  of  the  Agents  and  their  affiliates  have  engaged  in,  and  may  in  the  future  engage  in,  investment  banking  and
other  commercial  dealings  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  with  us.  They  have  received,  and  may  in  the  future
receive, customary fees and commissions for these transactions.
United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom this prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus is being distributed only
to,  and  is  directed  only  at,  investors  who  (i)  have  professional  experience  in  matters  relating  to  investments  falling
within  Article  19(5)  of  the  United  Kingdom’s  Financial  Services  and  Markets  Act  2000  (Financial  Promotion)  Order
2005  as  amended  (the  “Order”),  or  (ii)  high  net  worth  entities,  and  other  person  to  whom  it  may  be  lawfully
communicated,  falling  within  Article  49(2)(a)  to  (d)  of  the  Order  (each  such  person  being  referred  to  as  a  “Relevant
Person” and collectively referred to as “Relevant Persons”) and persons within the United Kingdom who receive this
document (other than persons falling within (i) and (ii) above) should not rely on or act upon this document.
This prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus has not been approved by an authorised person
for the purpose of the Financial Conduct Authority Handbook nor is it a prospectus for the purposes of the Prospectus
Directive.  Any  investment  to  which  this  prospectus  supplement  and  the  accompanying  base  prospectus  relates  is
available  in  the  United  Kingdom  only  to  (and  any  investment  activity  to  which  it  related  will  be  engaged  only  with)
Relevant Persons. This prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus is confidential and directed in
the United Kingdom only at Relevant Persons and persons who are not Relevant Persons should not take any action
based upon this document and should not rely on it. Each purchaser of Offered Shares resident in the United Kingdom
will  be  deemed  to  have  represented  to  the  Company  and  the  Agents,  and  acknowledges  that  each  of  the  Company
and the Agents are relying on such representation, that such purchaser is a Relevant Person.
Table of Contents
S-24
MATERIAL U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
The following is a general summary of material U.S. federal income tax consequences arising from and relating to the
acquisition of Shares acquired as part of the Units, the exercise, disposition, and lapse of Warrants acquired as part
of  the  Units,  and  the  acquisition,  ownership  and  disposition  of  Warrant  Shares  received  on  the  exercise  of  the
Warrants.
This summary is for general information purposes only and does not purport to be a complete analysis or listing of all
potential  U.S.  federal  income  tax  consequences  related  to  the  acquisition,  ownership  and  disposition  of  Shares,
Warrants and Warrant Shares. Except as specifically set forth below, this summary does not discuss applicable tax
reporting requirements. In addition, this summary does not take into account the individual facts and circumstances of
any  particular  holder  that  may  affect  the  U.S.  federal  income  tax  consequences  to  such  holder.  Accordingly,  this
summary is not intended to be, and should not be construed as, legal or U.S. federal income tax advice with respect
to any particular holder. Each holder should consult its own tax advisor regarding the U.S. federal, state and local, and
non-U.S.  tax  consequences  related  to  the  acquisition,  ownership  and  disposition  of  Shares,  Warrants  and  Warrant
Shares.
No legal opinion from U.S. legal counsel or ruling from the Internal Revenue Service (which we refer to as “IRS”) has
been  requested,  or  will  be  obtained,  regarding  the  U.S.  federal  income  tax  consequences  related  to  the  acquisition,
ownership and disposition of Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares. This summary is not binding on the IRS, and the
IRS is not precluded from taking a position that is different from, and contrary to, the positions taken in this summary.
Scope of this Summary
Authorities
This summary is based on the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (which we refer to as “Code”), Treasury
Regulations (whether final, temporary, or proposed), published rulings of the IRS, published administrative positions of
the IRS, and U.S. court decisions that are applicable and, in each case, as in effect and available, as of the date of
this prospectus supplement. Any of the authorities on which this summary is based could be changed in a material
and adverse manner at any time, and any such change could be applied on a retroactive basis. This summary does
not discuss the potential effects, whether adverse or beneficial, of any proposed legislation that, if enacted, could be
applied on a retroactive basis.
U.S. Holders
As used in this summary, the term “U.S. Holder” means a beneficial owner of Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares
acquired pursuant to this prospectus supplement that is for U.S. federal income tax purposes: an individual who is a
citizen or resident of the U.S.; a corporation (or other entity taxable as a corporation) organized under the laws of the
U.S., any state thereof or the District of Columbia; an estate whose income is subject to U.S. federal income taxation
regardless  of  its  source;  or  a  trust  that  (1)  is  subject  to  the  primary  supervision  of  a  court  within  the  U.S.  and  the
control of one or more U.S. persons for all substantial decisions or (2) has a valid election in effect under applicable
Treasury Regulations to be treated as a U.S. person.
Non-U.S. Holders
The term “Non-U.S. Holder” means any beneficial owner of Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares acquired pursuant
to this prospectus supplement that is neither a U.S. Holder nor a partnership nor other entity or arrangement treated
as  a  partnership  for  U.S.  federal  income  tax  purposes.  A  Non-U.S.  Holder  should  review  the  discussion  under  the
heading “U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences to Non-U.S. Holders of the Acquisition, Ownership and Disposition
of Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares” below for more information.
Holders Subject to Special United States Federal Income Tax Rules
This summary deals only with persons or entities who hold Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares as a capital asset
within  the  meaning  of  Section  1221  of  the  Code  (generally,  property  held  for  investment  purposes).  This  summary
does  not  address  all  aspects  of  U.S.  federal  income  taxation  that  may  be  applicable  to  holders  in  light  of  their
particular  circumstances  or  to  holders  subject  to  special  treatment  under  U.S.  federal  income  tax  law,  such  as
(without  limitation):  banks,  insurance  companies,  and  other  financial  institutions;  dealers  or  traders  in  securities,
commodities or foreign currencies; regulated investment companies; U.S. expatriates or former long-term residents of
the U.S.; persons holding Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares as part of a straddle, appreciated financial position,
Table of Contents
S-25
synthetic security, hedge, conversion transaction or other integrated investment; persons holding Shares, Warrants or
Warrant Shares as a result of a constructive sale; entities that acquire Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares that are
treated as partnerships for U.S. federal income tax purposes and investors (i.e., partners) in such partnerships; real
estate  investment  trusts;  U.S.  Holders  that  have  a  “functional  currency”  other  than  the  U.S.  dollar;  holders  that
acquired Shares, Warrants, or Warrant Shares in connection with the exercise of employee stock options or otherwise
as  consideration  for  services;  or  holders  that  are  “controlled  foreign  corporations”  or  “passive  foreign  investment
companies.”  Holders  that  are  subject  to  special  provisions  under  the  Code,  including  holders  described  immediately
above,  should  consult  their  own  tax  advisors  regarding  the  United  States  federal,  state  and  local,  and  non-U.S.  tax
consequences arising from and relating to the acquisition, ownership and disposition of Shares, Warrants and Warrant
Shares.
If an entity or arrangement that is classified as a partnership (or other “pass-through” entity) for U.S. federal income
tax  purposes  holds  Shares,  Warrants  or  Warrant  Shares,  the  U.S.  federal  income  tax  consequences  to  such  entity
and the partners (or other owners) of such entity generally will depend on the activities of the entity and the status of
such  partners  (or  owners).  This  summary  does  not  address  the  tax  consequences  to  any  such  owner  or  entity.
Partners (or other owners) of entities or arrangements that are classified as partnerships or as “pass-through” entities
for  U.S.  federal  income  tax  purposes  should  consult  their  own  tax  advisors  regarding  the  U.S.  federal  income  tax
consequences  arising  from  and  relating  to  the  acquisition,  ownership,  and  disposition  of  Shares,  Warrants  and
Warrant Shares.
Tax Consequences Not Addressed
This  summary  does  not  address  the  United  States  state  and  local,  United  States  federal  estate  and  gift,  United
States federal alternative minimum tax, or non-U.S. tax consequences to holders of the acquisition, ownership, and
disposition of Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares. Each holder should consult its own tax advisors regarding the
United  States  state  and  local,  United  States  federal  estate  and  gift,  United  States  federal  alternative  minimum  tax,
and  non-U.S.  tax  consequences  of  the  acquisition,  ownership,  and  disposition  of  Shares,  Warrants  and  Warrant
Shares.
Certain Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Purchase of Units to U.S. Holders and Non-
U.S. Holders
For U.S. federal income tax purposes, the purchase of a Unit by U.S. Holders and Non-U.S. Holders will be treated as
the  purchase  of  two  components:  a  component  consisting  of  one  Share  and  a  component  consisting  of  one  half  of
one Warrant. The purchase price for each Unit will be allocated between these two components in proportion to their
relative  fair  market  values  at  the  time  the  Unit  is  purchased  by  the  holder.  This  allocation  of  the  purchase  price  for
each Unit will establish a holder’s initial tax basis for U.S. federal income tax purposes in the Share and one half of
one Warrant that comprise each Unit.
For  purposes  of  determining  tax  basis,  we  will  allocate  $1.24  of  the  purchase  price  for  each  Unit  to  the  Share  and
$0.01 of the purchase price for each Unit to the one half of one Warrant. However, the IRS will not be bound by our
allocation of the purchase price for the Units, and, therefore, the IRS or a U.S. court may not respect the allocation
set forth above. Each holder should consult its own tax advisor regarding the allocation of the purchase price for the
Units.
U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences to U.S. Holders of the Exercise and Disposition of Warrants
Exercise of Warrants
A U.S. Holder generally will not recognize gain or loss on the exercise of a Warrant and related receipt of a Warrant
Share (unless cash is received in lieu of the issuance of a fractional Warrant Share). A U.S. Holder’s initial tax basis
in the Warrant Share received on the exercise of a Warrant should be equal to the sum of (a) such U.S. Holder’s tax
basis in such Warrant plus (b) the exercise price paid by such U.S. Holder on the exercise of such Warrant. A U.S.
Holder’s holding period for the Warrant Share received on the exercise of a Warrant should begin on the date that such
Warrant is exercised by such U.S. Holder.
In certain limited circumstances (as described under “Description of Securities Distributed—Warrants”), a U.S. Holder
may  be  permitted  to  undertake  a  cashless  exercise  of  Warrants  into  Warrant  Shares.  The  U.S.  federal  income  tax
treatment of a cashless exercise of Warrants into Warrant Shares is unclear, and the tax consequences of a
S-26
Table of Contents
cashless  exercise  could  differ  from  the  consequences  upon  the  exercise  of  a  Warrant  described  in  the  preceding
paragraph. U.S. Holders should consult their own tax advisors regarding the U.S. federal income tax consequences of
a cashless exercise of Warrants.
Disposition of Warrants
A U.S. Holder will recognize gain or loss on the sale or other taxable disposition of a Warrant in an amount equal to
the difference, if any, between (a) the amount of cash plus the fair market value of any property received and (b) such
U.S. Holder’s tax basis in the Warrant sold or otherwise disposed of. Any such gain or loss generally will be a capital
gain or loss (provided that the Warrant Share to be issued on the exercise of such Warrant would have been a capital
asset within the meaning of Section 1221 of the Code if acquired by the U.S. Holder), which will be long-term capital
gain  or  loss  if  the  Warrant  is  held  for  more  than  one  year.  Any  such  gain  recognized  by  certain  non-corporate  U.S.
Holders may be subject to the 3.8% Medicare surtax discussed below in addition to the normal U.S. federal income
taxes applicable to such gain.
Expiration of Warrants without Exercise
Upon  the  lapse  or  expiration  of  a  Warrant,  a  U.S.  Holder  will  recognize  a  loss  in  an  amount  equal  to  such  U.S.
Holder’s tax basis in the Warrant. Any such loss generally will be a capital loss and will be long-term capital loss if the
Warrants are held for more than one year. Deductions for capital losses are subject to complex limitations under the
Code.
Certain Adjustments to the Warrants
Under Section 305 of the Code, an adjustment to the number of Warrant Shares that will be issued on the exercise of
the Warrants, or an adjustment to the exercise price of the Warrants, may be treated as a constructive distribution to
a  U.S.  Holder  of  the  Warrants  if,  and  to  the  extent  that,  such  adjustment  has  the  effect  of  increasing  such  U.S.
Holder’s  proportionate  interest  in  our  “earnings  and  profits”  or  assets,  depending  on  the  circumstances  of  such
adjustment  (for  example,  if  such  adjustment  is  to  compensate  for  a  distribution  of  cash  or  other  property  to  our
shareholders).  Adjustments  to  the  exercise  price  of  Warrants  made  pursuant  to  a  bona  fide  reasonable  adjustment
formula that has the effect of preventing dilution of the interest of the holders of the Warrants should generally not be
considered to result in a constructive distribution. Any such constructive distribution would be taxable whether or not
there  is  an  actual  distribution  of  cash  or  other  property.  See  the  more  detailed  discussion  of  the  rules  applicable  to
distributions made by us at “U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences to U.S. Holders of the Acquisition, Ownership
and Disposition of Shares and Warrant Shares—Distributions” below.
U.S.  Federal  Income  Tax  Consequences  to  U.S.  Holders  of  the  Acquisition,  Ownership  and  Disposition  of
Shares and Warrant Shares
Distributions
Distributions  made  on  Shares  and  Warrant  Shares  generally  will  be  included  in  a  U.S.  Holder’s  income  as  ordinary
dividend  income  to  the  extent  of  our  current  and  accumulated  earnings  and  profits  (determined  under  U.S.  federal
income  tax  principles)  as  of  the  end  of  our  taxable  year  in  which  the  distribution  occurs.  However,  with  respect  to
dividends received by certain non-corporate U.S. Holders (including individuals), such dividends are generally taxed at
the lower applicable long-term capital gains rates, provided certain holding period and other requirements are satisfied.
Distributions in excess of our current and accumulated earnings and profits will be treated as a return of capital to the
extent of a U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in the Shares or Warrant Shares and thereafter as capital gain from the
sale  or  exchange  of  such  Shares  or  Warrant  Shares,  which  will  be  taxable  according  to  rules  discussed  under  the
heading “Sale, Certain Redemptions or Other Taxable Dispositions of Shares and Warrant Shares,” below. Dividends
received by a corporate holder may be eligible for a dividends received deduction, subject to applicable limitations.
Sale, Certain Redemptions or Other Taxable Dispositions of Shares and Warrant Shares
Upon the sale, certain qualifying redemptions, or other taxable disposition of Shares or Warrant Shares, a U.S. Holder
generally will recognize capital gain or loss equal to the difference between (i) the amount of cash and the fair market
value  of  any  property  received  upon  such  taxable  disposition  and  (ii)  the  U.S.  Holder’s  adjusted  tax  basis  in  the
Shares or Warrant Shares. Such  capital  gain  or  loss  will  be  long-term  capital  gain  or  loss  if  a  U.S.  Holder’s  holding
period in the Shares or Warrant Shares is more than one year at the time of the taxable disposition. Long-
Table of Contents
S-27
term capital gains recognized by certain non-corporate U.S. Holders (including individuals) will generally be subject to
a  maximum  U.S.  federal  income  tax  rate  of  20%.  Deductions  for  capital  losses  are  subject  to  complex  limitations
under the Code.
Other U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences Applicable to U.S. Holders
Additional Tax on Passive Income
Certain  individuals,  estates  and  trusts  whose  income  exceeds  certain  thresholds  will  be  required  to  pay  a  3.8%
Medicare surtax on “net investment income” including, among other things, dividends and net gain from disposition of
property (other than property held in certain trades or businesses). U.S. Holders should consult their own tax advisors
regarding the effect, if any, of this tax on their ownership and disposition of Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares.
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding
Information reporting requirements generally will apply to payments of dividends on Shares and Warrant Shares and to
the  proceeds  of  a  sale  of  Shares,  Warrants  or  Warrant  Shares  paid  to  a  U.S.  Holder  unless  the  U.S.  Holder  is  an
exempt recipient (such as a corporation). Backup withholding will apply to those payments if the U.S. Holder fails to
provide its correct taxpayer identification number, or certification of exempt status, or if the U.S. Holder is notified by
the  IRS  that  it  has  failed  to  report  in  full  payments  of  interest  and  dividend  income.  Backup  withholding  is  not  an
additional tax, and any amounts withheld under the backup withholding rules generally will be allowed as a refund or a
credit against a U.S. Holder’s U.S. federal income tax liability, if any, provided the required information is furnished in
a timely manner to the IRS.
U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences to Non-U.S. Holders of the Acquisition, Ownership and Disposition of
Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares
U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences to Non-U.S. Holders of the Exercise and Disposition of Warrants
Exercise of Warrants
A  Non-U.S.  Holder  generally  will  not  recognize  gain  or  loss  on  the  exercise  of  a  Warrant  and  related  receipt  of  a
Warrant  Share  (unless  cash  is  received  in  lieu  of  the  issuance  of  a  fractional  Warrant  Share).  A  Non-U.S.  Holder’s
initial tax basis in the Warrant Share received on the exercise of a Warrant should be equal to the sum of (a) such
Non-U.S. Holder’s tax basis in such Warrant plus (b) the exercise price paid by such Non-U.S. Holder on the exercise
of  such  Warrant.  A  Non-U.S.  Holder’s  holding  period  for  the  Warrant  Share  received  on  the  exercise  of  a  Warrant
should begin on the date that such Warrant is exercised by such Non-U.S. Holder.
In  certain  limited  circumstances  (as  described  under  “Description  of  Securities  Distributed—Warrants”),  a  Non-U.S.
Holder may be permitted to undertake a cashless exercise of Warrants into Warrant Shares. The U.S. federal income
tax  treatment  of  a  cashless  exercise  of  Warrants  into  Warrant  Shares  is  unclear,  and  the  tax  consequences  of  a
cashless  exercise  could  differ  from  the  consequences  upon  the  exercise  of  a  Warrant  described  in  the  preceding
paragraph.  Non-U.S.  Holders  should  consult  their  own  tax  advisors  regarding  the  U.S.  federal  income  tax
consequences of a cashless exercise of Warrants.
Disposition of Warrants
A Non-U.S. Holder will recognize gain or loss on the sale or other taxable disposition of a Warrant in an amount equal
to  the  difference,  if  any,  between  (a)  the  amount  of  cash  plus  the  fair  market  value  of  any  property  received  and
(b) such Non-U.S. Holder’s tax basis in the Warrant sold or otherwise disposed of. Any such gain or loss generally will
be a capital gain or loss (provided that the Warrant Share to be issued on the exercise of such Warrant would have
been a capital asset within the meaning of Section 1221 of the Code if acquired by the Non-U.S. Holder), which will be
long-term capital gain or loss if the Warrant is held for more than one year. Any such gain recognized by a Non-U.S.
Holder will be taxable for U.S. federal income tax purposes according to rules discussed under the heading “Sale or
Other Taxable Disposition of Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares,” below.
Expiration of Warrants without Exercise
Upon the lapse or expiration of a Warrant, a Non-U.S. Holder will recognize a loss in an amount equal to such Non-
U.S. Holder’s tax basis in the Warrant. Any such loss generally will be a capital loss and will be long-term capital loss
if the Warrants are held for more than one year. Deductions for capital losses are subject to complex limitations under
the Code.
S-28
Table of Contents
Certain Adjustments to the Warrants
Under Section 305 of the Code, an adjustment to the number of Warrant Shares that will be issued on the exercise of
the Warrants, or an adjustment to the exercise price of the Warrants, may be treated as a constructive distribution to
a Non-U.S. Holder of the Warrants if, and to the extent that, such adjustment has the effect of increasing such Non-
U.S. Holder’s proportionate interest in our “earnings and profits” or assets, depending on the circumstances of such
adjustment  (for  example,  if  such  adjustment  is  to  compensate  for  a  distribution  of  cash  or  other  property  to  our
shareholders).  Adjustments  to  the  exercise  price  of  Warrants  made  pursuant  to  a  bona  fide  reasonable  adjustment
formula that has the effect of preventing dilution of the interest of the holders of the Warrants should generally not be
considered to result in a constructive distribution. Any such constructive distribution would be taxable whether or not
there  is  an  actual  distribution  of  cash  or  other  property.  See  the  more  detailed  discussion  of  the  rules  applicable  to
distributions made by us under the heading “Dividends” below.
Dividends
Distributions on Shares or Warrant Shares will constitute dividends for U.S. federal income tax purposes to the extent
paid from our current and accumulated earnings and profits, as determined under U.S. federal income tax principles.
To the extent those distributions exceed our current and accumulated earnings and profits, they will constitute a return
of capital and will first reduce a Non-U.S. Holder’s basis in Shares or Warrant Shares, but not below zero, and then
will be treated as gain from the sale of stock, which will be taxable according to rules discussed under the heading
“Sale or Other Taxable Disposition of Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares,” below. Any dividends paid to a Non-U.S.
Holder  with  respect  to  Shares  or  Warrant  Shares  generally  will  be  subject  to  withholding  tax  at  a  30%  gross  rate,
subject to any exemption or lower rate under an applicable treaty if the Non-U.S. Holder provides us with a properly
executed  IRS  Form  W-8BEN  or  W-8BEN-E,  unless  the  Non-U.S.  Holder  provides  us  with  a  properly  executed  IRS
Form  W-8ECI  (or  other  applicable  form)  relating  to  income  effectively  connected  with  the  conduct  of  a  trade  or
business within the U.S.
Dividends that are effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business within the U.S. and includible in the
Non-U.S. Holder’s gross income are not subject to the withholding tax (assuming proper certification and disclosure),
but  instead  are  subject  to  U.S.  federal  income  tax  on  a  net  income  basis  at  applicable  graduated  individual  or
corporate  rates.  Any  such  effectively  connected  income  received  by  a  non-U.S.  corporation  may,  under  certain
circumstances, be subject to an additional branch profits tax at a 30% rate, subject to any exemption or lower rate as
may be specified by an applicable income tax treaty.
A  Non-U.S.  Holder  of  Shares  or  Warrant  Shares  who  wishes  to  claim  the  benefit  of  an  applicable  treaty  rate  or
exemption  is  required  to  satisfy  certain  certification  and  other  requirements.  If  a  Non-U.S.  Holder  is  eligible  for  an
exemption from or a reduced rate of U.S. withholding tax pursuant to an income tax treaty, it may obtain a refund of
any excess amounts withheld by timely filing an appropriate claim for refund with the IRS.
Sale or Other Taxable Disposition of Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares
In general, a Non-U.S. Holder of Shares, Warrants or Warrant Shares will not be subject to U.S. federal income tax on
gain  recognized  from  a  sale,  exchange,  or  other  taxable  disposition  of  such  Shares,  Warrants  or  Warrant  Shares,
unless:
•
the gain is effectively connected with a U.S. trade or business carried on by the Non-U.S. Holder (and, where an
income  tax  treaty  applies,  is  attributable  to  a  U.S.  permanent  establishment  of  the  Non-U.S.  Holder),  in  which
case  the  Non-U.S.  Holder  will  be  subject  to  tax  on  the  net  gain  from  the  sale  at  regular  graduated  U.S.  federal
income tax rates, and if the Non-U.S. Holder is a corporation, may be subject to an additional U.S. branch profits
tax at a gross rate equal to 30% of its effectively connected earnings and profits for that taxable year, subject to
any exemption or lower rate as may be specified by an applicable income tax treaty;
S-29
Table of Contents
•
•
the  Non-U.S.  Holder  is  an  individual  who  is  present  in  the  U.S.  for  183  days  or  more  in  the  taxable  year  of
disposition and certain other conditions are met, in which case the Non-U.S. Holder will be subject to a 30% tax
on the gain from the sale, which may be offset by U.S. source capital losses; or
the  Company  is  or  has  been  a  “United  States  real  property  holding  corporation”  (“USRPHC”)  for  U.S.  federal
income tax purposes at any time during the shorter of the Non-U.S. Holder’s holding period or the 5-year period
ending  on  the  date  of  disposition  of  Shares,  Warrants  or  Warrant  Shares;  provided,  with  respect  to  the  Shares
and Warrant Shares, that as long as our common stock is regularly traded on an established securities market as
determined under the Treasury Regulations (which we refer to as the “Regularly Traded Exception”), a Non-U.S.
Holder would not be subject to taxation on the gain on the sale of Shares or Warrant Shares under this rule unless
the  Non-U.S.  Holder  has  owned  more  than  5%  of  our  common  stock  at  any  time  during  such  5-year  or  shorter
period  (a  “5%  Shareholder”).  In  determining  whether  a  Non-U.S.  Holder  is  a  5%  Shareholder,  such  holder’s
Warrants  may  be  included  in  such  determination.  In  addition,  certain  attribution  rules  apply  in  determining
ownership for this purpose. While the Shares and Warrant Shares will be listed on the NYSE MKT and therefore
are  likely  to  satisfy  the  Regularly  Traded  Exception,  since  the  Warrants  are  not  expected  to  be  listed  on  a
securities market, the Warrants are unlikely to qualify for the Regularly Traded Exception. Although the Company
has not undertaken a detailed analysis of its USRPHC status, the Company believes that it is currently, and may
be in one or more future years, a USRPHC. The Company can provide no assurances that the Shares, Warrants
or  Warrant  Shares  will  meet  the  Regularly  Traded  Exception  at  the  time  a  Non-U.S.  Holder  purchases  such
securities  or  sells,  exchanges  or  otherwise  disposes  of  such  securities.  Non-U.S.  Holders  should  consult  with
their  own  tax  advisors  regarding  the  consequences  to  them  of  investing  in  a  USRPHC.  As  a  USRPHC,  a  Non-
U.S. Holder will be taxed as if any gain or loss were effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business
as  described  above  in  “Dividends”  in  the  event  that  (i)  such  holder  is  a  5%  Shareholder,  or  (ii)  the  Regularly
Traded Exception is not satisfied during the relevant period.
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding
Generally, we must report annually to the IRS and to Non-U.S. Holders the amount of dividends paid on the Shares
and  Warrant  Shares  to  Non-U.S.  Holders  and  the  amount  of  tax,  if  any,  withheld  with  respect  to  those  payments.
Copies  of  the  information  returns  reporting  such  dividends  and  withholding  may  also  be  made  available  to  the  tax
authorities in the country in which a Non-U.S. Holder resides under the provisions of an applicable income tax treaty.
In general, a Non-U.S. Holder will not be subject to backup withholding with respect to payments of dividends that we
make, provided we receive a statement meeting certain requirements to the effect that the Non-U.S. Holder is not a
U.S.  person  and  we  do  not  have  actual  knowledge  or  reason  to  know  that  the  holder  is  a  U.S.  person,  as  defined
under  the  Code,  that  is  not  an  exempt  recipient.  The  requirements  for  the  statement  will  be  met  if  (1)  the  Non-U.S.
Holder  provides  its  name,  address  and  U.S.  taxpayer  identification  number,  if  any,  and  certifies,  under  penalty  of
perjury,  that  it  is  not  a  U.S.  person  (which  certification  may  be  made  on  IRS  Form  W-8BEN  or  W-8BEN-E)  or  (2)  a
financial  institution  holding  the  instrument  on  behalf  of  the  Non-U.S.  Holder  certifies,  under  penalty  of  perjury,  that
such  statement  has  been  received  by  it  and  furnishes  us  or  our  paying  agent  with  a  copy  of  the  statement.  In
addition,  a  Non-U.S.  Holder  will  be  subject  to  information  reporting  and,  depending  on  the  circumstances,  backup
withholding  with  respect  to  payments  of  the  proceeds  of  a  sale  of  Shares,  Warrants  and  Warrant  Shares  within  the
U.S.  or  conducted  through  certain  U.S.-related  financial  intermediaries,  unless  the  statement  described  above  has
been  received,  and  we  do  not  have  actual  knowledge  or  reason  to  know  that  a  holder  is  a  U.S.  person,  as  defined
under the Code, that is not an exempt recipient, or the Non-U.S. Holder otherwise establishes an exemption. Backup
withholding is not an additional tax and any amounts withheld under the backup withholding rules will be allowed as a
refund  or  a  credit  against  a  Non-U.S.  Holder’s  U.S.  federal  income  tax  liability,  if  any,  provided  the  required
information is furnished in a timely manner to the IRS.
Rules Relating to Foreign Accounts
Generally, we will be required to withhold tax at a rate of 30% on dividends in respect of, and gross proceeds from the
sale  of,  Shares,  Warrants  and  Warrant  Shares  held  by  or  through  certain  foreign  financial  institutions  (including
investment funds) beginning after June 30, 2014 (subject to certain transitional relief provisions), in the case of
Table of Contents
S-30
dividends, and beginning after December 31, 2016, in the case of such gross proceeds, unless such institution enters
into an agreement with the Secretary of the Treasury to report, on an annual basis, information with respect to shares
in the institution held by certain U.S. persons and by certain non-U.S. entities that are wholly- or partially-owned by
U.S.  persons.  Accordingly,  the  entity  through  which  Shares,  Warrants  and  Warrant  Shares  are  held  will  affect  the
determination of whether such withholding is required. Similarly, dividends in respect of, and gross proceeds from the
sale of, Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares held by certain investors that are non-financial non-U.S. entities will be
subject to withholding at a rate of 30%, beginning after June 30, 2014 (subject to certain transitional relief provisions),
in the case of dividends, and beginning after December 31, 2016, in the case of such gross proceeds, unless such
entity  either  (i)  certifies  that  such  entity  does  not  have  any  “substantial  U.S.  owners”  or  (ii)  provides  certain
information  regarding  the  entity’s  “substantial  U.S.  owners,”  which  will  in  turn  be  provided  to  the  Secretary  of  the
Treasury.  Non-U.S.  Holders  should  consult  with  their  own  tax  advisors  regarding  the  possible  implications  of  the
foregoing rules on their holding of Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
This prospectus supplement is deemed, as of the date hereof, to be incorporated by reference into the accompanying
base prospectus solely for the purpose of offering the Units. Other documents are also incorporated, or are deemed to
be  incorporated,  by  reference  into  the  accompanying  base  prospectus,  and  reference  should  be  made  to  the
accompanying base prospectus for full particulars thereof.
The  following  documents  which  have  been  filed  by  us  with  securities  commissions  or  similar  authorities  in  Canada
and with the SEC, are also specifically incorporated by reference into, and form an integral part of the accompanying
base  prospectus,  as  supplemented  by  this  prospectus  supplement  (excluding,  unless  otherwise  provided  therein  or
herein, information furnished pursuant to Item 2.02 and Item 7.01 of any Current Report on Form 8-K):
(a) our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013, which report contains our audited
consolidated  financial  statements  and  the  notes  thereto  as  at  December  31,  2013  and  2012  and  for  the
three years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 together with the auditors’ report thereon, as filed
with the SEC on March 14, 2014;
our  Proxy  Statement  on  Schedule  14A  in  connection  with  our  June  11,  2014  annual  general  meeting  of
our  Proxy  Statement  on  Schedule  14A  in  connection  with  our  June  11,  2014  annual  general  meeting  of
shareholders, as filed with the SEC on April 29, 2014;
(b)
(c) our  Quarterly  Report  on  Form  10-Q  for  the  quarter  ended  March  31,  2014,  which  report  contains  our
unaudited consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto as at March 31, 2014 and for the three
month periods ended March 31, 2014 and 2013, as filed with the SEC on May 12, 2014;
(d) our  Current  Reports  on  Form  8-K  as  filed  with  the  SEC  on  February  19,  2014,  April  16,  2014,  May  6,
2014, May 6, 2014 and June 16, 2014;
(e)
the  description  of  our  common  stock  contained  in  our  registration  statement  on  Form  8-A,  as  filed  on
August 7, 2006, including any amendment or reports filed for purposes of updating such description;
(f)
the description of our common stock purchase rights contained in our registration statement on Form 8-A,
as  filed  on  August  26,  2010,  including  any  amendment  or  reports  filed  for  purposes  of  updating  such
description; and
(g) all  other  documents  filed  by  us  with  the  SEC  under  Sections  13(a),  13(c),  14  or  15(d)  of  the  U.S.
Exchange  Act  (excluding,  unless  otherwise  provided  therein  or  herein,  information  furnished  pursuant  to
Item 2.02 and Item 7.01 on any Current Report on Form 8-K), after the date of this prospectus supplement
but  before  the  end  of  the  offering  of  securities  made  by  this  prospectus  supplement  and  the
accompanying base prospectus.
S-31
Table of Contents
Any statement contained in the accompanying base prospectus or in a document incorporated or deemed to
be incorporated by reference herein or therein shall be deemed to be modified or superseded for the purposes
of  this  prospectus  supplement  to  the  extent  that  a  statement  contained  in  this  prospectus  supplement,  any
free  writing  prospectus  (unless  otherwise  specifically  indicated  therein)  or  in  any  other  subsequently  filed
document which also is or is deemed to be incorporated by reference in this prospectus supplement modifies
or supersedes that statement. The modifying or superseding statement need not state that it has modified or
superseded  a  prior  statement  or  include  any  other  information  set  forth  in  the  document  that  it  modifies  or
supersedes. The making of a modifying or superseding statement is not to be deemed an admission for any
purposes that the modified or superseded statement, when made, constituted a misrepresentation, an untrue
statement of material fact or an omission to state a material fact that is required to be stated or is necessary to
make  a  statement  not  misleading  in  light  of  the  circumstances  in  which  it  was  made.  Any  statement  so
modified  or  superseded  shall  not  constitute  a  part  of  this  prospectus  supplement,  except  as  so  modified
or superseded.
You may obtain copies of any of these documents by contacting us at the address and telephone number indicated
below or by contacting the SEC as described under the section entitled “Where to Find Additional Information.” You
may request a copy of these documents, and any exhibits that have specifically been incorporated by reference as an
exhibit  to  the  registration  statement  of  which  this  prospectus  supplement  forms  a  part,  at  no  cost,  by  writing  to  or
telephoning:
Uranerz Energy Corporation
1701 East “E” Street, PO Box 50850
Casper, Wyoming 82605-0850
Attention: Ben Leboe, Chief Financial Officer
(604) 689-1659
You  should  rely  only  on  the  information  provided  or  incorporated  by  reference  in  this  prospectus  supplement,  the
accompanying base prospectus and any free writing prospectus. You should not assume that the information in this
prospectus  supplement,  the  accompanying  base  prospectus,  any  free  writing  prospectus  or  any  document
incorporated  herein  or  therein,  is  accurate  as  of  any  date  other  than  the  date  on  the  front  cover  of  the  applicable
document.
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the Shares, Warrants and Warrant Shares offered hereby will be passed upon for us by McMillan LLP.
Certain legal matters relating to the securities offered pursuant to this prospectus supplement and the accompanying
base prospectus will be passed upon for us by McMillan LLP, with respect to Canadian legal matters, and McMillan
LLP and Dorsey & Whitney LLP, with respect to United States legal matters.
EXPERTS
Our  consolidated  balance  sheets  as  at  December  31,  2013  and  2012  and  the  related  consolidated  statements  of
operations, cash flows and stockholders’ equity for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2013,
2012  and  2011,  and  accumulated  from  May  26,  1999  (Date  of  Inception)  to  December  31,  2013  have  been
incorporated  by  reference  herein  in  reliance  upon  the  report  of  Manning  Elliott  LLP,  independent  registered  public
accounting firm, given upon the authority of that firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
WHERE TO FIND ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
We file annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy statements and other information with the SEC. You may read and
copy materials we have filed with the SEC at the SEC’s public reference room at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, DC
20549. Please call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 for further information on the operation of its public reference room.
Our SEC filings also are available to the public on the SEC’s Internet site at www.sec.gov. In addition, we maintain a
website that contains information about us, including our SEC filings, at www.uranerz.com. The information contained
on  our  website  does  not  constitute  a  part  of  this  prospectus  supplement,  the  accompanying  base  prospectus,  the
Canadian  Prospectus  or  any  other  report  or  documents  we  file  with  or  furnish  to  the  SEC  or  with  the  securities
regulatory authorities in Canada.
Table of Contents
PROSPECTUS
S-32
URANERZ ENERGY CORPORATION
$100,000,000
Common Shares (and Associated Rights)
Warrants
Subscription Receipts
Units
We may offer and sell, from time to time, up to $100,000,000 aggregate initial offering price of our shares of common
stock, par value $0.001 (“Common Shares”), and the associated rights to purchase shares of common stock
pursuant to the Company’s shareholder rights plan effective May 25, 2010 (“Rights Plan”), which are attached to each
Common Share and will only separate and become exercisable following the separation, as more fully described below
under the section heading “Description of Common Shares—Rights” (“Rights”), warrants to purchase Common Shares
(“Warrants”), subscription receipts for Common Shares, Warrants or any combination thereof (“Subscription
Receipts”), or any combination of Common Shares (and associated Rights), Warrants or Subscription Receipts
(“Units”) (collectively, the Common Shares, Warrants, Subscription Receipts, and Units are referred to as the
“Securities”) in one or more transactions under this prospectus (the “Prospectus”).
This Prospectus provides you with a general description of the Securities that we may offer. Each time we offer
Securities, we will provide you with a prospectus supplement (the “Prospectus Supplement”) that describes specific
information about the particular Securities being offered and may add, update or change information contained in this
Prospectus. You should read both this Prospectus and the Prospectus Supplement, together with any additional
information which is incorporated by reference into this Prospectus. This Prospectus may not be used to offer or
sell securities without the Prospectus Supplement which includes a description of the method and terms of
that offering.
We may sell the Securities on a continuous or delayed basis to or through underwriters, dealers or agents or directly
to purchasers. The Prospectus Supplement, which we will provide to you each time we offer Securities, will set forth
the names of any underwriters, dealers or agents involved in the sale of the Securities, and any applicable fee,
commission or discount arrangements with them. For additional information on the methods of sale, you should refer
to the section entitled “Plan of Distribution” in this Prospectus.
The Common Shares are traded on the NYSE MKT LLC (the “NYSE MKT”) and on the Toronto Stock Exchange (the
“TSX”) under the symbol “URZ” and on the Frankfurt Exchange under the symbol “U9E”. On July 9, 2014, the last
reported sale price of the Common Shares on the NYSE MKT was $1.44 per Common Share, on the TSX was
Cdn$1.52 per Common Share and on the Frankfurt Exchange was €1.08 per Common Share. There is currently no
market through which the Securities, other than the Common Shares, may be sold and purchasers may not be
able to resell the Securities, other than the Common Shares, purchased under this Prospectus. This may
affect the pricing of the Securities, other than the Common Shares, in the secondary market, the transparency
and availability of trading prices, the liquidity of these Securities and the extent of issuer regulation. Investing
in the Securities involves risks. See “Risk Factors” on page 8.
These Securities have not been approved or disapproved by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
(“SEC”) or any state securities commission nor has the SEC or any state securities commission passed upon
the accuracy or adequacy of this Prospectus. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
THE DATE OF THIS PROSPECTUS IS JULY 14, 2014.
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
SUMMARY
RISK FACTORS
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
USE OF PROCEEDS
RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON SHARES
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
DESCRIPTION OF SUBSCRIPTION RECEIPTS
DESCRIPTION OF UNITS
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
INTERESTS OF NAMED EXPERTS AND COUNSEL
EXPERTS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
Table of Contents
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
1  
  2  
  8  
 17  
 18  
 20  
 20  
 21  
 21  
 25  
 27  
 30  
 31  
 32  
 36  
 36  
 36
This Prospectus is a part of a registration statement that we filed with the SEC utilizing a “shelf” registration process.
Under this shelf registration process, we may sell any combination of the Securities described in this Prospectus in
one or more offerings up to a total dollar amount of initial aggregate offering price of $100,000,000. This Prospectus
provides you with a general description of the Securities that we may offer. The specific terms of the Securities in
respect of which this Prospectus is being delivered will be set forth in a Prospectus Supplement and may include,
where applicable: (i) in the case of Common Shares, the number of Common Shares offered, the offering price and
any other specific terms of the offering; (ii) in the case of Warrants, the designation, number and terms of the
Common Shares purchasable upon exercise of the Warrants, any procedures that will result in the adjustment of
those numbers, the exercise price, dates and periods of exercise, and the currency or the currency unit in which the
exercise price must be paid and any other specific terms; (iii) in the case of Subscription Receipts, the designation,
number and terms of the Common Shares or Warrants or receivable upon satisfaction of certain release conditions,
any procedures that will result in the adjustment of those numbers, any additional payments to be made to holders of
Subscription Receipts upon satisfaction of the release conditions, the terms of the release conditions, terms
governing the escrow of all or a portion of the gross proceeds from the sale of the Subscription Receipts, terms for the
refund of all or a portion of the purchase price for Subscription Receipts in the event the release conditions are not
met and any other specific terms; and (iv) in the case of Units, the designation, number and terms of the Common
Shares, Warrants or Subscription Receipts comprising the Units. A Prospectus Supplement may include specific
variable terms pertaining to the Securities that are not within the alternatives and parameters set forth in this
Prospectus.
In connection with any offering of the Securities (unless otherwise specified in a Prospectus Supplement), the
underwriters or agents may over-allot or effect transactions which stabilize or maintain the market price of the
Securities offered at a higher level than that which might exist in the open market. Such transactions, if commenced,
may be interrupted or discontinued at any time. See “Plan of Distribution”.
Please carefully read both this Prospectus and any Prospectus Supplement together with the documents incorporated
herein by reference under “Documents Incorporated by Reference” and the additional information described below
under “Where You Can Find More Information.”
Owning securities may subject you to tax consequences in the United States. This Prospectus or any
applicable Prospectus Supplement may not describe these tax consequences fully. You should read the tax
discussion in any Prospectus Supplement with respect to a particular offering and consult your own tax
advisor with respect to your own particular circumstances.
References in this Prospectus to “$” are to United States dollars. Canadian dollars are indicated by the symbol
“Cdn$”.
You should rely only on the information contained in this Prospectus. We have not authorized anyone to provide you
with information different from that contained in this Prospectus. The distribution or possession of this Prospectus in
or from certain jurisdictions may be restricted by law. This Prospectus is not an offer to sell these Securities and is
not soliciting an offer to buy these Securities in any jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not permitted or where the
person making the offer or sale is not qualified to do so or to any person to whom it is not permitted to make such
offer or sale. The information contained in this Prospectus is accurate only as of the date of this Prospectus,
regardless of the time of delivery of this Prospectus or of any sale of the Securities. Our business, financial condition,
results of operations and prospects may have changed since that date.
In this Prospectus and in any Prospectus Supplement, unless the context otherwise requires, references to “Uranerz”,
“we”, “us”, “our” and the “Company” refer to Uranerz Energy Corporation.
Table of Contents
The Company
1
SUMMARY
Uranerz Energy Corporation was incorporated under the laws of the State of Nevada on May 26, 1999. On July 5,
2005, we changed our name from Carleton Ventures Corp. to Uranerz Energy Corporation.
Our principal business office and our operations office is located at 1701 East “E” Street, PO Box 50850, Casper,
Wyoming 82605-0850, USA and our phone number there is 307-265-8900. We also maintain an administrative office
located at Suite 1410—800 West Pender Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6C 2V6, and our telephone
number there is 604-689-1659.
General
We are a United States based uranium company focused on commercial in-situ recovery (“ISR”) uranium extraction
and production. ISR is a mining process that uses a “leaching solution” to extract uranium from underground
sandstone-hosted uranium deposits; it is the generally accepted extraction technology used in the Powder River Basin
area of Wyoming. We control a large strategic land position in the central Powder River Basin. Our management team
has specialized expertise in the ISR uranium mining method, and a record of licensing, constructing, and operating
ISR uranium projects.
Our Powder River Basin properties include:
•   our 100% owned properties that totaled 20,121 acres as of March 31, 2014; and
•   our 81% interest in Arkose Mining Venture properties that totaled 59,107 acres as of March 31, 2014.
Our 100% owned properties are comprised of unpatented mineral lode claims, state leases and fee (private) mineral
leases, summarized as follows:
Property Composition
  
Unpatented Lode Mining Claims   
State Leases
  
Fee (private) Mineral Leases
Total
Ownership Interest (1)
100%  
100%  
100%
Number of Claims/
Leases
826    
3    
41
Acreage  
 16,520  
  1,360  
  2,241  
  
 
 20,121
(1) Subject to various royalties.
Our 100% owned properties in the Powder River Basin include the following property units:
Property
Jane Dough
Collins Draw
North Rolling Pin
Hank
Nichols Ranch
Willow Creek
West North-Butte
East Nichols
North Nichols
Total
No. Claims    
 
22    
32    
 
54    
 
 
66    
36    
 
11    
 
125    
 
 
44    
107    
 
    
   
 
497
Acreage 
 
440  
 
640  
  1,080  
  1,320  
720  
 
 
220  
  2,500  
 
880  
  2,140  
  
 
  9,940
2
Table of Contents
The Arkose Mining Venture properties are comprised of unpatented lode mining claims, state leases and fee (private)
mineral leases, summarized as follows:
Property Composition
  
Unpatented Lode Mining Claims   
State Leases
  
Fee (private) Mineral Leases
Total
Ownership Interest (1)
81%  
81%  
81%
Number of Claims/
Leases
2,641    
3    
61
Acreage  
 43,207  
  2,080  
 13,820  
  
 
 59,107
(1) Subject to various royalties.
Through a combination of claim staking, purchasing and leasing, we have also acquired interests in projects that lie
within the Powder River Basin but outside of the specific project areas discussed above. These additional properties
include the Verna Ann, Niles Ranch and Reno Creek projects. However, due to our focus on other activities, we have
not yet made any decisions on these projects.
Information regarding the location of and access to our Wyoming properties, together with the history of operations,
present condition and geology of each of our significant properties, is presented in Item 2 of our Annual Report on
Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013, as filed with the SEC on March 14, 2014 under the heading
“Description of Properties.” None of our properties has proven or probable reserves pursuant to the SEC’s Industry
Guide 7 and all are exploratory in nature.
We are principally focused on the exploitation of our properties in the Powder River Basin but we continually
investigate other uranium opportunities as they arise.
In anticipation of receiving all the approvals necessary to begin uranium extraction, we commenced a marketing
program for conditional sales of uranium from our Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project. In 2009, we entered into a
sales agreement with Exelon Generation Company, LLC for the sale of uranium over a five-year period at defined
pricing. That agreement was subsequently amended to defer the delivery schedule by a year and adjust the pricing
terms. On January 25, 2013 we entered into a second supply agreement with Exelon for the sale of uranium over an
additional five-year period commencing in 2016, at defined pricing adjustable for inflation. In August of 2009, we
entered into what was then our second contract for the sale of uranium to a U.S. utility, also over five years, with a
pricing structure that contains references to both spot and term prices and includes floor and ceiling prices. That
agreement was also subsequently amended to defer the original five-year delivery period by a year, reduce the annual
volumes to be supplied, and adjust the pricing terms. These three long-term contracts for the sale of uranium are with
two of the largest nuclear utilities in the U.S. These three agreements do not individually represent a substantial
portion of our targeted uranium extraction and our business is not substantially dependent on these agreements.
The Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project currently includes our Nichols Ranch Unit and our Hank Unit. Under the
licensed plan, a processing plant has been built at Nichols Ranch and a satellite processing facility would be built at
Hank. In March 2010, we commenced preparation of the environmental permit and license applications for the Jane
Dough Unit, which is adjacent to the area currently being developed at the Nichols Ranch Unit and will share its
infrastructure. This will provide us with the option to revise our original plan of operations by bringing our Jane Dough
Unit into extraction before the Hank Unit of our Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project. Due to the close proximity, Jane
Dough fluids can be delivered directly to our Nichols Ranch processing facility by pipeline, thus eliminating the need
for larger capital outlay to build a satellite processing facility at Hank. Our Jane Dough Unit includes the Doughstick,
South Doughstick and North Jane properties. Additional units may be added to the mine plan as we assess our
geological data. We plan to continue the exploration and strategic planning of our other Wyoming Powder River Basin
properties through a number of strategies including acquisitions or exchanges with other ISR uranium mining
companies in the area.
In December 2010, we received a Permit to Mine from the Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality—Land
Quality Division (“WDEQ-LQD”). In July 2011, we received our Source Material License from the United States
Nuclear Regulatory Commission and immediately began construction of our Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project.
In November 2011, we signed a processing agreement with Cameco Resources (“Cameco”), a wholly-owned U.S.
subsidiary of Cameco Corporation, the world’s largest publicly-traded uranium company. Under the agreement we will
deliver uranium-loaded resin from our Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project to Cameco’s Smith Ranch Highland
uranium mine for final processing into dried uranium concentrate packaged for shipping to a converter. Cameco’s
Table of Contents
3
Smith Ranch Highland mine is located in the Powder River Basin approximately 25 miles south of our Nichols Ranch
Unit. Extraction at the Jane Dough Unit is compatible with this plan. The agreement is for a fixed term with a variable
starting date dependent on the commencement of uranium extraction. Under the agreement, we and Cameco stipulate
both a minimum quantity of pounds and a maximum quantity of pounds which will be delivered by us and processed
by Cameco. It is our expectation that in its initial few years of extraction, all resins extracted at Nichols Ranch will be
processed by Cameco under this agreement. In the event that we fail to deliver the minimum quantities stipulated by
the agreement, we will be required to compensate Cameco a stipulated sum of liquidated damages.
In September 2012, we submitted an application to the Wyoming Business Council for a $20,000,000 loan under the
Wyoming Industrial Development Revenue Bond Program (the “Bond Financing”). The loan was received in
December 2013 and has a seven year term with an interest rate of 5.75% per annum. We are required to make
interest-only payments during the first year and in the following years the debt will be amortized to include payments
of principal and interest. The Loan can be repaid earlier than its maturity date if we so choose. The Loan is secured by
a charge on certain assets of the Company.
On June 6, 2013, we entered into a Note Purchase Agreement, dated as of May 31, 2013, by and among us, Deans
Knight Capital Management Ltd. (“Deans Knight”) and the investors in the Notes (the “Investors”), (the “Note
Purchase Agreement”). Pursuant to the Note Purchase Agreement, the Investors agreed to lend to the Company $6
million (the “Loan”) in exchange for senior notes of the Company equal to the outstanding principal balance of the loan
(the “Notes”). Pursuant to the terms of the Note Purchase Agreement, the Notes matured on the earlier of: (i) 30 days
from the execution and delivery of documentation in connection with the Bond Financing, and (ii) December 31, 2013.
The Notes bore interest from the date of issue at 6.0% per annum increasing to 10.0% per annum on August 16, 2013
as the Notes were not repaid prior to August 15, 2013. As additional consideration for the Loan, we agreed to issue to
the Investors 1,600,000 non-transferable common stock purchase warrants, each warrant entitling the Investors to
purchase from us a share of our common stock at an exercise price of $1.60. The warrants expire 30 months from the
date of issue, subject to acceleration. The Notes were repaid upon the closing of the Bond Financing.
During the first quarter of 2014 the Company completed the construction of the processing facility, the installation of
two deep disposal wells and the installation of the initial mine wellfield at Nichols Ranch. Standard Operating
Procedures were prepared and operating personnel were hired and trained. A Nuclear Regulatory Commission (“NRC”)
pre-operational field inspection was conducted in January 2014, with the final start-up authorization received in April.
Uranerz commenced uranium mining operations at Nichols Ranch in April 2014 upon receipt of the NRC authorization.
In May 2014 we submitted the source material license amendment application for our Jane Dough Unit to the U.S.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission. We are applying to add the Jane Dough Unit as an amendment to the existing
license for the Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project. We intend to continue the permitting and licensing of the Jane
Dough Unit so that it can be sequenced as described above while uranium extraction is ongoing at the Nichols Ranch
Unit.
The Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project is licensed for a recovery level of up to two million pounds of uranium per
year with initial annual recovery dependent upon the extraction efficiency in our first wellfield and market factors. The
project will also serve as a platform to advance our other Powder River Basin properties with potential enhanced
economics for adjacent and satellite projects. Cameco and Uranium One, two of the largest ISR uranium mining
companies in the world, are continuing to extract uranium near the Uranerz properties in the Powder River Basin.
Overview of Uranium Market
The primary commercial use for uranium is to fuel nuclear power plants for the generation of electricity. All the
uranium produced from our mines will be used to generate electricity.
In 2012, nuclear power plants supplied about 11% of the global electricity consumption. According to the World
Nuclear Association, there are currently 434 operable reactors world-wide which will require approximately 145 million
pounds of U3O8 fuel in 2014. World-wide there are currently 72 new reactors under construction with an additional 173
reactors on order or in the planning stage and another 309 in the proposed stage.
Table of Contents
4
The world continues to consume more uranium than it produces and largely due to increasing energy demands in
Asia. Historically the gap between demand and supply has been filled by stock-piled inventories and secondary
supplies; however these are finite and are being drawn down. Until recently, one of the largest sources of secondary
supply was the uranium derived from Russia’s Highly Enrich Uranium program with the United States. However, all the
deliveries from this source were completed at the end of 2013. The United States currently has 100 operating
reactors, 5 new reactors under construction and another 22 reactors in the planned or proposed stage. The United
States derives approximately 10% of its uranium needs from domestic U.S. uranium production.
Uranium is not traded on an open market or organized commodity exchange such as the London Metal Exchange
(although the New York Mercantile Exchange provides trading of cash-settled uranium futures contracts). Buyers and
sellers negotiate contracts privately and usually directly. Uranium prices, both spot prices and long-term prices, are
published by two independent market consulting firms, Tradetech and Ux Consulting, on a weekly basis.
The spot and long-term price of uranium is influenced by a number of factors, some of which are international. For
example, both the spot and long-term price of uranium was impacted by the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi
Nuclear Plant in Japan in March 2011. The events at Fukushima created heightened concerns regarding the safety of
nuclear plants and lead to closures of nuclear plants. These plant closures have created uncertainty in the market.
Most nuclear utilities seek to purchase a portion of their uranium needs through long-term supply contracts with
another portion being bought on the spot market in the short term. Like sellers, buyers are seeking to balance the
security of long-term supply with the opportunity to take advantage of price fluctuations. For this reason both buyers
and sellers track current spot and long-term prices for uranium carefully, make considered projections as to future
price changes, and then negotiate with one another to enter into a contract which each deems favorable to their
respective interests.
The graph below shows the monthly spot uranium and long-term uranium price from 1969 until May 2014 as reported
by Ux Consulting.
5
Table of Contents
The Securities Offered under this Prospectus
We may offer the Common Shares (and associated Rights), Warrants, Subscription Receipts, or Units with a total
value of up to $100,000,000 from time to time under this Prospectus, together with any applicable Prospectus
Supplement and related free writing prospectus, at prices and on terms to be determined by market conditions at the
time of offering. This Prospectus provides you with a general description of the Securities we may offer. Each time we
offer Securities, we will provide a Prospectus Supplement that will describe the specific amounts, prices and other
important terms of the Securities, including, to the extent applicable:
•   designation or classification;
•   aggregate principal amount or aggregate offering price;
•   maturity, if applicable;
•   original issue discount, if any;
•   rates and times of payment of interest or dividends, if any;
•   redemption, conversion, exchange or sinking fund terms, if any;
•   conversion or exchange prices or rates, if any, and, if applicable, any provisions for changes to or
adjustments in the conversion or exchange prices or rates and in the securities or other property receivable
upon conversion or exchange;
•   ranking;
•   restrictive covenants, if any;
•   voting or other rights, if any; and
•   important United States federal income tax considerations.
A Prospectus Supplement and any related free writing prospectus that we may authorize to be provided to you may
also add, update or change information contained in this Prospectus or in documents we have incorporated by
reference. However, no Prospectus Supplement or free writing prospectus will offer a security that is not registered
and described in this Prospectus at the time of the effectiveness of the registration statement of which this
Prospectus is a part.
We may sell the Securities on a continuous or delayed basis to or through underwriters, dealers or agents or directly
to purchasers. The Prospectus Supplement, which we will provide to you each time it offers Securities, will set forth
the names of any underwriters, dealers or agents involved in the sale of the Securities, and any applicable fee,
commission or discount arrangements with them.
Common Shares and Associated Rights
We may offer Common Shares. Holders of Common Shares are entitled to one vote per Common Share on all matters
that require shareholder approval. Holders of our Common Shares are entitled to dividends when and if declared by the
Board of Directors of the Company. Our Common Shares are described in greater detail in this Prospectus under
“Description of Common Shares.” Each Common Share will also have a Right attached thereto pursuant to the
Company’s Rights Plan. Our Rights are described in greater detail in this Prospectus under “Description of Common
Shares—Rights.” We will not offer any Rights independent of the Common Shares.
Warrants
We may offer Warrants for the purchase of Common Shares, in one or more series, from time to time. We may issue
Warrants independently or together with Common Shares or Subscription Receipts, and the Warrants may be attached
to or separate from such securities.
The Warrants will be evidenced by warrant certificates and may be issued under one or more warrant indentures,
which are contracts between us and a warrant trustee for the holders of the Warrants. In this prospectus, we have
summarized certain general features of the Warrants under “Description of Warrants.” We urge you, however, to read
any Prospectus Supplement and any free writing prospectus that we may authorize to be provided to you related to
the series of Warrants being offered, as well as the complete warrant indentures and warrant certificates that contain
the terms of the Warrants. Specific warrant indentures will contain additional important terms and provisions and will
be filed as exhibits to the registration statement of which this Prospectus is a part, or incorporated by reference from
a Current Report on Form 8-K that we file with the SEC.
Table of Contents
Subscription Receipts
6
We may issue Subscription Receipts, which will entitle holders to receive upon satisfaction of certain release
conditions and for no additional consideration, Common Shares or Warrants or any combination thereof. Subscription
Receipts will be issued pursuant to one or more subscription receipt agreements, each to be entered into between us
and an escrow agent, which will establish the terms and conditions of the Subscription Receipts. Each escrow agent
will be a financial institution organized under the laws of the United States or any state thereof or Canada or a
province thereof and authorized to carry on business as a trustee. A copy of the form of subscription receipt
agreement will be filed as an exhibit to the registration statement of which this Prospectus is a part, or will be
incorporated by reference from a Current Report on Form 8-K that we file with the SEC.
Units
We may offer Units consisting of Common Shares, Warrants and/or Subscription Receipts to purchase any of such
securities in one or more series. In this Prospectus, we have summarized certain general features of the Units under
“Description of Units.” We urge you, however, to read any Prospectus Supplement and any free writing prospectus
that we may authorize to be provided to you related to the series of Units being offered. We may evidence each series
of units by unit certificates that we will issue under a separate unit agreement with a unit agent. We will file as exhibits
to the registration statement of which this Prospectus is a part, or will incorporate by reference from a Current Report
on Form 8-K that we file with the SEC, the unit agreements that describe the terms of the series of Units we are
offering before the issuance of the related series of Units.
THIS PROSPECTUS MAY NOT BE USED TO OFFER OR SELL ANY SECURITIES UNLESS ACCOMPANIED BY
A PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT.
Table of Contents
7
RISK FACTORS
Investing in the Securities involves a high degree of risk. Prospective investors in a particular offering of Securities
should carefully consider the following risks, as well as the other information contained in this Prospectus, any
applicable Prospectus Supplement, and the documents incorporated by reference herein before investing in the
Securities. If any of the following risks actually occurs, our business could be materially harmed. The risks and
uncertainties described below are not the only ones we face. Additional risks and uncertainties, including those of
which we are currently unaware or that we deem immaterial, may also adversely affect the Company’s business.
Risks Related to Our Business
Our future performance is difficult to evaluate because we have a limited operating history.
We were incorporated in 1999 and we began to implement our current business strategy in the uranium industry in the
beginning of 2005. Our operating cash flow needs have been financed primarily through issuances of our common
stock. As a result, we have little historical financial and operating information available to help you evaluate our
performance.
Because the probability of an individual prospect ever having reserves is remote, our properties may not
contain any reserves, and any funds spent on exploration may be lost.
We have never generated any revenue from our operations. Because the probability of an individual prospect ever
having reserves is uncertain, our properties may not contain any reserves, and any funds spent on exploration may be
lost. Notwithstanding our disclosures to Canadian authorities under National Instrument 43-101, we do not know with
certainty that economically recoverable uranium exists on any of our properties. We may never discover uranium in
commercially exploitable quantities and any identified deposit may never qualify as a commercially mineable (or
viable) reserve. We will continue to attempt to acquire the surface and mineral rights on lands that we think are
geologically favorable or where we have historical information in our possession that indicates uranium mineralization
might be present.
The exploration and development of mineral deposits involves significant financial and other risks over an extended
period of time, which even a combination of careful evaluation, experience and knowledge may not eliminate. While
discovery of a uranium or precious or base metal deposit may result in substantial rewards, few properties which are
explored are ultimately developed into producing mines. Major expenditures are required to establish reserves by
drilling and to construct mining and processing facilities at a site. Our uranium properties are all at the exploration
stage and do not contain any reserves at this time. It is impossible to ensure that the current or proposed exploration
programs on properties in which we have an interest will result in the delineation of mineral deposits or in profitable
commercial operations. Our operations are subject to the hazards and risks normally incident to exploration and
extraction of uranium, precious and base metals, any of which could result in damage to life or property,
environmental damage and possible legal liability for such damage. While we may obtain insurance against certain
risks, the nature of these risks is such that liabilities could exceed policy limits or could be excluded from coverage.
There are also risks against which we cannot insure or against which we may elect not to insure. The potential costs
which could be associated with any liabilities not covered by insurance, or in excess of insurance coverage, or
compliance with applicable laws and regulations may cause substantial delays and require significant capital outlays,
adversely affecting our future earnings and competitive position and, potentially our financial viability.
We have losses which may continue into the future. As a result, we may have to suspend or cease exploration
activities.
We were incorporated in 1999 and are engaged in the business of mineral exploration. We have not realized any
revenue from our operations and have incurred losses since inception. We have a relatively limited exploration history
upon which an evaluation of our future success or failure can be made. Our ability to achieve and maintain profitability
and positive cash flow is dependent upon:
•   our ability to locate a profitable mineral property;
•   our ability to generate revenues; and
•   our ability to control costs.
Table of Contents
8
Based upon current plans, we expect to incur operating losses in future periods. This will happen because there are
expenses associated with the research and exploration of our mineral properties plus development costs to produce
saleable product. We cannot guarantee that we will be successful in generating revenues in the future. Failure to
generate revenues may cause us to go out of business.
Because some of our officers and directors do not have technical training or experience in exploring for,
starting, and operating a mine, we may have to hire qualified personnel. If we can’t locate qualified personnel,
we may have to suspend or cease exploration activity.
Some, but not all, of our officers and directors have experience with exploring for, starting, and operating a mine.
Because some of our officers and directors are inexperienced with exploring for, starting, and operating a mine, we
may have to hire qualified persons to perform surveying, exploration, and water management of our properties. Some
of our officers and directors have no direct training or experience in these areas and as a result may not be fully aware
of many of the specific requirements related to working within the industry. Their decisions and choices would
typically take into account standard engineering or managerial approaches mineral exploration companies commonly
use. However, our exploration activities, earnings and ultimate financial success could suffer irreparable harm due to
certain of management’s decisions. As a result we may have to suspend or cease exploration activities, or any future
warranted activities.
Our future profitability will be dependent on uranium prices.
Because a significant portion of our anticipated revenues are expected to be derived from the sale of uranium, our net
earnings, if any, can be affected by the long- and short-term market price of yellowcake (U3O8). Uranium prices are
subject to fluctuation. The price of uranium has been and will continue to be affected by numerous factors beyond our
control. With respect to uranium, such factors include the demand for nuclear power, political and economic
conditions in uranium producing and consuming countries, uranium supply from secondary sources, uranium
production levels and costs of production. Spot prices for U3O8 were at $20.00 per pound U3O8 in December 2004,
and then increased to $35.25 per pound in December 2005 and $72.00 per pound in December 2006. During 2007 the
spot price reached a high of $138.00 per pound. The spot price of U3O8 was approximately $90.00 per pound in
December 2007. The spot price declined during 2008, reaching a low of $44.00 per pound in October. In 2009, the
spot price of U3O8 had a high of $51.50 and a low of $42.00. In 2010 the spot price had a high of $62.50 and a low of
$40.75. In 2011 the spot price had a high of $74.00 and a low of $48.00. In 2012 the spot price had a high of $52.50
and a low of $40.75. In 2013 the spot price reached a high of $44.00 and a low of $34.00. The spot price of U3O8 was
approximately $34.50 per pound and the long term price was approximately $50.00 per pound at the end of December
2013. The spot price of U3O8 on June 10, 2014 was $28.50.
Public acceptance of nuclear energy is uncertain.
The demand for uranium as a source of energy and growth in that demand is dependent on society’s acceptance of
nuclear technology as a means of generating electricity. A major incident at a nuclear power plant anywhere in the
world, such as that which occurred at Japan’s Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station in March of 2011, following a
major earthquake and tsunami, or an accident relating to the transportation of new or spent nuclear fuel, could
negatively impact the continuing public acceptance of nuclear energy and the future prospects for nuclear power
generation, which may have a material adverse effect on the nuclear industry and the results of the Company
operations and revenues.
Our operations are subject to environmental regulation and environmental risks.
We are required to comply with applicable environmental protection laws and regulations and permitting requirements,
and we anticipate that we will be required to continue to do so in the future. The material laws and regulations within
the U.S. that the Company must comply with are the National Environmental Protection Act (“NEPA”), Atomic Energy
Act, Uranium Mill Tailings Radiation Control Act of 1978 (“UMTRCA”), Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, Safe Drinking
Water Act, Federal Land Policy Management Act, National Park System Mining Regulations Act, and the State Mined
Land Reclamation Acts or State Department of Environmental Quality regulations, as applicable. We are required to
comply with the Atomic Energy Act, as amended by UMTRCA, by applying for and maintaining a Source Material
license from the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Uranium operations must conform to the terms of such license,
which include provisions for protection of human health and the environment from endangerment due to radioactive
materials. The license encompasses protective measures consistent with the Clean Air Act and the Clean Water Act.
We intend to utilize specific employees and consultants in order to comply with and maintain our compliance with the
above laws and regulations.
Table of Contents
9
The uranium industry is subject not only to the worker health and safety and environmental risks associated with all
mining businesses, but also to additional risks uniquely associated with uranium mining and processing. The
possibility of more stringent regulations exists in the areas of worker health and safety, the disposition of wastes, the
decommissioning and reclamation of exploration and in-situ recovery mining sites, and other environmental matters,
each of which could have a material adverse effect on the costs or the viability of a particular project. We cannot
predict what environmental legislation, regulation or policy will be enacted or adopted in the future or how future laws
and regulations will be administered or interpreted. The recent trend in environmental legislation and regulation,
generally, is toward stricter standards and this trend is likely to continue in the future. This recent trend includes,
without limitation, laws and regulations relating to air and water quality, mine reclamation, waste handling and
disposal, the protection of certain species and the preservation of certain lands. These regulations may require the
acquisition of permits or other authorizations for certain activities. These laws and regulations may also limit or
prohibit activities on certain lands. Compliance with more stringent laws and regulations, as well as potentially more
vigorous enforcement policies or stricter interpretation of existing laws, may necessitate significant capital outlays,
may materially affect our results of operations and business, or may cause material changes or delays in our intended
activities.
Our operations may require additional analysis in the future including environmental and social impact and other
related studies. Certain activities require the submission and approval of environmental impact assessments.
Environmental assessments of proposed projects carry a heightened degree of responsibility for companies and
directors, officers, and employees. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain or maintain all necessary
permits that may be required to continue operations or exploration of properties or, if feasible, to commence
construction and operation of mining facilities at such properties at economically justifiable costs.
We intend to extract uranium from our properties using the in-situ recovery mining process which may not be
successful.
We intend to extract uranium from our properties using in-situ recovery mining, which is suitable for extraction of
certain types of uranium deposits. This process requires in-situ recovery mining equipment and trained personnel.
Competition and unforeseen limited sources of supplies in the industry could result in occasional spot shortages of
supplies, and certain equipment such as drilling rigs and other equipment that we might need to conduct exploration
and, if warranted, development. We will attempt to locate additional products, equipment and materials as needed. If
we cannot find the products and equipment we need, we will have to suspend our exploration and, if warranted,
development plans until we do find the products and equipment we need.
We face risks related to exploration and mine construction, if warranted, on our properties.
Our level of profitability, if any, in future years will depend to a great degree on uranium prices and whether any of our
exploration stage properties can be brought into extraction or production. The exploration for and development of
mineral deposits involves significant risks. It is impossible to ensure that the current and future exploration programs
and/or feasibility studies on our existing properties will establish reserves. Whether a uranium ore body will be
commercially viable depends on a number of factors, including, but not limited to: the particular attributes of the
deposit, such as size, grade and proximity to infrastructure; uranium prices, which cannot be predicted and which
have been highly volatile in the past; mining, processing and transportation costs; perceived levels of political risk and
the willingness of lenders and investors to provide project financing; labor costs and possible labor strikes; and
governmental regulations, including, without limitation, regulations relating to prices, taxes, royalties, land tenure, land
use, importing and exporting materials, foreign exchange, environmental protection, employment, worker safety,
transportation, and reclamation and closure obligations.
We are subject to the risks normally encountered in the mining industry, such as:
•   the discovery of unusual or unexpected geological formations;
•   accidental fires, floods, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and other natural disasters;
•   unplanned power outages and water shortages;
•   controlling water and other similar mining hazards;
•   operating labor disruptions and labor disputes;
10
Table of Contents
•   the ability to obtain suitable or adequate machinery, equipment, or labor;
•   our liability for pollution or other hazards; and
•   other known and unknown risks involved in the conduct of exploration, the operation of mines and the market
for uranium.
The development of mineral properties is affected by many factors, including, but not limited to: the cost of
operations; variations in the grade of ore; fluctuations in metal markets; costs of extraction and processing
equipment; availability of equipment and labor; labor costs and possible labor strikes; government regulations,
including without limitation, regulations relating to taxes, royalties, allowable production, importing and exporting of
minerals; foreign exchange; employment; worker safety; transportation; and environmental protection. Depending on
the price of uranium, we may determine that it is impractical to commence, or, if commenced, continue, operation of
our Nichols Ranch project. Such a decision would negatively affect our profits and may affect the value of your
investment.
Because we may be unable to meet property payment obligations or be able to acquire or maintain necessary
mining licenses, we may lose interests in our exploration properties.
The agreements pursuant to which we acquired our interests in some of our properties provide that we must make a
series of cash payments over certain time periods, expend certain minimum amounts on the exploration of the
properties or contribute our share of ongoing expenditures. If we fail to make such payments or expenditures in a
timely fashion, we may lose our interest in those properties. Further, even if we do complete exploration activities, we
may not be able to obtain the necessary licenses to conduct mining operations on the properties, and thus would
realize no benefit from our exploration activities on the properties.
Our mineral properties may be subject to defects in title.
We own, lease, or have under option, mining claims, mineral claims or concessions and fee mineral leases which
constitute our property holdings. The ownership and validity or title of unpatented mining claims and concessions are
often uncertain and may be contested. We also may not have, or may not be able to obtain, all necessary surface
rights to develop a property. We have not conducted title research in relation to many of our mining claims and
concessions to ensure clean title. We cannot guarantee that title to our properties will not be challenged. Title
insurance is generally not available for mineral properties and our ability to ensure that we have obtained secure claim
to individual mineral properties or mining concessions may be severely constrained. Our mineral properties may be
subject to prior unregistered agreements, transfers or claims, and title may be affected by, among other things,
undetected defects. We may incur significant costs related to defending the title to our properties. A successful claim
contesting our title to a property may cause us to compensate other persons or perhaps reduce our interest in the
affected property or lose our rights to explore and, if warranted, develop that property. This could result in us not being
compensated for our prior expenditures relating to the property. Also, in any such case, the investigation and
resolution of title issues would divert our management’s time from ongoing exploration and, if warranted, development
programs.
Because we may be unable to secure access rights, we may be unable to explore and/or develop our
properties.
Our mineral rights do not always include rights of access or use of the surface of lands. We require agreements with
land owners for these rights which may be difficult to obtain and which may require cash payments.
Because mineral exploration and mine construction activities are inherently risky, we may be exposed to
environmental liabilities.
The business of mineral exploration, extraction and production involves a high degree of risk. Few properties that are
explored are ultimately developed into extraction or production. At present, none of our properties has a known body
of commercial ore. Unusual or unexpected formations, formation pressures, fires, power outages, labor disruptions,
flooding, explosions and the inability to obtain suitable or adequate machinery, equipment or labor are other risks
involved in extraction operations and the conduct of exploration programs. Although we intend to carry liability
insurance with respect to our mineral exploration operations, we may become subject to liability for damage to life and
property, environmental damage or hazards against which we cannot insure or against which we may elect not to
insure. Previous mining operations may have caused environmental damage at certain of our properties. It may be
difficult or impossible to assess the extent to which such damage was caused by us or by the activities of
Table of Contents
11
previous operators, in which case, any indemnities and exemptions from liability may be ineffective. If any of our
properties is found to have commercial quantities of ore, we would be subject to additional risks respecting any mine
construction and extraction or production activities. Most exploration projects do not result in the discovery of
commercially mineable deposits of ore.
Our recently completed in-situ extraction project and future expansion projects are subject to risks associated
with new mine operations, which may result in delays in the start-up of mining operations, delays in
extraction from existing operations and unanticipated costs.
Some of the risks and uncertainties of new mine operations, include:
•   the ongoing requirement to meet necessary environmental and governmental regulations and permit
requirements, which may become more stringent over time;
•   unforeseen operating costs, including part failures, system inefficiencies, environmental hazards and related
contingencies;
•   the continued availability and cost of skilled labor, power, water and other materials;
•   the continued accessibility of transportation and other infrastructure, particularly in remote locations;
•   the continued availability and cost of processing arrangements; and
•   the continued availability of funds to finance repair and expansion activities.
The costs, timing and complexities of new mine operations can increase because of the remote location of our
projects. New mining operations could experience unexpected problems and delays during start-up and initial
extraction activities. If these unexpected events occur, our mining efforts may be materially impacted and our
expected extraction greatly reduced.
Acquisitions and integration issues may expose us to additional risks which could have a material adverse
effect on our business.
Our business strategy includes making targeted acquisitions. Any acquisition that we make may be of a significant
size, may change the scale of our business and operations, and may expose us to new geographic, political,
operating, financial and geological risks. The success of our acquisition activities depends on our ability to identify
suitable acquisition candidates, negotiate acceptable terms for any such acquisition and integrate the acquired
operations successfully with our own. Any acquisitions would be accompanied by risks which could have a material
adverse effect on our business. For example, there may be significant decreases in commodity prices after we have
committed to complete the transaction and have established the purchase price or exchange ratio; a material ore body
may prove to be below expectations; we may have difficulty integrating and assimilating the operations and personnel
of any acquired companies, realizing anticipated synergies and maximizing the financial and strategic position of the
combined enterprise and maintaining uniform standards, policies and controls across the organization; the integration
of the acquired business or assets may disrupt our ongoing business and our relationships with employees,
customers, suppliers and contractors; and the acquired business or assets may have unknown liabilities which may
be significant. If we choose to use equity securities as consideration for such an acquisition, existing stockholders
may suffer dilution. Alternatively, we may choose to finance any such acquisition with our existing resources. There
can be no assurance that we would be successful in overcoming these risks or any other problems encountered in
connection with such acquisitions.
The mining industry is highly competitive.
The business of the acquisition, exploration, and development of uranium properties is intensely competitive. We will
be required to compete, in the future, directly with other corporations that may have better access to potential uranium
resources, more developed infrastructure, more available capital, better access to necessary financing, and more
knowledgeable and available employees than us. We may encounter competition in acquiring uranium properties,
hiring mining professionals, obtaining mining resources, such as manpower, drill rigs, and other mining equipment.
Such competitors could outbid us for potential projects or produce minerals at lower costs. Increased competition
could also affect our ability to attract necessary capital funding or acquire suitable producing properties or prospects
for uranium exploration in the future.
Table of Contents
12
Risks Related to Corporate and Financial Structure
There could be problems with construction and operation of the Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project which
could result in cost overruns, extraction delays and require us to raise more capital to continue operations.
We are subject to all of the risks associated with establishing new mining operations:
•   the timing and cost, which can be considerable, of the construction of mining and processing facilities;
•   the availability and costs of skilled labor and mining equipment;
•   the availability and cost of appropriate processing and refining arrangements;
•   compliance with environmental and other governmental approval and permit requirements;
•   the availability of funds to finance additional construction and development activities;
•   potential opposition from non-governmental organizations, environmental groups, local groups or local
inhabitants which may delay or prevent development activities; and
•   potential increases in operating costs due to changes in the cost of fuel, power, materials and supplies.
It is common in new mining operations to experience unexpected problems and delays in development and mine start-
up. In addition, delays in the commencement of mineral extraction and production often occur. Any delay in the
performance of any one or more of the contractors, suppliers, consultants or other persons on which we depend, or
lack of availability of required equipment, material, supplies or workers could delay or prevent commencement of
operations at our Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project. Any delays or other problems in starting up could result in cost
overruns, delay or prevent extraction or production and require us to raise additional capital to continue operations. If
we are unable to raise additional capital, as needed, we may not be able to continue mining operations.
We may not be able to achieve targeted extraction or production rates at our Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium
Project.
Continuance of mining operations at our Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project is dependent on a number of factors,
including regulatory requirements, changes in governmental regulations, loss of key employees, environmental and
mining hazards, lack of necessary materials and supplies, uncertainty in resource estimates and fluctuations in the
price of uranium. Any changes in these factors could impact extraction or production levels or could prevent us from
achieving targeted extraction or production amounts, which could result in us not being profitable.
Operating Costs at the Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project could be higher than anticipated.
We have estimated operating and sustaining capital costs for the Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project based on
information available, and believe that these estimates are accurate. However, costs for labor, regulatory compliance,
energy, mine and plant equipment and materials needed for mine operations and development have increased
significantly industry-wide. In light of these factors, actual costs related to mine operations and development may
differ from, and in some cases exceed our estimates.
We have no operating history upon which it can base forecasts of estimated future extraction, production and
operating costs for the Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project. Such forecasts derive estimates of extraction or
production and cash operating costs from, among other things:
•   anticipated grades and metallurgical characteristics of the ore to be mined and processed;
•   anticipated recovery rates of uranium;
•   cash operating costs of comparable facilities and equipment; and
•   anticipated climatic conditions.
Capital and operating costs, extraction, production and economic returns, and other estimates contained in extraction,
production and cost forecasts may differ significantly from actual costs, and there can be no assurance that actual
capital and operating costs will not be higher than currently anticipated or disclosed.
Table of Contents
13
We may be unable to timely pay our obligations under our outstanding note, which may result in us losing
some of our assets covered by the mortgage and security agreement related to the note to the extent
necessary to cover our obligations and may adversely affect our assets, results of operations and future
prospects.
On November 26, 2013, we entered into a Financing Agreement (the “Financing Agreement”) with Johnson County,
Wyoming (the “County”) pursuant to which the County agreed to loan to us (the “Loan”) the proceeds from the sale of
its $20,000,000 Taxable Industrial Development Revenue Bond (Uranerz Energy Corporation Project), Series 2013,
(the “Bond”) upon the terms and conditions set out in the Financing Agreement, for the purpose of financing our
Nichols Ranch Project.
The Bond was issued by the County pursuant to an indenture of trust (the “Indenture”) dated as of November 26,
2013 between the County and UMB BANK, n.a. as trustee thereunder (the “Trustee”). The State of Wyoming, acting
by and through the Wyoming State Treasurer, agreed to purchase the Bond subject to the terms and conditions
specified under Wyoming Statute 9-4-715(m) and pursuant to the terms and conditions set out in a Bond Purchase
Agreement entered into on November 26, 2013 among the State of Wyoming, acting by and through the Wyoming
State Treasurer (the “State”), the County and us. In order to evidence our obligations under the Bond Purchase
Agreement, we delivered a promissory note (the “Note”) in the principal amount of $20,000,000, dated as of the date
of delivery of the Bond and due on October 1, 2020, payable to the order of the County, and endorsed to the Trustee.
In order to secure the payment of the principal and interest under the Bond, the County assigned and granted to the
Trustee, all right, title and interest of the County under the Financing Agreement and any and all interests in real or
personal property of the Company as security for our obligations under the Financing Agreement, the Bond Purchase
Agreement and the Note.
On November 26, 2013, in connection with the Financing Agreement and the Loan, we as mortgagor entered into a
Mortgage & Security Agreement (the “Mortgage & Security Agreement”), pursuant to which we granted to the
Trustee our rights and interests in the as-extracted collateral, contract rights relating directly or indirectly to the Lands
(as identified in Exhibit A to the Mortgage), general intangibles relating directly or indirectly to the lands, fixtures or
hereinafter located on the Lands or our Nichols Ranch ISR Processing Facility, goods ( including all inventory) and
equipment, including without limitations the ore and all personal property identified as owned by us in the Mortgage &
Security Agreement to secure our obligations under the Financing Agreement, the Bond Purchase Agreement and the
Note.
If we are unable to timely satisfy our obligations under the Note, including timely payment of the interest when due
and payment of the principal amount at maturity and we are not able to successfully extend the maturity date or
otherwise re-negotiate the terms of the Notes, the Trustee will have rights under the Mortgage and Security
Agreement to potentially seize or sell the secured properties and interests, our equipment and personal property and
the Nichols Ranch Processing Facility to satisfy our obligations under the Note. Any failure to timely meet our
obligations under the Note may adversely affect our assets, results of operations and future prospects.
We are dependent upon key management employees.
The success of our operations will depend upon numerous factors, many of which are beyond our control, including
(i) our ability to enter into strategic alliances through a combination of one or more joint ventures, mergers or
acquisition transactions; and (ii) our ability to attract and retain additional key personnel in sales, marketing, technical
support and finance. We currently depend upon our management employees to seek out and form strategic alliances
and find and retain additional employees. There can be no assurance of success with any or all of these factors on
which our operations will depend. We have relied and may continue to rely, upon consultants and others for operating
expertise.
Our growth will require new personnel, which we will be required to recruit, hire, train and retain.
We have experienced significant growth in the number of our employees. This growth has placed substantial demands
on us and our management. Our ability to assimilate new personnel will be critical to our performance. We will be
required to recruit additional personnel and to train, motivate and manage employees. We will also have to adopt and
implement new systems in all aspects of our operations. This will be particularly critical in the event we decide not to
use contract miners at any of our properties. We have no assurance that we will be able to recruit the personnel
required to execute our programs or to manage these changes successfully.
Table of Contents
14
Legislation, including the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, may make it difficult for us to retain or attract officers
and directors.
We may be unable to attract and retain qualified officers, directors and members of board committees required to
provide for our effective management as a result of the recent and currently proposed changes in the rules and
regulations which govern publicly-held companies. Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 has resulted in a series of rules and
regulations by the Securities and Exchange Commission that increased responsibilities and liabilities of directors and
executive officers. The increased personal risk associated with these changes may deter qualified individuals from
accepting these roles.
Stock market price and volume volatility.
The market for our common stock may be highly volatile for reasons both related to our performance or events
pertaining to the industry (i.e. mineral price fluctuation/high extraction or production costs/accidents) as well as
factors unrelated to us or our industry. In particular, market demand for uranium fluctuates from one business cycle to
the next, resulting in change of demand for the mineral and an attendant change in the price for the mineral. Our
common stock can be expected to be subject to volatility in both price and volume arising from market expectations,
announcements and press releases regarding our business, and changes in estimates and evaluations by securities
analysts or other events or factors. In recent years, the securities markets in the United States have experienced a
high level of price and volume volatility, and the market prices of securities of many companies, particularly small-
capitalization companies, have experienced wide fluctuations that have not necessarily been related to the operations,
performances, underlying asset values, or prospects of such companies. For these reasons, the price of our common
stock can also be expected to be subject to volatility resulting from purely market forces over which we will have no
control.
Granting of options may negatively impact the value of our shares of common stock.
Because our success is highly dependent upon our employees, we may in the future grant to some or all of our key
employees, directors and consultants, options to purchase shares of our common stock as non-cash incentives.
Those options may be granted at exercise prices equal to market prices at times when the public market is
depressed. To the extent that significant numbers of such options may be granted and exercised, the interests of our
other stockholders may be diluted.
The issuance of additional shares of common stock may negatively impact the trading price of our shares of
common stock.
We have issued equity securities in the past and may continue to issue equity securities to finance our activities in
the future, including to finance future acquisitions, or as consideration for acquisitions of businesses or assets. In
addition, outstanding options and warrants to purchase shares of common stock may be exercised, resulting in the
issuance of additional shares of common stock. The issuance by us of additional shares of common stock would
result in dilution to our stockholders, and even the perception that such an issuance may occur could have a negative
impact on the trading price of our shares of common stock.
The value of an investment in our shares of common stock could decline substantially.
The market price for shares of our common stock has been and can be expected to remain highly volatile. As a
result, shareholders might experience an extreme variation in the value of their holdings. Trading prices of many
exploration stage companies, including us, have experienced price and volume fluctuations which have, at times,
been seemingly unrelated to the performance of the companies whose securities were affected.
We do not intend to pay dividends in the foreseeable future.
We have never paid a dividend to our shareholders, and we intend to retain our cash for the continued expansion of
our business. We do not intend to pay cash dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future. As a result, a
return on investment will be solely determined by the ability to sell shares in a secondary market.
Table of Contents
15
We depend on our ability to successfully access the capital and financial markets. Any inability to access the
capital or financial markets may limit our ability to execute our business plan or pursue investments that we
may rely on for future growth.
We rely on access to long-term capital markets as a source of liquidity for capital and operating requirements. If we
are not able to access financial markets at competitive rates, our ability to implement our business plan and strategy
may be affected. Certain market disruptions may increase our cost of borrowing or affect our ability to access one or
more financial markets. Such market disruptions could result from:
•   adverse economic conditions;
•   adverse general capital market conditions;
•   poor performance and health of the uranium industry in general;
•   bankruptcy or financial distress of unrelated uranium companies or marketers;
•   significant decrease in the demand for uranium;
•   adverse regulatory actions that affect our exploration and mine construction plans; and
•   terrorist attacks on our potential customers.
Market events and conditions, including disruptions in the U.S. and international credit markets and other
financial systems and the deterioration of the U.S. and global economic conditions, could, among other
things, impede access to capital or increase the cost of capital, which would have an adverse effect on our
ability to fund our working capital and other capital requirements.
Since 2008, the credit markets in the United States have experienced serious disruption due to government
regulation, government inaction, deterioration in residential property values, defaults and delinquencies in the
residential mortgage market (particularly, subprime and non-prime mortgages) and a decline in the credit quality of
mortgage backed securities. These problems led to a loss of confidence in the broader United States and global credit
and financial markets and resulting in the collapse of, and government intervention in, major banks, financial
institutions and insurers and creating a climate of greater volatility, less liquidity, widening of credit spreads, a lack of
price transparency, increased credit losses and tighter credit conditions. Various actions by the United States and
foreign governments are targeting general conditions of the capital markets, financial instruments, banks, investment
banks, insurers and other financial institutions to stabilize and improve the broader credit and stock markets. The
general economic indicators, including low consumer sentiment, high unemployment and low economic growth
indicate continued economic uncertainty.
These disruptions in the current credit and financial markets have had a significant material adverse impact on a
number of financial institutions and have limited access to capital and credit for many companies. These disruptions
could, among other things, make it more difficult for us to obtain, or increase our cost of obtaining, capital and
financing for our operations. Our access to additional capital may not be available on terms acceptable to us or at all.
16
Table of Contents
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
The SEC allows us to “incorporate by reference” information it files with the SEC. This means that we can disclose
important information to you by referring you to those documents. Any information we reference in this manner is
considered part of this Prospectus. Information we file with the SEC after the date of this Prospectus will
automatically update and, to the extent inconsistent, supersede the information contained in this Prospectus. Copies
of the documents incorporated by reference in this Prospectus may be obtained on written or oral request without
charge from the Secretary of the Company at 1701 East “E” Street, P.O. Box 50850, Casper, Wyoming 82605-0850
(telephone: (307) 265-8900).
We incorporate by reference the documents listed below and future filings we make with the SEC pursuant to
Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”)
(excluding, unless otherwise provided therein or herein, information furnished pursuant to Item 2.02 and Item 7.01 on
any Current Report on Form 8-K) after the date of the initial filing of this registration statement on Form S-3 to which
this Prospectus relates until the termination of the offering under this Prospectus.
(a) our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013, which report contains our audited
financial statements and the notes thereto as at December 31, 2013 and 2012 and for the three years ended
December 31, 2013, together with the auditors’ report thereon, as filed on March 14, 2014;
(b) our Proxy Statement on Schedule 14A, dated April 29, 2014, in connection with our June 11, 2014 annual
general meeting of shareholders, as filed on April 29, 2014;
(c) our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2014, which report contains our
unaudited financial statements and the notes thereto as at March 31, 2014 and for the three month periods
ended March 31, 2014 and 2013, as filed on May 12, 2014;
(d) our Current Reports on Form 8-K as filed February 19, 2014, April 16, 2014, May 6, 2014 and June 16, 2014;
(e)
the description of our common stock contained in our registration statement on Form 8-A, as filed on
August 7, 2006, including any amendment or reports filed for purposes of updating such description; and
(f)
all other documents filed by us with the SEC under Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act,
after the date of this Prospectus but before the end of the offering of the Securities pursuant to this
Prospectus.
We also hereby specifically incorporate by reference all filings filed by us pursuant to Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 or
15(d) of the Exchange Act after the date of the initial registration statement on Form S-3 to which this Prospectus
relates and prior to effectiveness of such registration statement.
17
Table of Contents
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Prospectus and the documents incorporated herein by reference contain “forward-looking-statements” within the
meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such forward-looking statements concern our
anticipated results and developments in our operations in future periods, planned exploration and, if warranted,
development of its properties, plans related to its business and other matters that may occur in the future. These
statements relate to analyses and other information that are based on forecasts of future results, estimates of
amounts not yet determinable and assumptions of management.
Any statements that express or involve discussions with respect to predictions, expectations, beliefs, plans,
projections, objectives, assumptions or future events or performance (often, but not always, using words or phrases
such as “expects” or “does not expect”, “is expected”, “anticipates” or “does not anticipate”, “plans”, “estimates” or
“intends”, or stating that certain actions, events or results “may”, “could”, “would”, “might” or “will” be taken, occur or
be achieved) are not statements of historical fact and may be forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements
are subject to a variety of known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors which could cause actual events
or results to differ from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements, including, without limitation:
•   risks related to our limited operating history;
•   risks related to the probability that our properties contain reserves;
•   risks related to our past losses and expected losses in the near future;
•   risks related to our need for qualified personnel for exploring for, starting and operating a mine;
•   risks related to our lack of known reserves;
•   risks related to the fluctuation of uranium prices;
•   risks related to the public acceptance of nuclear power;
•   risks related to environmental laws and regulations and environmental risks;
•   risks related to using our in-situ recovery mining process;
•
risks related to exploration and, if warranted, development of our properties;
risks related to exploration and, if warranted, development of our properties;
•   risks related to our ability to acquire necessary mining licenses or permits;
•   risks related to our ability to make property payment obligations;
•   risks related to obtaining the necessary access rights;
•   risks related to the competitive nature of the mining industry;
•   risks related to our dependence on key personnel;
•   risks related to requirements for new personnel;
•   risks related to securities regulations;
•   risks related to stock price and volume volatility;
•   risks related to dilution;
•   risks related to our lack of dividends;
•   risks related to our ability to access capital markets;
•   risks related to recent market events;
•   risks related to our issuance of additional shares of common stock;
•   risks related to acquisition and integration issues;
•   risks related to defects in title to our mineral properties;
•   risks related to the construction and delay in construction of the Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project;
18
Table of Contents
•   risks related to our ability to achieve targeted extraction or production rates at our Nichols Ranch ISR
Uranium Project;
•   risks related to higher than expected operating costs at our Nichols Ranch ISR Uranium Project;
•   risks related to our outstanding notes; and
•   risks related to our securities.
This list is not exhaustive of the factors that may affect our forward-looking statements. Some of the important risks
and uncertainties that could affect forward-looking statements are described further under the sections titled “Risk
Factors” of this Prospectus. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should underlying
assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those anticipated, believed, estimated or
expected. We caution readers not to place undue reliance on any such forward-looking statements, which speak only
as of the date made. We disclaim any obligation subsequently to revise any forward-looking statements to reflect
events or circumstances after the date of such statements or to reflect the occurrence of anticipated or unanticipated
events.
We qualify all the forward-looking statements contained in this Prospectus by the foregoing cautionary
statements.
Table of Contents
19
Change in Control Severance Agreements
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
On May 1, 2014, we entered into new change in control severance agreements (the “Change in Control Severance
Agreements”) with four of our executive officers: Executive Chairman Dennis Higgs, Chief Executive Officer Glenn
Catchpole, President & Chief Operating Officer W. Paul Goranson, and Senior Vice President & Chief Financial
Officer Benjamin Leboe. The new Change in Control Severance Agreements replace and supersede change in control
agreements (the “previous agreements”) between the Company and three of its executive officers: Executive
Chairman Dennis Higgs, Chief Executive Officer Glenn Catchpole and Senior Vice President, Finance & Chief
Financial Officer Benjamin Leboe. Under the new Change in Control Severance Agreements, the executive officer will
be entitled to certain severance benefits if, following a “change of control” (as defined in the Change in Control
Severance Agreement), the Company terminates the executive’s employment without “cause”, as defined in the
agreement, or the executive terminates his employment with the Company for “good reason” (as defined in the
Change in Control Severance Agreement). In such event, each executive officer would be entitled to receive his base
salary through to the date of termination, a pro-rated target bonus for the year of termination and two times his base
salary and target bonus, in each case as in effect on the date of the change in control, or the date of termination
(whichever is higher).
The new form of Change in Control Severance Agreement provides that each executive officer will be prohibited, for a
one year period after his termination, from soliciting employees or customers or suppliers of the Company and each
executive officer will be subject to confidentiality restrictions. Following termination of employment the executive
officer will be required to sign a release of claims against the Company prior to receiving severance benefits under the
agreement.
Resignation of Senior Vice President, Legal & Corporate Secretary
On May 1, 2014, Sandra R. MacKay, Senior Vice President, Legal & Corporate Secretary and an executive officer of
our Company, tendered her resignation from employment with our Company, effective June 15, 2014, in order to
pursue another professional opportunity.
United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission Authorization
On April 15, 2014 the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission issued a letter of authorization to our Company
authorizing us to commence in-situ uranium recovery operations at our Nichols Ranch ISR (in-situ recovery) Project.
Option Surrender Agreements
Effective February 15, 2014, our four independent directors and each of our: Chief Executive Officer, Executive
Chairman, Senior Vice President, Finance & Chief Financial Officer and Senior Vice President, Legal & Corporate
Secretary, all of whom held options to purchase Common Shares with exercise prices greater than $3.20 per Common
Share, previously granted to them pursuant to the our Amended 2005 Nonqualified Stock Option Plan (the “Plan”)
entered into option surrender agreements (“Surrender Agreements”) with our Company.
Pursuant to the Surrender Agreements, the independent directors and such executive officers agreed to surrender to
us, for no consideration, options to purchase an aggregate of 1,814,000 Common Shares, with a weighted average
exercise price of $3.43; such surrendered shares are available for future grant under the Plan.
USE OF PROCEEDS
Unless otherwise indicated in the applicable Prospectus Supplement, the net proceeds from the sale of Securities will
be used by us for acquisitions, exploration and development of existing or acquired mineral properties, working capital
requirements, to repay indebtedness outstanding from time to time or for other general corporate purposes. We may,
from time to time, issue Common Shares or other securities otherwise than through the offering of Securities pursuant
to this Prospectus.
Table of Contents
20
RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
We did not have any fixed charges during the five fiscal years ending December 31, 2013. Accordingly, we have no
ratio of earnings to fixed charges to illustrate for such periods.
We have computed the ratio of earnings to fixed charges by dividing earnings by fixed charges. For this purpose,
“earnings” consist of income/(loss) from operations before income tax, minority interest adjustments and changes in
accounting principles and fixed charges, and “fixed charges” consist of the interest portion of rental expense and
interest incurred.
Common Shares
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON SHARES
We are authorized to issue 750,000,000 shares of common stock of the Company of which, as of June 9, 2014,
86,268,806 are issued and outstanding. The shares of common stock are entitled to one vote per share on all matters
submitted to a vote of the stockholders, including the election of directors. Except as otherwise required by law the
holders of shares of common stock will possess all voting power. Generally, all matters to be voted on by
stockholders must be approved by a majority (or, in the case of election of directors, by a plurality) of the votes
entitled to be cast by all shares of common stock that are present in person or represented by proxy. Holders of
shares of common stock representing 33 1/3% of our capital stock issued, outstanding and entitled to vote,
represented in person or by proxy, are necessary to constitute a quorum at any meeting of our stockholders. A vote
by the holders of a majority of the outstanding shares of common stock is required to effectuate certain fundamental
corporate changes such as liquidation, merger or an amendment to our Articles of Incorporation. Our Articles of
Incorporation do not provide for cumulative voting in the election of directors.
The holders of shares of common stock will be entitled to such cash dividends as may be declared from time to time
by our board of directors from funds available therefor.
Upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up, the holders of shares of common stock will be entitled to receive pro rata
all assets available for distribution to such holders.
In the event of any merger or consolidation with or into another company in connection with which shares of common
stock are converted into or exchangeable for shares of stock, other securities or property (including cash), all holders
of shares of common stock will be entitled to receive the same kind and amount of shares of stock and other
securities and property (including cash).
Holders of shares of common stock have no pre-emptive rights or conversion rights and there are no redemption
provisions applicable to our common stock.
Rights Plan
Our board of directors previously declared a dividend distribution of one common stock purchase right (which we refer
to as a “Right”) for each outstanding share of our common stock, which distribution was payable on August 25, 2010
(which we refer to as the “Record Time”) pursuant to a shareholders rights plan effective May 25, 2010 (the “Rights
Plan”). Each Right entitles the registered holder to purchase one share of common stock from us at a price of $8.75
per share (which we refer to as the “Exercise Price”), subject to adjustment.
Each Right will be evidenced by the share of common stock and will trade only with such share, until the Separation
Time, as discussed and defined below. No physical distribution of separate certificates evidencing the Rights will be
made until the Separation Time.
On July 10, 2013, our shareholders reconfirmed the Rights Plan at our annual meeting.
Issuance of Rights
Under the Rights Plan, we issued one Right in respect of each share of common stock outstanding on the Record
Time and we will issue one Right in respect of each share of common stock which may be issued after the Record
Time and prior to the earlier of the Separation Time (as defined below) and the Expiration Time (as defined below). We
may, after the Separation Time but prior to the Expiration Time, issue one Right in respect of each share of common
stock which is issued after the Record Time pursuant to the exercise of securities convertible into shares of
Table of Contents
21
our common stock (which we refer to as “Convertible Securities”) which are outstanding as of the date of the first
public announcement that any person or entity has become an Acquiring Person (as defined below) (which we refer to
as the “Stock Acquisition Date”).
Exercise Price and Adjustment of Exercise Price and Number of Rights
Each Right will entitle the holder thereof, from and after the Separation Time and prior to the Expiration Time, to
purchase, for the Exercise Price, one share of our common stock. The Exercise Price and the number of Rights
outstanding are subject to adjustment if, after the Record Time and prior to the Expiration Time, we perform certain
actions that customarily trigger adjustments, including declaring or paying a dividend on our shares of common stock,
subdividing or changing the number of outstanding shares of our common stock into a greater number of shares and
combining or changing the number of outstanding shares of our common stock into a smaller number of shares.
Exercise of Rights and Transferability
Until the Separation Time, the Rights will not be exercisable and each Right will be evidenced by the certificate for the
associated share of common stock and will be transferable only together with, and will be transferred by a transfer of,
the associated share of common stock. From and after the Separation Time and prior to the Expiration Time, the
Rights will be exercisable and the registration and transfer of the Rights will be separate from and independent of the
shares of our common stock.
Promptly following the Separation Time, the Rights Agent will send to each holder of record of our common stock as
of the Separation Time, or who subsequently becomes a holder of record of our common stock upon the exercise of
rights attaching to Convertible Securities outstanding at the Stock Acquisition Date, a rights certificate (which we refer
to as a “Rights Certificate”) representing one Right for each share of our common stock. The Rights may be
exercised in whole or in part on any business day after the Separation Time and prior to the Expiration Time by
submitting to the Rights Agent, a Rights Certificate together with an election to exercise the applicable Rights and
payment of the Exercise Price for each Right being exercised. Upon receipt of the foregoing, the Rights Agent will
direct our transfer agent to issue stock certificates to the holders exercising their Rights, representing one share of
our common stock for each Right exercised.
Flip-in Event
A flip-in event (which we refer to as a “Flip-in Event”) occurs when any person or entity becomes an Acquiring
Person. If, prior to the Expiration Time, a Flip-in Event occurs, we will take such action as is necessary to ensure and
provide, within ten business days of the Flip-in Event or such longer period as may be required, that each Right will
thereafter constitute the right to purchase from us, upon payment of the Exercise Price and otherwise exercising the
applicable Right in accordance with the terms of the Rights Plan, that number of shares of our common stock having
an aggregate market price on the date of consummation or occurrence of the Flip-in Event equal to twice the Exercise
Price for an amount in cash equal to the Exercise Price.
Upon the occurrence of any Flip-in Event, any Rights that are or were beneficially owned on or after the earlier of the
Separation Time and the Stock Acquisition Date by an Acquiring Person or any person or entity acting jointly or in
concert with an Acquiring Person or a transferee of Rights of an Acquiring Person or of any person or entity acting
jointly or in concert with an Acquiring Person who becomes a transferee in a transfer that our board of directors has
determined is part of a plan, arrangement or scheme of an Acquiring Person will become null and void without any
further action, and any holder of those Rights will not have any right whatsoever to exercise those Rights under the
Rights Plan and will not have thereafter any right whatsoever with respect to those Rights.
Separation Time
Separation Time means the close of business on the tenth trading day after the earlier of (i) the Stock Acquisition
Date, (ii) the date of the commencement of or first public announcement of the intent of any person (other than us or
any of our subsidiaries) to commence a take-over bid (other than a Permitted Bid or Competing Permitted Bid (as
defined below)), (iii) the date upon which a take-over bid ceases to be a Permitted Bid or Competing Permitted Bid or
(iv) such later time as may be determined by our board of directors acting in good faith.
Expiration Time
Expiration Time means the earlier of (i) the date our board of directors waives or redeems the Rights or (ii) the close of
the annual general meeting of our stockholders held in 2016.
Table of Contents
Acquiring Person
22
Acquiring Person means any person who or entity which is the beneficial owner of 20% or more of the outstanding
shares of our common stock and our other voting securities (which we collectively refer to as our “Voting Shares”),
provided, however, that the term Acquiring Person does not include (i) us or any of our subsidiaries, (ii) any person
who or entity which becomes the beneficial owner of 20% or more of the outstanding shares of our common stock and
our other voting securities as a result of any one or any combination of: (A) a Voting Share Reduction (as defined
below); (B) a Permitted Bid Acquisition (as defined below); (C) an Exempt Acquisition (as defined below); (D) a
Convertible Security Acquisition (as defined below); or (E) a Pro Rata Acquisition (as defined below), (iii) for the period
of 10 days after the date of the first public announcement of a take-over bid, any person who or entity which becomes
the beneficial owner of 20% or more of the outstanding Voting Shares as a result of that person or entity making or
proposing to make a take-over bid, (iv) an underwriter or member of a banking or selling group that becomes the
beneficial owner of 20% or more of the outstanding Voting Shares in connection with a distribution of our securities or
(v) any employee or executive or director stock ownership or other employee or executive or director benefit plan, or
trust for the benefit of our employees or the employees of any of our subsidiaries or any person or entity organized,
appointed or established by us for or pursuant to the terms of any such plan or trust. In general:
(A) a Voting Share Reduction means an acquisition or redemption by us or our subsidiaries of Voting Shares
which, by reducing the number of Voting Shares outstanding or which may be voted, increases the
proportionate number of Voting Shares beneficially owned by any person or entity;
(B) a Permitted Bid Acquisition means an acquisition made pursuant to a Permitted Bid (as defined below) or a
Competing Permitted Bid (as defined below);
(C) an Exempt Acquisition means a share acquisition in respect of which our board of directors has waived the
application of the Rights Plan (i) which was made on or prior to the Record Time, (ii) which was made
pursuant to a dividend reinvestment plan, (iii) which was made pursuant to the receipt or exercise of rights
issued by us to all the holders of our common stock to subscribe for or purchase shares of our common
stock or Convertible Securities, provided that those rights are acquired directly from us; (iv) which was made
pursuant to a distribution by us of shares of our common stock or Convertible Securities made pursuant to a
prospectus or (v) which was made pursuant to a distribution by us of shares of our common stock or
Convertible Securities by way of a private placement by us or upon the exercise by an individual employee
of stock options granted under a stock option plan of ours or rights to purchase securities granted under a
share purchase plan of ours where all necessary stock exchange approvals for the private placement, stock
option plan or share purchase plan have been obtained and the private placement, stock option plan or share
purchase plan complies with the terms and conditions of the approvals and the person or entity does not
become the beneficial owner of more than 25% of the shares of our common stock outstanding immediately
prior to the distribution;
(D) a Convertible Security Acquisition means the acquisition of shares of our common stock upon the exercise
of Convertible Securities received by a person or entity pursuant to a Permitted Bid Acquisition, Exempt
Acquisition or a Pro Rata Acquisition; and
(E) a Pro Rata Acquisition means an acquisition by a person or entity of beneficial ownership of Voting Shares
as a result of: a dividend reinvestment acquisition; a stock dividend, a stock split or other event pursuant to
which a person or entity becomes the beneficial owner of Voting Shares on the same pro rata basis as all
other holders of Voting Shares; the acquisition or exercise by a person or entity of rights to purchase Voting
Shares distributed to that person or entity in the course of a distribution to all holders of Voting Shares
pursuant to a rights offering or pursuant to a prospectus; or a distribution of Voting Shares or securities
convertible into or exchangeable for Voting Shares (and the conversion or exchange of those convertible or
exchangeable securities) made pursuant to a prospectus or a distribution by way of a private placement;
provided that the person or entity does not thereby acquire a greater percentage of the Voting Shares, or
securities convertible into or exchangeable for Voting Shares, so offered than the person’s or entity’s
percentage of Voting Shares beneficially owned immediately prior to the acquisition.
Permitted Bid and Competing Permitted Bid
A take-over bid will not trigger a Flip-in Event if it is a Permitted Bid or a Competing Permitted Bid.
Table of Contents
23
A Permitted Bid is a take-over bid made by way of a take-over bid circular which also complies with the following
additional provisions: (i) the take-over bid is made for any and all Voting Shares to all holders of record of Voting
Shares wherever resident as registered on our books; (ii) the take-over bid contains, and the take up and payment for
securities tendered or deposited thereunder will be subject to, irrevocable and unqualified conditions that (A) no Voting
Shares will be taken up or paid for pursuant to the take-over bid prior to the close of business on a date which is not
earlier than the 60th day following the date of the take-over bid and unless at such date more than 50% of the Voting
Shares held by independent stockholders have been deposited pursuant to the take-over bid and not withdrawn,
(B) unless the take-over bid is withdrawn, Voting Shares may be deposited pursuant to the take-over bid at any time
prior to the close of business on the date of first take up or payment and that any Voting Shares deposited pursuant
to the take-over bid may be withdrawn at any time prior to the close of business on that date and, (C) if as of a date
not earlier than the 60th day following the date of the take-over bid more than 50% of the Voting Shares held by
independent stockholders have been deposited pursuant to the take-over bid and not withdrawn, the offeror will make
a public announcement of that fact and the take-over bid will remain open for deposits and tenders of Voting Shares
for not less than 10 business days from the date of the public announcement.
A Competing Permitted Bid is a take-over bid that is made after a Permitted Bid has been made and prior to the
expiry of that Permitted Bid that satisfies the requirements for a Permitted Bid and that contains, and the take up and
payment for securities tendered or deposited thereunder are subject to, an irrevocable and unqualified condition that
no Voting Shares will be taken up or paid for pursuant to the take-over bid prior to the close of business on a date that
is no earlier than the later of (A) the earliest date on which Voting Shares may be taken up or paid for under any prior
Permitted Bid in existence on the date of that take-over bid and (B) the last day on which the take-over bid must be
open for acceptance after the date of the take-over bid under applicable legislation.
Agreement of Rights Holders
Every holder of Rights, by accepting the same, consents and agrees with us and the Rights Agent and with every
other holder of Rights (i) to be bound by and subject to the provisions of the Rights Plan in respect of all Rights held,
(ii) that, prior to the Separation Time, each Right will be transferable only together with, and will be transferred by a
transfer of, the associated share of common stock, (iii) that, after the Separation Time, the Rights Certificate will be
transferable only upon registration of the transfer in the register for the Rights, (iv) that, prior to due presentment of a
Rights Certificate for registration of transfer, we, the Rights Agent and any agent of ours or the Rights Agent may
deem and treat the person in whose name the Rights Certificate is registered as the absolute owner thereof and of the
Rights evidenced thereby for all purposes whatsoever, and neither we nor the Rights Agent will be affected by any
notice to the contrary, (v) that the holders of the Rights have waived their right to receive any fractional Rights or any
fractional shares upon exercise of Rights, (vi) that, without the approval of any holder of Rights and upon the sole
authority of our board of directors acting in good faith, the Rights Plan may be supplemented or amended from time to
time as provided for in the Rights Plan and (vii) that neither we nor our board of directors nor the Rights Agent will
have any liability to any holder of a Right or any other person or entity as result of the inability of us, our board of
directors or the Rights Agent to perform any of their obligations under the Rights Plan by reason of any preliminary or
permanent injunction or other order, decree, notice of hearing or ruling issued by a court of competent jurisdiction or
by a governmental, regulatory or administrative agency or commission, or any statute, rule, regulation, or executive
order promulgated or enacted by any governmental authority, prohibiting or otherwise inhibiting or restraining
performance of such obligation.
Rights Holders Not Stockholders
No holder of any Rights or Rights Certificate will be entitled to vote, receive dividends or be deemed for any purpose
the holder of any shares of our common stock or any other share or security of ours which may at any time be
issuable on the exercise of the Rights, nor will the Rights Agreement or any Rights Certificate be construed or
deemed to confer upon the holder of any Right or Rights Certificate any of the rights, titles, benefits or privileges of a
holder of shares of our common stock or any of our other shares or securities or any right to vote at any meeting of
our stockholders or to receive notice of any meeting or other action affecting any holder of shares of our common
stock or any of our other shares or securities.
Redemption and Waiver
Our board of directors, acting in good faith, may, with the prior consent of the holders of Voting Shares or the holders
of Rights, at any time prior to the occurrence of a Flip-in Event, elect to redeem all but not less than all of the then
outstanding Rights at a redemption price of $0.0001 per Right (which we refer to as the “Redemption Price”), subject
to adjustment. If our board of directors elects or is deemed to have elected to redeem the Rights subsequent to a Flip-
in Event and the redemption is approved by the holders of Voting Shares or the holders of Rights, as applicable, the
right to exercise the Rights will, without further action and without notice, terminate and the only right thereafter of the
holders of the Rights will be to receive the Redemption Price.
Table of Contents
24
Our board of directors may also waive certain provisions of the Rights Plan. Amongst other provisions, our board of
directors, acting in good faith, may, prior to the occurrence of a Flip-in Event, determine to waive the application of the
Rights Plan to that particular Flip-in Event, provided that the Flip-in Event would occur by way of a takeover bid made
by means of a takeover bid circular delivered to all holders of Voting Shares. Our board of directors may also waive
the application of the Rights Plan in respect of the occurrence of any Flip-in Event if it has determined that a person
or entity became an Acquiring Person by inadvertence and without any intention to become, or knowledge that it
would become, an Acquiring Person under the Rights Plan, provided that within 10 days after any waiver by our board
of directors, the person or entity reduces its beneficial ownership of Voting Shares such that the person or entity is no
longer an Acquiring Person.
Supplements and Amendments
We may make changes to the Rights Plan prior to or after the Separation Time to correct any clerical or typographical
error or to maintain the validity of the Rights Plan as a result of any change in any applicable legislation, rules or
regulation without the approval of the holders of the Voting Shares or the Rights. We may, with the approval of the
holders of Voting Shares, at any time prior to the Separation Time, make changes to or rescind any of the provisions
of the Rights Plan and the Rights (whether or not the action would materially adversely affect the interests of the
holders of the Rights generally). We may, with the approval of the holders of the Rights, at any time after the
Separation Time, make changes to or rescind any of the provisions of the Rights Plan and the Rights (whether or not
the action would materially adversely affect the interests of the holders of the Rights generally).
Preferred Stock
We are authorized to issue up to 10,000,000 of preferred stock of which, as of June 5, 2014, none was issued and
outstanding. The preferred stock may be divided into and issued in series. Our Board of Directors is authorized to
divide the authorized shares of preferred stock into one or more series, each of which shall be so designated as to
distinguish the shares thereof from the shares of all other series and classes. Our Board of Directors is authorized,
within the limitations prescribed by law and its Articles of Incorporation, to fix and determine the designations, rights,
qualifications, preferences, limitations and terms of the shares of any series of preferred stock.
We refer you to our Articles of Incorporation, Bylaws and the applicable statutes of the State of Nevada for a more
complete description of the rights and liabilities of holders of our securities.
Cash dividends
As of the date of this Prospectus, we have not paid any cash dividends to stockholders. The declaration of any future
cash dividend will be at the discretion of our board of directors and will depend upon our earnings, if any, our capital
requirements and financial position, our general economic conditions, and other pertinent conditions. It is our present
intention not to pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable future, but rather to reinvest earnings, if any, in our
exploration and exploitation activities.
Warrants
As of July 10, 2014, we have issued and do have outstanding 5,750,000 warrants to purchase our shares of common
stock exercisable as follows:
Number of Warrants
 
1,600,000
4,150,000
$
Exercise Price
1.60
1.60
Expiry Date
December 5, 2015
March 5, 2016
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
The following description, together with the additional information we may include in any applicable Prospectus
Supplements and free writing prospectuses, summarizes the material terms and provisions of the Warrants that we
may offer under this Prospectus, which may consist of Warrants to purchase Common Shares and may be issued in
one or more series. Warrants may be offered independently or together with Common Shares or Subscription Receipts
offered by any Prospectus Supplement, and may be attached to or separate from those Securities. While the terms
we have summarized below will apply generally to any Warrants that it may offer under this Prospectus, we will
describe the particular terms of any series of Warrants that it may offer in more detail in the applicable Prospectus
Supplement and any applicable free writing prospectus. The terms of any Warrants offered under a Prospectus
Supplement may differ from the terms described below.
Table of Contents
General
25
Warrants may be issued under and governed by the terms of one or more warrant indentures (each a “Warrant
Indenture”) between us and a warrant trustee (the “Warrant Trustee”) that we will name in the relevant Prospectus
Supplement. Each Warrant Trustee will be a financial institution organized under the laws of Canada or any province
thereof and authorized to carry on business as a trustee.
This summary of some of the provisions of the Warrants is not complete. The statements made in this Prospectus
relating to any Warrant Indenture and Warrants to be issued under this Prospectus are summaries of certain
anticipated provisions thereof and do not purport to be complete and are subject to, and are qualified in their entirety
by reference to, all provisions of the applicable Warrant Indenture. Prospective investors should refer to the Warrant
Indenture relating to the specific Warrants being offered for the complete terms of the Warrants. We will file as
exhibits to the registration statement of which this Prospectus is a part, or will incorporate by reference from a Current
Report on Form 8-K that we file with the SEC, any Warrant Indenture describing the terms and conditions of Warrants
we are offering before the issuance of such Warrants.
The applicable Prospectus Supplement relating to any Warrants offered by us will describe the particular terms of
those Warrants and include specific terms relating to the offering.
Equity Warrants
The particular terms of each issue of equity warrants (“Equity Warrants”) will be described in the applicable
Prospectus Supplement. This description will include, where applicable:
•   the designation and aggregate number of Equity Warrants;
•   the price at which the Equity Warrants will be offered;
•   the currency or currencies in which the Equity Warrants will be offered;
•   the date on which the right to exercise the Equity Warrants will commence and the date on which the right
will expire;
•   the number of Common Shares that may be purchased upon exercise of each Equity Warrant and the price
at which and currency or currencies in which the Common Shares may be purchased upon exercise of each
Equity Warrant;
•   the designation and terms of any Securities with which the Equity Warrants will be offered, if any, and the
number of the Equity Warrants that will be offered with each Security;
•   the date or dates, if any, on or after which the Equity Warrants and the other Securities with which the Equity
Warrants will be offered will be transferable separately;
•   whether the Equity Warrants will be subject to redemption and, if so, the terms of such redemption
provisions;
•   whether we will issue the Equity Warrants as global securities and, if so, the identity of the depositary of the
global securities;
•   whether the Equity Warrants will be listed on any exchange;
•   material United States and Canadian federal income tax consequences of owning the Equity Warrants; and
•   any other material terms or conditions of the Equity Warrants.
Rights of Holders Prior to Exercise
Prior to the exercise of their Warrants, holders of Warrants will not have any of the rights of holders of the Common
Shares issuable upon exercise of the Warrants.
Table of Contents
Exercise of Warrants
26
Each Warrant will entitle the holder to purchase the Securities that we specify in the applicable Prospectus
Supplement at the exercise price that we describe therein. Unless we otherwise specify in the applicable Prospectus
Supplement, holders of the Warrants may exercise the Warrants at any time up to the specified time on the expiration
date that we set forth in the applicable Prospectus Supplement. After the close of business on the expiration date,
unexercised Warrants will become void.
Holders of the Warrants may exercise the Warrants by delivering the Warrant Certificate representing the Warrants to
be exercised together with specified information, and paying the required amount to the Warrant Trustee in
immediately available funds, as provided in the applicable Prospectus Supplement. We will set forth on the Warrant
Certificate and in the applicable Prospectus Supplement the information that the holder of the Warrant will be required
to deliver to the Warrant Trustee.
Upon receipt of the required payment and the Warrant Certificate properly completed and duly executed at the
corporate trust office of the Warrant Trustee or any other office indicated in the applicable Prospectus Supplement, we
will issue and deliver the securities purchasable upon such exercise. If fewer than all of the Warrants represented by
the Warrant Certificate are exercised, then we will issue a new Warrant Certificate for the remaining amount of
Warrants. If we so indicate in the applicable Prospectus Supplement, holders of the Warrants may surrender
securities as all or part of the exercise price for Warrants.
Anti-Dilution
The Warrant Indenture will specify that upon the subdivision, consolidation, reclassification or other material change of
the Common Shares or any other reorganization, amalgamation, merger or sale of all or substantially all of our assets,
the Warrants will thereafter evidence the right of the holder to receive the securities, property or cash deliverable in
exchange for or on the conversion of or in respect of the Common Shares to which the holder of a Common Share
would have been entitled immediately after such event. Similarly, any distribution to all or substantially all of the
holders of Common Shares of rights, options, warrants, evidences of indebtedness or assets will result in an
adjustment in the number of Common Shares to be issued to holders of Equity Warrants.
Global Securities
We may issue Warrants in whole or in part in the form of one or more global securities, which will be registered in the
name of and be deposited with a depositary, or its nominee, each of which will be identified in the applicable
Prospectus Supplement. The global securities may be in temporary or permanent form. The applicable Prospectus
Supplement will describe the terms of any depositary arrangement and the rights and limitations of owners of
beneficial interests in any global security. The applicable Prospectus Supplement will describe the exchange,
registration and transfer rights relating to any global security.
Modifications
The Warrant Indenture, if any, will provide for modifications and alterations to the Warrants issued thereunder by way
of a resolution of holders of Warrants at a meeting of such holders or a consent in writing from such holders. The
number of holders of Warrants required to pass such a resolution or execute such a written consent will be specified
in the Warrant Indenture.
We may amend any Warrant Indenture and the Warrants, without the consent of the holders of the Warrants, to cure
any ambiguity, to cure, correct or supplement any defective or inconsistent provision, or in any other manner that will
not materially and adversely affect the interests of holders of outstanding Warrants.
DESCRIPTION OF SUBSCRIPTION RECEIPTS
We may issue Subscription Receipts, which will entitle holders to receive upon satisfaction of certain release
conditions and for no additional consideration, Common Shares, Warrants or any combination thereof. Subscription
Receipts will be issued pursuant to one or more subscription receipt agreements (each, a “Subscription Receipt
Agreement”), each to be entered into between us and an escrow agent (the “Escrow Agent”), which will establish the
terms and conditions of the Subscription Receipts. Each Escrow Agent will be a financial institution organized under
the laws of the United States or a state thereof or Canada or a province thereof and authorized to carry on
Table of Contents
27
business as a trustee. We will file as exhibits to the registration statement of which this Prospectus is a part, or will
incorporate by reference from a Current Report on Form 8-K that we file with the SEC, any Subscription Receipt
Agreement describing the terms and conditions of Subscription Receipts we are offering before the issuance of such
Subscription Receipts.
The following description sets forth certain general terms and provisions of Subscription Receipts and is not intended
to be complete. The statements made in this Prospectus relating to any Subscription Receipt Agreement and
Subscription Receipts to be issued thereunder are summaries of certain anticipated provisions thereof and are subject
to, and are qualified in their entirety by reference to, all provisions of the applicable Subscription Receipt Agreement
and the Prospectus Supplement describing such Subscription Receipt Agreement.
The Prospectus Supplement relating to any Subscription Receipts we offer will describe the Subscription Receipts
and include specific terms relating to their offering. All such terms will comply with the requirements of the TSX and
NYSE MKT relating to Subscription Receipts. If underwriters or agents are used in the sale of Subscription Receipts,
one or more of such underwriters or agents may also be parties to the Subscription Receipt Agreement governing the
Subscription Receipts sold to or through such underwriters or agents.
General
The Prospectus Supplement and the Subscription Receipt Agreement for any Subscription Receipts we offer will
describe the specific terms of the Subscription Receipts and may include, but are not limited to, any of the following:
•   the designation and aggregate number of Subscription Receipts offered;
•   the price at which the Subscription Receipts will be offered;
the currency or currencies in which the Subscription Receipts will be offered;
the currency or currencies in which the Subscription Receipts will be offered;
•
•   the designation, number and terms of the Common Shares, Warrants or combination thereof to be received
by holders of Subscription Receipts upon satisfaction of the release conditions, and the procedures that will
result in the adjustment of those numbers;
•   the conditions (the “Release Conditions”) that must be met in order for holders of Subscription Receipts to
receive for no additional consideration Common Shares, Warrants or a combination thereof;
•   the procedures for the issuance and delivery of Common Shares, Warrants or a combination thereof to
holders of Subscription Receipts upon satisfaction of the Release Conditions;
•   whether any payments will be made to holders of Subscription Receipts upon delivery of the Common
Shares, Warrants or a combination thereof upon satisfaction of the Release Conditions (e.g., an amount
equal to dividends declared on Common Shares by us to holders of record during the period from the date of
issuance of the Subscription Receipts to the date of issuance of any Common Shares pursuant to the terms
of the Subscription Receipt Agreement);
•   the terms and conditions under which the Escrow Agent will hold all or a portion of the gross proceeds from
the sale of Subscription Receipts, together with interest and income earned thereon (collectively, the
“Escrowed Funds”), pending satisfaction of the Release Conditions;
•   the terms and conditions pursuant to which the Escrow Agent will hold Common Shares or Warrants or a
combination thereof pending satisfaction of the Release Conditions;
•   the terms and conditions under which the Escrow Agent will release all or a portion of the Escrowed Funds to
us upon satisfaction of the Release Conditions;
•   if the Subscription Receipts are sold to or through underwriters or agents, the terms and conditions under
which the Escrow Agent will release a portion of the Escrowed Funds to such underwriters or agents in
payment of all or a portion of their fees or commission in connection with the sale of the Subscription
Receipts;
•   procedures for the refund by the Escrow Agent to holders of Subscription Receipts of all or a portion of the
subscription price for their Subscription Receipts, plus any pro rata entitlement to interest earned or income
generated on such amount, if the Release Conditions are not satisfied;
28
Table of Contents
•   any entitlement of the Company to purchase the Subscription Receipts in the open market by private
agreement or otherwise;
•   whether we will issue the Subscription Receipts as global securities and, if so, the identity of the depositary
for the global securities;
•   whether we will issue the Subscription Receipts as bearer securities, registered securities or both;
•   provisions as to modification, amendment or variation of the Subscription Receipt Agreement or any rights or
terms attaching to the Subscription Receipts;
•   the identity of the Escrow Agent;
•   whether the Subscription Receipts will be listed on any exchange;
•   material United States and Canadian federal tax consequences of owning the Subscription Receipts; and
•   any other terms of the Subscription Receipts.
In addition, the Prospectus Supplement and the Subscription Receipt Agreement for any Subscription Receipts we
offer will describe all contractual rights of rescission that will be granted to initial purchasers of Subscription Receipts
in the event this Prospectus, the Prospectus Supplement under which the Subscription Receipts are issued or any
amendment hereto or thereto contains a misrepresentation, as discussed further under the sub-paragraph entitled
“Rescission” below.
The holders of Subscription Receipts will not be shareholders of the Company. Holders of Subscription
Receipts are entitled only to receive Common Shares, Warrants or a combination thereof on exchange of their
Subscription Receipts, plus any cash payments provided for under the Subscription Receipt Agreement, if the
Release Conditions are satisfied. If the Release Conditions are not satisfied, the holders of Subscription
Receipts shall be entitled to a refund of all or a portion of the subscription price therefor and all or a portion
of the pro rata share of interest earned or income generated thereon, as provided in the Subscription Receipt
Agreement.
Escrow
The Escrowed Funds will be held in escrow by the Escrow Agent, and such Escrowed Funds will be released to us
(and, if the Subscription Receipts are sold to or through underwriters or agents, a portion of the Escrowed Funds may
be released to such underwriters or agents in payment of all or a portion of their fees in connection with the sale of the
Subscription Receipts) at the time and under the terms specified by the Subscription Receipt Agreement. If the
Release Conditions are not satisfied, holders of Subscription Receipts will receive a refund of all or a portion of the
subscription price for their Subscription Receipts plus their pro rata entitlement to interest earned or income generated
on such amount, in accordance with the terms of the Subscription Receipt Agreement. Common Shares or Warrants
may be held in escrow by the Escrow Agent, and will be released to the holders of Subscription Receipts following
satisfaction of the Release Conditions at the time and under the terms specified in the Subscription Receipt
Agreement.
Anti-Dilution
The Subscription Receipt Agreement will specify that upon the subdivision, consolidation, reclassification or other
material change of the Common Shares or Warrants or any other reorganization, amalgamation, merger or sale of all
or substantially all of our assets, the Subscription Receipts will thereafter evidence the right of the holder to receive
the securities, property or cash deliverable in exchange for or on the conversion of or in respect of the Common
Shares or Warrants to which the holder of a Common Share or Warrant would have been entitled immediately after
such event. Similarly, any distribution to all or substantially all of the holders of Common Shares of rights, options,
warrants, evidences of indebtedness or assets will result in an adjustment in the number of Common Shares to be
issued to holders of Subscription Receipts whose Subscription Receipts entitle the holders thereof to receive
Common Shares. Alternatively, such securities, evidences of indebtedness or assets may, at our option, be issued to
the Escrow Agent and delivered to holders of Subscription Receipts on exercise thereof. The Subscription Receipt
Agreement will also provide that if other actions of the Company affect the Common Shares or Warrants, which, in the
reasonable opinion of our directors, would materially affect the rights of the holders of Subscription Receipts and/or
the rights attached to the Subscription Receipts, the number of Common Shares or Warrants which are to be received
pursuant to the Subscription Receipts shall be adjusted in such manner, if any, and at such time as our directors may
in their discretion reasonably determine to be equitable to the holders of Subscription Receipts in such circumstances.
Table of Contents
Rescission
29
The Subscription Receipt Agreement will also provide that any misrepresentation in this Prospectus, the Prospectus
Supplement under which the Subscription Receipts are offered, or any amendment thereto, will entitle each initial
purchaser of Subscription Receipts to a contractual right of rescission following the issuance of the Common Shares
or Warrants to such purchaser entitling such purchaser to receive the amount paid for the Subscription Receipts upon
surrender of the Common Shares or Warrants, provided that such remedy for rescission is exercised in the time
stipulated in the Subscription Receipt Agreement. This right of rescission does not extend to holders of Subscription
Receipts who acquire such Subscription Receipts from an initial purchaser, on the open market or otherwise, or to
initial purchasers who acquire Subscription Receipts in the United States.
Global Securities
We may issue Subscription Receipts in whole or in part in the form of one or more global securities, which will be
registered in the name of and be deposited with a depositary, or its nominee, each of which will be identified in the
applicable Prospectus Supplement. The global securities may be in temporary or permanent form. The applicable
Prospectus Supplement will describe the terms of any depositary arrangement and the rights and limitations of owners
of beneficial interests in any global security. The applicable Prospectus Supplement also will describe the exchange,
registration and transfer rights relating to any global security.
Modifications
The Subscription Receipt Agreement will provide for modifications and alterations to the Subscription Receipts issued
thereunder by way of a resolution of holders of Subscription Receipts at a meeting of such holders or a consent in
writing from such holders. The number of holders of Subscriptions Receipts required to pass such a resolution or
execute such a written consent will be specified in the Subscription Receipt Agreement.
DESCRIPTION OF UNITS
The following description, together with the additional information we may include in any applicable Prospectus
Supplements, summarizes the material terms and provisions of the Units that we may offer under this Prospectus.
While the terms we have summarized below will apply generally to any Units that we may offer under this Prospectus,
we will describe the particular terms of any series of Units in more detail in the applicable Prospectus Supplement.
The terms of any Units offered under a Prospectus Supplement may differ from the terms described below.
The Company will file as exhibits to the registration statement of which this Prospectus is a part, or will incorporate by
reference from a Current Report on Form 8-K that the we file with the SEC, the form of any unit agreement (“Unit
Agreement”) between us and a unit agent (“Unit Agent”) that describes the terms and conditions of the series of Units
the Company is offering, and any supplemental agreements, before the issuance of the related series of Units. The
following summaries of material terms and provisions of the Units are subject to, and qualified in their entirety by
reference to, all the provisions of the Unit Agreement, if any, and any supplemental agreements applicable to a
particular series of Units. We urge you to read the applicable Prospectus Supplements related to the particular series
of Units that we sell under this Prospectus, as well as the complete Unit Agreement, if any, and any supplemental
agreements that contain the terms of the Units.
General
We may issue units comprising one or more of Common Shares, Warrants and Subscription Receipts in any
combination. Each Unit will be issued so that the holder of the Unit is also the holder of each security included in the
Unit. Thus, the holder of a Unit will have the rights and obligations of a holder of each included security. The Unit
Agreement, if any, under which a Unit may be issued may provide that the securities included in the Unit may not be
held or transferred separately, at any time or at any time before a specified date.
We will describe in the applicable Prospectus Supplement the terms of the series of Units, including:
•   the designation and terms of the Units and of the securities comprising the Units, including whether and
under what circumstances those securities may be held or transferred separately;
30
Table of Contents
•   any provisions of the governing Unit Agreement, if any, that differ from those described below; and
•   any provisions for the issuance, payment, settlement, transfer or exchange of the Units or of the securities
comprising the Units.
The provisions described in this section, as well as those described under “Description of Common Shares,”
“Description of Warrants,” and “Description of Subscription Receipts” will apply to each Unit and to any Common
Share, Warrant or Subscription Receipt included in each Unit, respectively.
Issuance in Series
We may issue Units in such amounts and in numerous distinct series as we determine.
Enforceability of Rights by Holders of Units
Each Unit Agent, if any, will act solely as our agent under the applicable Unit Agreement, if any, and will not assume
any obligation or relationship of agency or trust with any holder of any Unit. A single bank or trust company may act
as Unit Agent for more than one series of Units. A Unit Agent will have no duty or responsibility in case of any default
by us under the applicable Unit Agreement, if any, or Unit, including any duty or responsibility to initiate any
proceedings at law or otherwise, or to make any demand upon us. Any holder of a Unit may, without the consent of
the related Unit Agent or the holder of any other Unit, enforce by appropriate legal action its rights as holder under any
security included in the Unit.
We, the Unit Agents, if any, and any of their agents may treat the registered holder of any Unit Certificate as an
absolute owner of the Units evidenced by that certificate for any purpose and as the person entitled to exercise the
rights attaching to the Units so requested, despite any notice to the contrary.
General
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
We may offer and sell the Securities, separately or together: (a) to one or more underwriters or dealers; (b) through
one or more agents; or (c) directly to one or more other purchasers. The Securities offered pursuant to any
Prospectus Supplement may be sold from time to time in one or more transactions at: (i) a fixed price or prices, which
may be changed from time to time; (ii) market prices prevailing at the time of sale; (iii) prices related to such
prevailing market prices; or (iv) other negotiated prices. We may only offer and sell the Securities pursuant to a
Prospectus Supplement during the period that this Prospectus, including any amendments hereto, remains effective.
The Prospectus Supplement for any of the Securities being offered thereby will set forth the terms of the offering of
such Securities, including the type of Security being offered, the name or names of any underwriters, dealers or
agents, the purchase price of such Securities, the proceeds to us from such sale, any underwriting commissions or
discounts and other items constituting underwriters’ compensation and any discounts or concessions allowed or re-
allowed or paid to dealers. Only underwriters so named in the Prospectus Supplement are deemed to be underwriters
in connection with the Securities offered thereby.
By Underwriters
If underwriters are used in the sale, the Securities will be acquired by the underwriters for their own account and may
be resold from time to time in one or more transactions, including negotiated transactions, at a fixed public offering
price or at varying prices determined at the time of sale. Unless otherwise set forth in the Prospectus Supplement
relating thereto, the obligations of underwriters to purchase the Securities will be subject to certain conditions, but the
underwriters will be obligated to purchase all of the Securities offered by the Prospectus Supplement if any of such
Securities are purchased. We may offer the Securities to the public through underwriting syndicates represented by
managing underwriters or by underwriters without a syndicate. We may agree to pay the underwriters a fee or
commission for various services relating to the offering of any Securities. Any such fee or commission will be paid out
of our general corporate funds. We may use underwriters with whom it has a material relationship. We will describe in
the Prospectus Supplement, naming the underwriter, the nature of any such relationship.
Table of Contents
By Dealers
31
If dealers are used, and if so specified in the applicable Prospectus Supplement, we will sell such Securities to the
dealers as principals. The dealers may then resell such Securities to the public at varying prices to be determined by
such dealers at the time of resale. Any public offering price and any discounts or concessions allowed or re-allowed or
paid to dealers may be changed from time to time. We will set forth the names of the dealers and the terms of the
transaction in the applicable Prospectus Supplement.
By Agents
The Securities may also be sold through agents designated by us. Any agent involved will be named, and any fees or
commissions payable by us to such agent will be set forth, in the applicable Prospectus Supplement. Any such fees
or commissions will be paid out of our general corporate funds. Unless otherwise indicated in the Prospectus
Supplement, any agent will be acting on a best efforts basis for the period of its appointment.
Direct Sales
Securities may also be sold directly by us at such prices and upon such terms as agreed to by us and the purchaser.
In this case, no underwriters, dealers or agents would be involved in the offering.
General Information
Underwriters, dealers and agents that participate in the distribution of the Securities offered by this Prospectus may
be deemed underwriters under the Securities Act, and any discounts or commissions they receive from us and any
profit on their resale of the securities may be treated as underwriting discounts and commissions under the Securities
Act.
Underwriters, dealers or agents who participate in the distribution of Securities may be entitled under agreements to
be entered into with us to indemnification by us against certain liabilities, including liabilities under Canadian provincial
and territorial and United States securities legislation, or to contribution with respect to payments which such
underwriters, dealers or agents may be required to make in respect thereof. Such underwriters, dealers or agents may
be customers of, engage in transactions with, or perform services for, us in the ordinary course of business.
We may enter into derivative transactions with third parties, or sell securities not covered by this Prospectus to third
parties in privately negotiated transactions. If the applicable Prospectus Supplement indicates, in connection with
those derivatives, the third parties may sell securities covered by this Prospectus and the applicable Prospectus
Supplement, including in short sale transactions. If so, the third parties may use securities pledged by us or borrowed
from us or others to settle those sales or to close out any related open borrowings of stock, and may use securities
received from us in settlement of those derivatives to close out any related open borrowings of stock. The third
parties in such sale transactions will be identified in the applicable Prospectus Supplement.
One or more firms, referred to as “remarketing firms,” may also offer or sell the Securities, if the Prospectus
Supplement so indicates, in connection with a remarketing arrangement upon their purchase. Remarketing firms will
act as principals for their own accounts or as agents for us. These remarketing firms will offer or sell the Securities in
accordance with the terms of the Securities. The Prospectus Supplement will identify any remarketing firm and the
terms of its agreement, if any, with us and will describe the remarketing firm’s compensation. Remarketing firms may
be deemed to be underwriters in connection with the Securities they remarket.
In connection with any offering of Securities, underwriters may over-allot or effect transactions which stabilize or
maintain the market price of the Securities offered at a level above that which might otherwise prevail in the open
market. Such transactions may be commenced, interrupted or discontinued at any time.
U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
The following is a general summary of certain U.S. federal income tax considerations arising from and related to the
acquisition, ownership and disposition of Common Shares acquired pursuant to this Prospectus.
Table of Contents
32
This summary is for general information purposes only and does not purport to be a complete analysis or listing of all
potential U.S. federal income tax consequences related to the acquisition, ownership and disposition of Common
Shares. Except as specifically set forth below, this summary does not discuss applicable tax reporting requirements
In addition, this summary does not take into account the individual facts and circumstances of any particular holder
that may affect the U.S. federal income tax consequences to such holder. Accordingly, this summary is not intended
to be, and should not be construed as, legal or U.S. federal income tax advice with respect to any particular holder.
Each holder should consult its own tax advisor regarding the U.S. federal, state and local, and non-U.S. tax
consequences related to the acquisition, ownership and disposition of Common Shares.
No legal opinion from U.S. legal counsel or ruling from the Internal Revenue Service (the “IRS”) has been requested,
or will be obtained, regarding the U.S. federal income tax consequences related to the acquisition, ownership and
disposition of Common Shares. This summary is not binding on the IRS, and the IRS is not precluded from taking a
position that is different from, and contrary to, the positions taken in this summary.
Scope of this Summary
Authorities
This summary is based on the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), Treasury Regulations
(whether final, temporary, or proposed), published rulings of the IRS, published administrative positions of the IRS,
and U.S. court decisions that are applicable and, in each case, as in effect and available, as of the date of this
Prospectus. Any of the authorities on which this summary is based could be changed in a material and adverse
manner at any time, and any such change could be applied on a retroactive basis. This summary does not discuss
the potential effects, whether adverse or beneficial, of any proposed legislation that, if enacted, could be applied on a
retroactive basis.
U.S. Holders
As used in this summary, the term “U.S. Holder” means a beneficial owner of Common Shares acquired pursuant to
this Prospectus that is for U.S. federal income tax purposes: an individual who is a citizen or resident of the U.S.; a
corporation (or other entity taxable as a corporation) organized under the laws of the U.S., any state thereof or the
District of Columbia; an estate whose income is subject to U.S. federal income taxation regardless of its source; or a
trust that (1) is subject to the primary supervision of a court within the U.S. and the control of one or more U.S.
persons for all substantial decisions or (2) has a valid election in effect under applicable Treasury Regulations to be
treated as a U.S. person.
Non-U.S. Holders
The term “Non-U.S. Holder” means any beneficial owner of Common Shares acquired pursuant to this Prospectus that
is neither a U.S. Holder nor a partnership nor other entity or arrangement treated as a partnership for U.S. federal
income tax purposes. A Non-U.S. Holder should review the discussion under the heading “U.S. Federal Income Tax
Consequences to Non-U.S. Holders of the Acquisition, Ownership and Disposition of Common Shares” below for more
information.
U.S. Holders Subject to Special U.S. Federal Income Tax Rules Not Addressed
This summary deals only with persons or entities who hold Common Shares as a capital asset within the meaning of
Section 1221 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”). This summary does not address
all aspects of U.S. federal income taxation that may be applicable to holders in light of their particular circumstances
or to holders subject to special treatment under U.S. federal income tax law, such as (without limitation): banks,
insurance companies, and other financial institutions; dealers in securities or foreign currencies; regulated investment
companies; traders in securities that mark to market; U.S. expatriates or former long-term residents of the U.S.;
persons holding Common Shares as part of a straddle, appreciated financial position, synthetic security, hedge,
conversion transaction or other integrated investment; persons holding Common Shares as a result of a constructive
sale; persons holding Common Shares whose functional currency is not the U.S. dollar; persons who directly,
indirectly, or by attribution own 10% or more of the our outstanding equity interests; “controlled foreign corporations;”
“passive foreign investment companies;” or entities that acquire Common Shares that are treated as partnerships for
U.S. federal income tax purposes and investors (i.e., partners) in such partnerships. Holders that are subject to
special provisions under the Code, including holders described immediately above, should consult their own tax
advisor regarding the U.S. federal, state and local, and foreign tax consequences arising from and relating to the
acquisition, ownership and disposition of Common Shares.
If an entity treated as a partnership holds Common Shares, the tax treatment of the partners and the partnership
generally will depend on the status of the partner and the activities of the partnership. If you are a partner of a
partnership holding Common Shares you should consult your own tax advisor.
33
Table of Contents
Tax Consequences Not Addressed
This summary does not address the U.S. state and local, U.S. federal estate and gift, U.S. federal alternative
minimum tax, or non-U.S. tax consequences to holders of the acquisition, ownership, and disposition of Common
Shares. Each holder should consult its own tax advisor regarding the U.S. state and local, U.S. federal estate and
gift, U.S. federal alternative minimum tax, and foreign tax consequences of the acquisition, ownership, and disposition
of Common Shares.
U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences to U.S. Holders of the Acquisition, Ownership and Disposition of
Common Shares
Distributions
Distributions made on Common Shares generally will be included in a U.S. Holder’s income as ordinary dividend
income to the extent of our current and accumulated earnings and profits (determined under U.S. federal income tax
principles) as of the end of our taxable year in which the distribution occurs. However, with respect to dividends
received by non-corporate U.S. Holders (including individuals), such dividends are generally taxed at the lower
applicable long-term capital gains rates, provided certain holding period and other requirements are satisfied.
Distributions in excess of our current and accumulated earnings and profits will be treated as a return of capital to the
extent of a U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in the Common Shares and thereafter as capital gain from the sale or
exchange of such Common Shares. Dividends received by a corporation may be eligible for a dividends received
deduction, subject to applicable limitations.
Sale, Certain Redemptions or Other Taxable Dispositions of Common Shares
Upon the sale, certain qualifying redemptions, or other taxable disposition of Common Shares, a U.S. Holder generally
will recognize capital gain or loss equal to the difference between (i) the amount of cash and the fair market value of
any property received upon such taxable disposition and (ii) the U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in the Common
Shares. Such capital gain or loss will be long-term capital gain or loss if a U.S. Holder’s holding period in the Common
Shares is more than one year at the time of the taxable disposition. Long-term capital gains recognized by certain
non-corporate U.S. Holders (including individuals) will generally be subject to a maximum U.S. federal income tax rate
of 20%. Deductions for capital losses are subject to complex limitations under the Code.
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding
Information reporting requirements generally will apply to payments of dividends on Common Shares and to the
proceeds of a sale of Common Shares paid to a U.S. Holder unless the U.S. Holder is an exempt recipient (such as a
corporation). A backup withholding tax will apply to those payments if the U.S. Holder fails to provide its correct
taxpayer identification number, or certification of exempt status, or if the U.S. Holder is notified by the IRS that it has
failed to report in full payments of interest and dividend income. Backup withholding is not an additional tax and any
amounts withheld under the backup withholding rules will be allowed as a refund or a credit against a U.S. Holder’s
U.S. federal income tax liability provided the required information is furnished in a timely manner to the IRS.
U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences to Non-U.S. Holders of the Acquisition, Ownership and Disposition of
Common Shares
Distributions on Common Shares
Distributions on Common Shares will constitute dividends for U.S. tax purposes to the extent paid from our current
and accumulated earnings and profits, as determined under U.S. federal income tax principles. To the extent those
distributions exceed our current and accumulated earnings and profits, they will constitute a return of capital and will
first reduce a Non-U.S. Holder’s basis in Common Shares, but not below zero, and then will be treated as gain from
the sale of stock, which will be taxable according to rules discussed under the heading “Sale or Other Taxable
Disposition of Common Shares,” below. Any dividends paid to a Non-U.S. Holder with respect to Common Shares
generally will be subject to withholding tax at a 30% gross rate, subject to any exemption or lower rate under an
applicable treaty if the Non-U.S. Holder provides us with a properly executed IRS Form W-8BEN or W-8BEN-E, unless
the Non-U.S. Holder provides us with a properly executed IRS Form W-8ECI (or other applicable form) relating to
income effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business within the U.S.
Dividends that are effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business within the U.S. and includible in the
Non-U.S. Holder’s gross income are not subject to the withholding tax (assuming proper certification and disclosure),
but instead are subject to U.S. federal income tax on a net income basis at applicable graduated individual or
corporate rates. Any such effectively connected income received by a non-U.S. corporation may, under certain
circumstances, be subject to an additional branch profits tax at a 30% rate, subject to any exemption or lower rate as
may be specified by an applicable income tax treaty.
Table of Contents
34
A Non-U.S. Holder of Common Shares who wishes to claim the benefit of an applicable treaty rate or exemption is
required to satisfy certain certification and other requirements. If a Non-U.S. Holder is eligible for an exemption from or
a reduced rate of U.S. withholding tax pursuant to an income tax treaty, it may obtain a refund of any excess amounts
withheld by timely filing an appropriate claim for refund with the IRS.
Sale or Other Taxable Disposition of Common Shares
In general, a Non-U.S. Holder of Common Shares will not be subject to U.S. federal income tax on gain recognized
from a sale, exchange, or other taxable disposition of Common Shares, unless:
•   the gain is effectively connected with a U.S. trade or business carried on by the Non-U.S. Holder (and, where
an income tax treaty applies, is attributable to a U.S. permanent establishment of the Non-U.S. Holder), in
which case the Non-U.S. Holder will be subject to tax on the net gain from the sale at regular graduated U.S.
federal income tax rates, and, if the Non-U.S. Holder is a corporation, may be subject to an additional U.S.
branch profits tax at a gross rate equal to 30% of its effectively connected earnings and profits for that
taxable year, subject to any exemption or lower rate as may be specified by an applicable income tax treaty;
•   the Non-U.S. Holder is an individual who is present in the U.S. for 183 days or more in the taxable year of
disposition and certain other conditions are met, in which case the Non-U.S. Holder will be subject to a 30%
tax on the gain from the sale, which may be offset by U.S. source capital losses; or
•   we are or have been a “U.S. real property holding corporation” (“USRPHC”) for U.S. federal income tax
purposes at any time during the shorter of the Non-U.S. Holder’s holding period or the 5-year period ending
on the date of disposition of Common Shares; provided, that as long as the Common Shares are regularly
traded on an established securities market as determined under Treasury Regulations (the “Regularly
Traded Exception”), a Non-U.S. Holder would not be subject to taxation under this rule unless the Non-U.S.
Holder has owned more than 5% of our shares at any time during such 5-year or shorter period (a “5%
Shareholder”). Certain attribution rules apply in determining ownership for this purpose. The Common
Shares are listed on the NYSE MKT and therefore are likely to satisfy the Regularly Traded Exception.
Although we have not undertaken a detailed analysis of its USRPHC status, we believe that we are currently,
and may be in one or more future years, a USRPHC. We can provide no assurances that the Common
Shares will meet the Regularly Traded Exception at the time a Non-U.S. Holder purchases such securities or
sells, exchanges or otherwise disposes of such securities. Non-U.S. Holders should consult with their own
tax advisors regarding the consequences to them of investing in a USRPHC. As a USRPHC, a Non-U.S.
Holder will be taxed as if any gain or loss were effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business
as described above in “Distributions on Common Shares” in the event that (i) such holder is a 5%
Shareholder, or (ii) the Regularly Traded Exception is not satisfied during the relevant period. Non-U.S.
Holders should consult with their own tax advisors regarding the consequences of investing in a USRPHC.
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding
Generally, we must report annually to the IRS and to Non-U.S. Holders the amount of dividends paid on Common
Shares to Non-U.S. Holders and the amount of tax, if any, withheld with respect to those payments. Copies of the
information returns reporting such dividends and withholding may also be made available to the tax authorities in the
country in which a Non-U.S. Holder resides under the provisions of an applicable income tax treaty.
In general, a Non-U.S. Holder will not be subject to backup withholding with respect to payments of dividends that we
make, provided we receive a statement meeting certain requirements to the effect that the Non-U.S. Holder is not a
U.S. person and we do not have actual knowledge or reason to know that the holder is a U.S. person, as defined
under the Code, that is not an exempt recipient. The requirements for the statement will be met if (1) the Non-U.S.
Holder provides it’s name, address and U.S. taxpayer identification number, if any, and certifies, under penalty of
perjury, that it is not a U.S. person (which certification may be made on IRS Form W-8BEN or W-8BEN-E) or (2) a
financial institution holding the instrument on behalf of the Non-U.S. Holder certifies, under penalty of perjury, that
such statement has been received by it and furnishes us or our paying agent with a copy of the statement. In
addition, a Non-U.S. Holder will be subject to information reporting and, depending on the circumstances, backup
withholding with respect to payments of the proceeds of a sale of Common Shares within the U.S. or conducted
Table of Contents
35
through certain U.S.-related financial intermediaries, unless the statement described above has been received, and we
do not have actual knowledge or reason to know that a holder is a U.S. person, as defined under the Code, that is not
an exempt recipient, or the Non-U.S. Holder otherwise establishes an exemption. Backup withholding is not an
additional tax and any amounts withheld under the backup withholding rules will be allowed as a refund or a credit
against a Non-U.S. Holder’s U.S. federal income tax liability provided the required information is furnished timely to
the IRS.
Rules Relating to Foreign Accounts
Generally, we will be required to withhold tax at a rate of 30% on dividends in respect of, and gross proceeds from the
sale of, Common Shares held by or through certain foreign financial institutions (including investment funds) beginning
after June 30, 2014, in the case of dividends, and beginning after December 31, 2016, in the case of such gross
proceeds, unless such institution enters into an agreement with the Secretary of the Treasury (or complies with the
rules of an intergovernmental agreement) to report, on an annual basis, information with respect to shares in the
institution held by certain U.S. persons and by certain non-U.S. entities that are wholly- or partially-owned by U.S.
persons. Accordingly, the entity through which Common Shares are held will affect the determination of whether such
withholding is required. Similarly, dividends in respect of, and gross proceeds from the sale of, Common Shares held
by certain investors that are non-financial non-U.S. entities will be subject to withholding at a rate of 30%, beginning
after June 30, 2014, in the case of dividends, and beginning after December 31, 2016, in the case of such gross
proceeds, unless such entity either (i) certifies that such entity does not have any “substantial U.S. owners” or
(ii) provides certain information regarding the entity’s “substantial U.S. owners,” which will in turn be provided to the
Secretary of the Treasury. Non-U.S. Holders should consult with their own tax advisors regarding the possible
implications of the foregoing rules on their holding of Common Shares.
None.
INTERESTS OF NAMED EXPERTS AND COUNSEL
TRANSFER AGENT AND REGISTRAR
Our registrar and transfer agent for our common shares is Corporate Stock Transfer, Inc. located at 3200 Cherry
Creek Dr. South, Suite 430, Denver, Colorado 80209.
LEGAL MATTERS
The law firm of McMillan LLP has acted as our counsel by providing an opinion on the validity of the securities offered
in this Prospectus and applicable Prospectus Supplements and counsel named in the applicable Prospectus
Supplement will pass upon legal matters for any underwriters, dealers or agents. Certain legal matters related to the
Securities offered by this Prospectus will be passed upon on our behalf by McMillan LLP, with respect to matters of
Nevada law, and Dorsey & Whitney LLP, with respect to matters of United States of law other than the State of
Nevada.
EXPERTS
Our consolidated balance sheets as at December 31, 2013 and 2012 and the related consolidated statements of
operations, cash flows and stockholders’ equity for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2013
and accumulated from May 26, 1999 (Date of Inception) to December 31, 2013 have been incorporated by reference
herein in reliance upon the report of Manning Elliott LLP, independent registered public accounting firm, given upon the
authority of that firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We file annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy statements and other information with the SEC. Our SEC filings
are available to the public over the Internet at the SEC’s web site at http://www.sec.gov.
This Prospectus is part of a registration statement and, as permitted by SEC rules, does not contain all of the
information included in the registration statement. Whenever a reference is made in this Prospectus to any of our
contracts or other documents, the reference may not be complete and, for a copy of the contract or document, you
should refer to the exhibits that are part of the registration statement. You may call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 for
more information on the public reference rooms and their copy charges. You may also read and copy any document
we file with the SEC at the SEC’s public reference rooms at:
Table of Contents
100 F Street, N.E.
Room 1580
Washington, D.C. 20549
36
9,600,000 Units
PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
Haywood Securities Inc.
H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC
Cantor Fitzgerald Canada Corporation
Laurentian Bank Securities Inc.
JULY 17, 2014