
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
Form 10‐K
(Mark One)
[X]
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the ﬁscal year ended  March 31, 2009
[   ]
TRANSITION REPORT UNDER SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from [   ] to [   ]
Commission ﬁle number  000‐30193
NATION ENERGY INC.
(Exact name of registrant as speciﬁed in its charter)
Wyoming
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation or
organization)
Suite 900
609 West Hastings Street
Vancouver British Columbia
(Address of principal executive oﬃces)
Registrant’s telephone number  (800) 400‐3969
59‐2887569
(I.R.S. Employer Identiﬁcation No.)
V6B 4W4
(Zip Code)
Former Name, former address and former ﬁscal year, if changed since last report:  N/A
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class
None
Name of each exchange on which registered
None
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
Common Stock, $0.001 par value per share
(Title of class)
Indicate by checkmark if the registrant is a well‐known seasoned issuer, as deﬁned in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.   
(Check one):   Yes [   ]   No [X].
Indicate by checkmark if the registrant is not required to ﬁle reports pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Act. .
(Check one):   Yes [   ];   No [X].
Indicate by checkmark whether the registrant has (1) ﬁled all reports required to be ﬁled by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that
the registrant was required to ﬁle such reports), and (2) has been subject to such ﬁling requirements for the past 90 days.  
Yes [X ]     No [   ]
Indicate by checkmark if disclosure of delinquent ﬁlers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S‐K (§229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in
deﬁnitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10‐K or any amendment to this Form 10K.   [   ]
Indicate by checkmark whether the registrant is a large accelerated ﬁler, an accelerated ﬁler, a non‐accelerated ﬁler, or a smaller reporting company.  See the deﬁnition of “large accelerated ﬁler”, “accelerated ﬁler”
and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b‐2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated ﬁler
Non‐accelerated ﬁler
[  ]
[  ]
(Do not check if a smaller reporting company)
Accelerated ﬁler [  ]
Smaller reporting company[X]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of
Regulation S‐T (§ 232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such ﬁles).  Yes  [ ]     No [ ]
Indicate by checkmark whether the registrant is a shell company (as deﬁned in Rule 12b‐2 of the Exchange Act).
Yes [ X ]     No [ ]
State the aggregate market value of the voting and non‐voting common equity held by non‐aﬃliates computed by reference to the price at which the common equity was last sold, or the average bid and asked
price of such common equity, as of the last business day of the registrant’s most recently completed second ﬁscal quarter:  $481,320 based on a price of $0.08 per share, being the price at which the common equity
was last sold on March 31, 2009.
State issuer's revenues for its most recent ﬁscal year.  $100,371 for the year ended March 31, 2009
Indicate by checkmark whether the registrant has ﬁled all documents and reports required to be ﬁled by Section 12,13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 subsequent to the distribution of securities
under a plan conﬁrmed by a court.  Yes [   ]     No [   ]   N/A
APPLICABLE ONLY TO REGISTRANTS INVOLVED IN BANKRUPTCY PROCEEDINGS DURING THE PAST FIVE YEARS:
Indicate the number of shares outstanding of each of the registrant’s classes of common stock, as of the latest practicable date.  16,020,000 common shares issued and outstanding as of February 8, 2011.
List hereunder the following documents if incorporated by reference and the Part of the Form 10‐K (e.g., Part I, Part II, etc.) into which the document is incorporated: (1) Any annual report to security holders; (2)
Any proxy or information statement; and (3) Any prospectus ﬁled pursuant to Rule 424(b) or (c) under the Securities Act of 1933. The listed documents should be clearly described for identiﬁcation purposes (e.g.,
annual report to security holders for ﬁscal year ended December 24, 1980).
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
(APPLICABLE ONLY TO CORPORATE REGISTRANTS)
1 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
FORWARD‐LOOKING STATEMENTS
PART I
This annual report contains forward‐looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.  These
statements relate to future events or our future ﬁnancial performance.  In some cases, you can identify forward‐looking statements by terminology such as "may", "should", "expects", "plans", "anticipates",
"believes", "estimates", "predicts", "potential" or "continue" or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology.  These statements are only predictions and involve known and unknown risks,
uncertainties and other factors, including the risks in the section entitled "Risk Factors" and the risks set out below, any of which may cause our or our industry's actual results, levels of activity, performance or
achievements to be materially diﬀerent from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these forward‐looking statements.  These risks include, by way of example
and not in limitation:
·
·
risks and uncertainties relating to the interpretation of drill results, the geology, range and continuity of mineral deposits;
results of initial feasibility, pre‐feasibility and feasibility studies, and the possibility that future exploration, development or mining results will not be consistent with our expectations;
· mining and development risks, including risks related to accidents, equipment breakdowns, labor disputes or other unanticipated diﬃculties with or interruptions in production;
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
the potential for delays in exploration or development activities or the completion of feasibility studies;
risks related to the inherent uncertainty of production and cost estimates and the potential for unexpected costs and expenses;
risks related to commodity price ﬂuctuations;
the uncertainty of proﬁtability based upon our history of losses;
risks related to failure to obtain adequate ﬁnancing on a timely basis and on acceptable terms for our planned exploration and development projects;
risks related to environmental regulation and liability;
risks that the amounts reserved or allocated for environmental compliance, reclamation, post‐closure control measures, monitoring and on‐going maintenance may not be suﬃcient to cover such costs;
risks related to tax assessments;
political and regulatory risks associated with mining development and exploration;
other risks and uncertainties related to our prospects, properties and business strategy; and
The Company is categorized as a “shell company” as that term is used in the Commission’s rules.
This list is not an exhaustive list of the factors that may aﬀect any of our forward‐looking statements.  These and other factors should be considered carefully and readers should not place undue reliance on our
forward‐looking statements.
Forward looking statements are made based on management’s beliefs, estimates, and opinions on the date the statements are made and we undertake no obligation to update forward‐looking statements if these
beliefs, estimates and opinions or other circumstances should change.  Although we believe that the expectations reﬂected in the forward‐looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results,
levels of activity, performances or achievements.  Except as required by applicable law, including the securities laws of the United States, we do not intend to update any of the forward‐looking statements to
conform these statements to actual results.
Our ﬁnancial statements are stated in United States Dollars (US$) are prepared in accordance with the United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
As used in this annual report, the terms "we", "us", "our", and "Nation Energy" mean Nation Energy Inc., unless otherwise indicated.
In this annual report, unless otherwise speciﬁed, all dollar amounts are expressed in United States dollars and all references to “common shares” refer to the common shares in our capital stock.
ITEM 1.  BUSINESS
We were formed under the laws of the State of Florida on April 19, 1988 under the name Excalibur Contracting, Inc. and from that date until September 1998, we conducted no business and existed as a shell
corporation.  After the restatement of our Articles of Incorporation on September 16, 1998, our main focus was the procurement of mineral leasehold interests, primarily for oil and gas exploitation rights.  We
reincorporated as a  Delaware corporation on  February  2, 2000 and  changed our name to Nation  Energy, Inc. on February 15, 2000.    Following the  change in our focus,  we  commenced corporate  strategic
development and explored potential oil and gas projects.  On June 13, 2003 we merged from the State of Delaware with Nation Energy Inc., a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of
Wyoming, which we incorporated for the purposes of the merger, pursuant to which we have changed our domicile to the State of Wyoming.
Due to our oil and gas operations located in Alberta, Canada, we registered as an extra‐provincial company in the province of Alberta on June 3, 2003.
Since the sale of all of our oil and gas operations eﬀective June 1, 2008, we have existed as a shell corporation and have conducted no business.  We are currently reviewing new business opportunities in the
resource sector.
Corporate History and General Overview
Since 2002 our business involved the development and exploration of our oil and gas properties located in the Smoky area near Grande Prairie, Alberta, Canada. We actively participated in drilling and testing
programs in well bores 09‐09‐59‐02‐W6M and 08‐09‐50‐02‐W6M.  The 08‐09‐50‐02‐W6M well was tested as uneconomic in August 2003 and the 09‐09‐59‐02‐W6M well was turned to sales in June 2004.
On January 10, 2005, we entered into a farm‐in agreement with Netco Energy Inc. as to certain interests in two sections at Boltan.  Under the terms of the agreement, Netco Energy Inc. earned 60% of our 15%
working interest by paying for 100% of costs related to our interests in the drilling and development of exploratory well 14‐10‐59‐2W6, a location oﬀsetting the 09‐09‐59‐02‐W6M well bore.  At the time of the
January 10, 2005 farm‐in agreement with Netco Energy Inc., Accrete Energy was the operator.  Our remaining interests in the two sections of land and 14‐10‐59‐2W6 well bore after payout were 6% at the time.
The 14‐10‐59‐2W6 well was successfully drilled and completed in March 2005 and began producing in June 2005 and was renamed and designated the 13‐10‐59‐2W6 well to correctly reﬂect the wells surveyed
bottom hole location.  Compression facilities were installed November 2005 to enable the 13‐10‐59‐2W6 and the 09‐09‐59‐02‐W6M well bores to ﬂow on an unrestricted and uninterrupted basis into regional sales
pipelines.
Eﬀective January 1, 2006 Churchill Energy Inc. (“Churchill Energy”) assumed Accrete Energy’s interests and became operator of the Boltan property.
In November 2006 Churchill Energy issued an operations notice to recomplete and coming‐le an undeveloped zone within the 13‐10‐59‐2W6 well bore and in November 2006 the well was shut‐in, recompleted and
subsequently placed back on production on March 2007.
On November 29, 2006 we entered into a letter of intent with Netco Energy Inc. pursuant to which we granted Netco the right to earn 60% of our interest in a new exploratory well proposed at Boltan, well bore
1‐16‐59‐2W6  (the “Test Well”) and the land,  Section 16, Twp 59, Rge 2 W6M, on which the well is located.  A farm‐in agreement was made eﬀective January 1, 2007 (the “1‐16 Farm‐in Agreement)
The 1‐16 Farm‐in Agreement provided that Netco Energy Inc. would acquire 60% of Nation’s 15% interest in the Test Well and the section of land where the Test Well is located by funding Nation’s share of related
drilling and development costs.  Netco Energy Inc. would earn a 15% before payout (and 9% after payout) interest in the Test Well.  The 1‐16‐59‐2W6M well reached a total depth of 3,585 meters in January 2007
and was cased as a potential gas well.  Completion operations commenced in early February 2007 and were suspended later that month due to early spring break up and road access bans.  Completion operations
and tie‐in of the Test Well resumed in July 2007 and the Test Well was placed in production to sales in November 2007.  Eﬀective May  1, 2008, EnCana Oil and Gas Partnership (“EnCana”) purchased Churchill
Energy’s interests in the Bolton properties and assumed operator ship.
Our Current Business
Sale of Bolton Property
On September 18, 2008, Nation Energy, Netco Energy Inc., and EnCana entered into a Petroleum, Natural Gas and Related Rights Conveyance pursuant to which Nation and Netco sold all of their interests in the
leases and lands comprising the Bolton Property to EnCana.  As a condition of the agreement, EnCana agreed to terminate the payable owing by Nation to EnCana as successor in interest to Churchill Energy (as
successor to Accrete Energy, Olympia Energy’s successor) pursuant to a participation agreement between the parties dated November 21, 2001.  In connection with the sale of the Bolton properties on September
26, 2008 we entered into a termination agreement with EnCana pursuant to which we agreed to terminate the Joint Operating Agreement between Nation, High Point Resources Inc. and Churchill Energy (as
2 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
Olympia Energy’s successor) eﬀective June 1, 2008 and assigned all of our rights under all operating contracts relating to the Bolton Property to EnCana.  The sale of the oil and gas assets closed on September 30,
2008 with a second closing in April 2009 for total net proceeds to Nation of CDN $1,102,939 (US $1,029,385 from Encana, plus an additional CDN $160,000 (US $129,324) from Netco Energy.
The proceeds of the sale of the Bolton Property were used to partially repay amounts owed to Caravel Management Corp. under a demand promissory note dated March 31, 2006 in the original amount of CDN
$980,905 (US $840,464).  Caravel Management Corp, is a private management services company wholly‐owned by our sole director and oﬃcer.  As of December 31, 2010, the remaining principal and accrued interest
due to Caravel totalled CDN $659,093 (US $662,671).
We currently have no business and operate as a shell company.  We are in the process of evaluating the merits of joint venture opportunities in the resource sector.
Competition
The oil and gas industry is intensely competitive.  Conducting our business in an environment that is highly competitive and unpredictable we may become involved in an acquisition with more risk or obtain
ﬁnancing on less favourable terms.  In seeking out prospective properties, we have encountered intense competition in all aspects of our proposed business as we compete directly with other development
companies as well as established international companies.  Many of our competitors are national or international companies with far greater resources, capital and access to information than us.  Accordingly, these
competitors may be able to spend greater amounts on the acquisition of prospective properties and on the exploration and development of such properties.  In addition, they may be able to aﬀord greater
geological expertise in  the  exploration  and  exploitation  of mineral  and  oil  and  gas  properties.  This  competition  could  result in  our  competitors  having resource  properties of  greater quality and  attracting
prospective investors to ﬁnance the development of such properties on more favourable terms.
Compliance with Governmental Regulations
Oil and gas operations are subject to various governmental regulations.  Matters subject to regulations include discharge permits for drilling operations, drilling and abandonment bonds, reports concerning
operations, the spacing of wells and pooling of properties and taxation.  From time to time, regulatory agencies have imposed price controls and limitations on production by restricting the rate of ﬂow of oil and gas
wells below actual production capacity in order to conserve supplies of oil and gas.  The production, handling, storage, transportation and disposal of oil and gas, by‐products thereof, and other substances and
materials produced or used in connection with oil and gas operations are also subject to regulation under federal and local laws and regulations relating primarily to the protection of human health and the
environment.  Expenditures related to complying with these laws, and for remediation of existing environmental contamination have not been signiﬁcant in relation to the results of operations of our company.
 The requirements imposed by such laws and regulations are frequently changed and subject to various interpretations.  We are unable to predict the ultimate cost of compliance or its eﬀect on any future
operations.
Employees
We have no employees other than John Hislop, our president, chief executive oﬃcer, chief ﬁnancial oﬃcer and sole director.  Mr. Hislop also acts as our secretary and treasurer.  We anticipate that we will be
conducting most of our business through agreements with consultants and third parties.   On January 1, 2009 we entered into a written contract with Caravel Management Corp., to provide oﬃce rent, reception,
compliance and accounting services for $7,865 per month.  The agreement commenced on January 1, 2009 and continues on a month to month basis unless terminated by the parties.  The agreement may be
terminated by either party upon 30 days notice.  One year following the eﬀective date of the agreement, the monthly fee increases by 3% subject to any required regulatory or stock exchange approval.  We
presently have no other employment or consulting agreements.  The agreement was amended eﬀective November 1, 2010 to reduce the fees for administrative services to $3,500 per month.
Environment
Our prior oil and gas business was subject to laws and regulations that controlled the discharge of materials into the environment and the proper handling and disposal of waste materials. In operating and owning
petroleum interests, we may be liable for damages and the costs of removing hydrocarbon spills for which we are held responsible.  Laws relating to the protection of the environment have in many jurisdictions
become more stringent in recent years and may, in certain circumstances, impose strict liability, rendering our company liable for environmental damage without regard to actual negligence or fault.  Such laws and
regulations may expose us to liability for the conduct of, or conditions caused by, others or for acts of our company.  We believe that we have complied in all material respects with applicable environmental laws
and regulations.
ITEM 1A.  RISK FACTORS
Much of the information included in this annual report includes or is based upon estimates, projections or other "forward looking statements".  Such forward looking statements include any projections or estimates
made by us and our management in connection with our past or future business operations.  While these forward‐looking statements, and any assumptions upon which they are based, are made in good faith and
reﬂect our current judgement regarding the direction of our business, actual results will almost always vary, sometimes materially, from any estimates, predictions, projections, assumptions or other future
performance suggested herein.
Such estimates, projections or other "forward looking statements" involve various risks and uncertainties as outlined below.  We caution the reader that important factors in some cases have aﬀected and, in the
future, could materially aﬀect actual results and cause actual results to diﬀer materially from the results expressed in any such estimates, projections or other "forward looking statements".
Our shares of common stock are considered speculative while we continue our search for a new business opportunity.  Prospective investors should consider carefully the risk factors set out below.
We have had negative cash ﬂows from operations and if we are not able to obtain further ﬁnancing, our business operations may fail.
We had a working capital deﬁcit of $330,790 as of March 31, 2009.  Accordingly, we will require additional funds, either from equity or debt ﬁnancing, to maintain our daily operations and to continue to evaluate
joint venture opportunities.  Obtaining additional ﬁnancing is subject to a number of factors, including market prices, investor acceptance of any venture we may acquire in the future and investor sentiment.  If we
are unable to raise additional funds when required, we may be forced to delay our plan of operation and our entire business may fail.
Because of the early stage of development and the nature of our business, our securities are considered highly speculative.
Our securities must be considered highly speculative, generally because of the nature of our business and the early stage of our development. We were engaged in the business of exploring and, if warranted,
developing commercial reserves of oil and gas. Our properties were in the exploration, development and production stage and had proven reserves of oil and gas as at March 31, 2008.   Accordingly, we realized
limited revenues and proﬁt from our operations.  Any proﬁtability in the future will be dependent upon acquiring a new business opportunity.  In September 2008, we closed the sale of all of our oil and gas assets
in the Smoky Hill area of Alberta.  The sale was eﬀective June 1, 2008.  We are now actively looking for a new business opportunity, primarily in the resource sector.
The Company is categorized as a “shell company” as that term is used in the Commission’s rules.
The Commission’s rules prohibit the use of Form S‐8 by a shell company, and require a shell company to ﬁle a Form 8‐K to report the same type of information that would be required if it were ﬁling to register a
class of securities under the Exchange Act whenever the shell company is reporting the event that caused it to cease being a shell company. Being a shell company may adversely impact our ability to oﬀer our stock
to oﬃcers, directors and consultants, and thereby make it more diﬃcult to attract and retain qualiﬁed individuals to perform services for the Company, and will likely increase the costs of registration compliance
following the completion of a business combination.
A decline in the price of our common stock could aﬀect our ability to raise further working capital and adversely impact our operations.
A prolonged decline in the price of our common stock could result in a reduction in the liquidity of our common stock and a reduction in our ability to raise capital.  Any reduction in our ability to raise equity
capital in the future could have a signiﬁcant negative eﬀect on our business plans and our ability to develop new products.  If our stock price declines, we may not be able to raise additional capital suﬃcient to
acquire new business.
Our accounts are subject to currency ﬂuctuations which may materially aﬀect our ﬁnancial position and results of operations.
As a result of maintaining some of our accounts in Canadian currency; we are subject to foreign exchange ﬂuctuations.  Such ﬂuctuations may materially aﬀect our ﬁnancial position and results of operations. We do
not engage in currency hedging activities.
We may not be able to manage the signiﬁcant strains that future growth may place on our administration infrastructure, systems and controls.
In the event we are able to acquire a new joint venture and experience any rapid expansion over current levels, we could experience rapid growth in revenues, personnel, complexity of administration and in other
areas.  There can be no assurance that we will be able to manage the signiﬁcant strains that future growth may place on our administrative infrastructure, systems, and controls.  If we are unable to manage future
growth eﬀectively, our business, operating results and ﬁnancial condition may be materially adversely aﬀected.
The loss of John Hislop would have an adverse impact on future development and could impair our ability to succeed.
We are dependent on our ability to hire and retain highly skilled and qualiﬁed personnel. We face competition for qualiﬁed personnel from numerous industry sources, and there can be no assurance that we will
be able to attract and retain qualiﬁed personnel on acceptable terms. We do not have key man insurance on our employees. The loss of the services of Mr. Hislop could have a material adverse eﬀect on our
operations or ﬁnancial condition.
Our management currently engages in other oil and gas businesses and, as a result, conﬂicts could arise.
In addition to their interest in our company, our management currently engages, and intends to engage in the future, in the oil and gas business independently of our company. As a result, conﬂicts of interest
between us and the management of our company might arise.
Trading of our stock may be restricted by the SEC’s “Penny Stock” regulations which may limit a stockholder’s ability to buy and sell our stock.
3 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has adopted regulations which generally deﬁne “penny stock” to be any equity security that has a market price (as deﬁned) less than $5.00 per share or an exercise
price of less than $5.00 per share, subject to certain exceptions.  Our securities are covered by the penny stock rules, which impose additional sales practice requirements on broker‐dealers who sell to person other
than established customers and “accredited investors.”  The term “accredited investor” refers generally to institutions with assets in excess of $5,000,000 or individuals with a net worth in excess of $1,000,000 or
annual income exceeding $200,000 or $300,000 jointly with their spouse.  The penny stock rules require a broker‐dealer, prior to a transaction in a penny stock not otherwise exempt from the rules, to deliver a
standardized risk disclosure document in a form prepared by the SEC which provides information about penny stocks and the nature and level of risks in the penny stock market.  The broker‐dealer also must
provide the customer with current bid and oﬀer quotations for the penny stock, the compensation of the broker‐dealer and its salesperson in the transaction and monthly account statements showing the market
value of each penny stock held in the customer’s account.  The bid and oﬀer quotations, and the broker‐dealer and sales person compensation information, must be given to the customer orally or in writing prior
to eﬀecting the transaction and must be given to the customer in writing before or with the customer’s conﬁrmation.  In addition, the penny stock rules require that prior to a transaction in a penny stock not
otherwise exempt from these rules; the broker‐dealer must make a special written determination that the penny stock is a suitable investment for the purchaser and receive the purchaser’s written agreement to
the transaction.  These disclosure requirements may have the eﬀect of reducing the level of trading activity in the secondary market for the stock that is subject to these penny stock rules.  Consequently, these
penny stock rules may aﬀect the ability of broker‐dealers to trade our securities.  We believe that the penny stock rules discourage investor interest in and limit the marketability of our common stock.
The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, or FINRA, has adopted sales practice requirements which may also limit a stockholder’s ability to buy and sell our stock.
In addition to the “penny stock” rules described above, FINRA has adopted rules that require that in recommending an investment to a customer, a broker‐dealer must have reasonable grounds for believing that
the investment is suitable for that customer.  Prior to recommending speculative low priced securities to their non‐institutional customers, broker‐dealers must make reasonable eﬀorts to obtain information about
the customer’s ﬁnancial status, tax status, investment objectives and other information.  Under interpretations of these rules, FINRA believes that there is a high probability that speculative low priced securities will
not be suitable for at least some customers.  FINRA requirements make it more diﬃcult for broker‐dealers to recommend that their customers buy our common stock, which may limit your ability to buy and sell our
stock and have an adverse eﬀect on the market for our shares.
Since our shares are thinly traded, and trading on the OTC Bulletin Board may be limited and sporadic because it is not an exchange, stockholders may have diﬃculty reselling their shares or liquidating their investments.
Our shares of common stock are currently listed for public trading on the Pink OTC Markets Inc.  The trading price of our shares of common stock has been subject to wide ﬂuctuations.  Trading prices of our shares
of common stock may ﬂuctuate in response to a number of factors, many of which will be beyond our control.  The stock market has generally experienced extreme price and volume ﬂuctuations that have often
been unrelated or disproportionate to the operating performance of companies with no current business operation.  There can be no assurance that trading prices and price earnings ratios previously experienced
by shares of our common stock will be matched or maintained.  These broad market and industry factors may adversely aﬀect the market price of the shares of our common stock, regardless of our operating
performance.
In the past, following periods of volatility in the market price of a company's securities, securities class‐action litigation has often been instituted.  Such litigation, if instituted, could result in substantial costs for us
and a diversion of management's attention and resources.
Our By‐laws contain provisions indemnifying our oﬃcers and directors against all costs, charges and expenses incurred by them.
Our By‐laws contain provisions with respect to the indemniﬁcation of our oﬃcers and directors against all costs, charges and expenses, including an amount paid to settle an action or satisfy a judgment on
transactions, actually and reasonably incurred by him, including an amount paid to settle an action or satisfy a judgement in a civil, criminal or administrative action or proceeding to which he is made a party by
reason of his being or having been one of our directors or oﬃcers.
Insofar as indemniﬁcation for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 may be permitted to directors, oﬃcers and controlling persons of our company under Wyoming law or otherwise, we have been
advised that the opinion of the Securities and Exchange Commission is that such indemniﬁcation is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act of 1933 and is, therefore, unenforceable.
Investors’ interests in our company will be diluted and investors may suﬀer dilution in their net book value per share if we issue additional shares or raise funds through the sale of equity securities.
Our constating documents authorize the issuance of 50,000,000 shares of common stock, each with a par value of $0.001.  In the event that we are required to issue any additional shares or enter into private
placements to raise ﬁnancing through the sale of equity securities, investors' interests in our company will be diluted and investors may suﬀer dilution in their net book value per share depending on the price at
which such securities are sold.  If we issue any such additional shares, such issuances also will cause a reduction in the proportionate ownership and voting power of all other shareholders.  Further, any such
issuance may result in a change in our control.
Our by‐laws do not contain anti‐takeover provisions which could result in a change of our management and directors if there is a take‐over of our company.
We do not currently have a shareholder rights plan or any anti‐takeover provisions in our By‐laws.  Without any anti‐takeover provisions, there is no deterrent for a take‐over of our company, which may result in a
change in our management and directors.
Since our director and oﬃcer is not a resident of the United States, investors may ﬁnd it diﬃcult to enforce, within the United States, any judgments obtained against our company or our director and oﬃcer.
We do not currently maintain a permanent place of business within the United States. In addition, our director and oﬃcer is not a resident of the United States.  As a result, it may be diﬃcult for investors to
enforce within the United States any judgments obtained against our company or our oﬃcers or directors, including judgments predicated upon the civil liability provisions of the securities laws of the United States
or any state thereof.
Risks Relating to the Industry
As our properties were primarily in the exploration and, development stage there can be no assurance that we will establish further commercial discoveries.
Exploration for economic reserves of oil and gas is subject to a number of risk factors.  While the rewards to an investor can be substantial if an economically viable discovery is made, few of the properties that are
explored are ultimately developed into producing oil and/or gas wells.  There can be no assurance that we will establish further commercial discoveries.
A decline in oil and natural gas prices would have an adverse impact on our operations.
Our revenues, cash ﬂows and proﬁtability were substantially dependent upon prevailing prices for oil and natural gas.  In recent years, oil and natural gas prices and, therefore, the level of drilling, exploration,
development and production, have been extremely volatile.  Any signiﬁcant or extended decline in oil or natural gas prices would have a material adverse eﬀect on our business, ﬁnancial condition and results of
operations and could impair access to future sources of capital.  Volatility in the oil and natural gas industry results from numerous factors, over which we have no control, including:
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
the level of oil and natural gas prices, expectations about future oil and natural gas prices and the ability of international cartels to set and maintain production levels and prices;
the cost of exploring for, producing and transporting oil and natural gas;
the domestic and foreign supply of oil and natural gas;
domestic and foreign governmental regulation;
the level and price of foreign oil and natural gas transportation;
available pipeline and other oil and natural gas transportation capacity;
weather conditions;
international political, military, regulatory and economic conditions;
the level of consumer demand;
the price and the availability of alternative fuels;
the eﬀect of worldwide energy conservation measures; and
the ability of oil and natural gas companies to raise capital.
Signiﬁcant declines in oil and natural gas prices for an extended period may:
·
·
·
·
·
impair our ﬁnancial condition, liquidity, ability to ﬁnance future plans;
reduce the amount of oil and natural gas that we could produce economically;
cause us to delay or postpone some of our capital projects;
reduce our revenues, operating income and cash ﬂow; and
reduce the carrying value of oil and natural gas properties.
4 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
No assurance can be given that current levels of oil and natural gas prices will continue.  We expect oil and natural gas prices, as well as the oil and natural gas industry generally, to continue to be volatile.
Continued ﬁnancial success depends on our ability to replace our reserves in the future.
Our future success depends upon our ability to ﬁnd, develop and acquire oil and natural gas reserves that are proﬁtable.  Oil and natural gas are depleting assets, and production from oil and natural gas from
properties declines as reserves are depleted with the rate of decline depending on reservoir characteristics.  If we are unable to conduct successful exploration or development activities or acquire properties
containing proved reserves our cash ﬂows will be adversely aﬀected.  Acquiring reserves through exploration or development activities or acquisitions will require signiﬁcant capital which may not be available to us.
Reserve estimates depend on many assumptions that may turn out to be inaccurate.
The process of estimating natural gas and oil reserves is complex.  It requires interpretations of available technical data and various assumptions, including assumptions relating to economic factors.  Any signiﬁcant
inaccuracies in these interpretations or assumptions could materially aﬀect the estimated quantities and present value of reserves shown in this annual report.  In order to prepare these estimates, we must project
production rates and timing of development expenditures.  We must also analyze available geological, geophysical, production and engineering data, and the extent, quality and reliability of this data can vary.  The
process also requires economic assumptions relating to matters such as oil and natural gas prices, drilling and operating expenses, capital expenditures, taxes and availability of funds.
Actual future production, oil and natural gas prices, revenues, taxes, development expenditures, operating expenses and quantities of recoverable oil and natural gas reserves most likely will vary from our
estimates.  Any signiﬁcant variance could materially aﬀect the estimated quantities and pre‐tax net present value of reserves shown in this annual report.  In addition, we may adjust estimates of proved reserves to
reﬂect production history, results of exploration and development, prevailing oil and natural gas prices and other factors, many of which are beyond our control.
The potential proﬁtability of oil and gas ventures depends upon factors beyond the control of our company.
The potential proﬁtability of oil and gas properties is dependent upon many factors beyond our control.  For instance, world prices and markets for oil and gas are unpredictable, highly volatile, potentially subject
to governmental ﬁxing, pegging, controls, or any combination of these and other factors, and respond to changes in domestic, international, political, social, and economic environments.  Additionally, due to
worldwide economic uncertainty, the availability and cost of funds for production and other expenses have become increasingly diﬃcult, if not impossible, to project.  These changes and events may materially
aﬀect our ﬁnancial performance.
Adverse weather conditions can also hinder drilling operations.  A productive well may become uneconomic in the event water or other deleterious substances are encountered which impair or prevent the
production of oil and/or gas from the well.  In addition, production from any well may be unmarketable if it is impregnated with water or other deleterious substances.  The marketability of oil and gas which may
be acquired or discovered will be aﬀected by numerous factors beyond our control.  These factors include the proximity and capacity of oil and gas pipelines and processing equipment, market ﬂuctuations of
prices, taxes, royalties, land tenure, allowable production and environmental protection. The extent of these factors cannot be accurately predicted but the combination of these factors may result in our company
not receiving an adequate return on invested capital.
Competition in the oil and gas industry is highly competitive and there is no assurance that we will be successful in acquiring desirable oil and gas leases.
The oil and gas industry is intensely competitive. We compete with numerous individuals and companies, including many major oil and gas companies, which have substantially greater technical, ﬁnancial and
operational resources and staﬀs.  Accordingly, there is a high degree of competition for desirable oil and gas leases, suitable properties for drilling operations and necessary drilling equipment, as well as for access
to funds.  We cannot predict if the necessary funds can be raised or that any project work will be completed.  Acreage may not become available or if it is available for leasing we may not be successful in acquiring
the leases.
The marketability of natural resources will be aﬀected by numerous factors beyond our control which may result in us not receiving an adequate return on invested capital to be proﬁtable or viable.
The marketability of natural resources which may be acquired or discovered by us will be aﬀected by numerous factors beyond our control.  These factors include market ﬂuctuations in oil and gas pricing and
demand, the proximity and capacity of natural resource markets and processing equipment, governmental regulations, land tenure, land use, regulation concerning the importing and exporting of oil and gas and
environmental protection regulations.  The exact eﬀect of these factors cannot be accurately predicted, but the combination of these factors may result in us not receiving an adequate return on invested capital to
be proﬁtable or viable.
Oil and gas operations are subject to comprehensive regulation which may cause substantial delays or require capital outlays in excess of those anticipated causing an adverse eﬀect on our company.
Oil and gas operations are subject to federal and local laws relating to the protection of the environment, including laws regulating removal of natural resources from the ground and the discharge of materials into
the environment.  Oil and gas operations are also subject to federal and local laws and regulations which seek to maintain health and safety standards by regulating the design and use of drilling methods and
equipment.  Various permits from government bodies are required for drilling operations to be conducted; no assurance can be given that such permits will be received.  Environmental standards imposed by
federal, provincial, or local authorities may be changed and any such changes may have material adverse eﬀects on our activities.  Moreover, compliance with such laws may cause substantial delays or require
capital outlays in excess of those anticipated, thus causing an adverse eﬀect on us.
Exploration and production activities are subject to certain environmental regulations which may prevent or delay the commencement of our operations.
In general, our exploration and production activities are subject to certain federal and local laws and regulations relating to environmental quality and pollution control.  Such laws and regulations increase the costs
of these activities and may prevent or delay the commencement or continuance of a given operation.  Compliance with these laws and regulations did not have a material eﬀect on our operations or ﬁnancial
condition to date.  Legislation has been enacted which requires well and facility sites to be abandoned and reclaimed to the satisfaction of state authorities.  However, such laws and regulations are frequently
changed and we are unable to predict the ultimate cost of compliance.  Generally, environmental requirements have not appeared to aﬀect us any diﬀerently or to any greater or lesser extent than other
companies in the industry. We believe that our operations complied, in all material respects, with all applicable environmental regulations. Our operating partners maintained insurance coverage customary to the
industry; however, we are not fully insured against all environmental risks.
Exploratory drilling involves many risks and we may become liable for pollution or other liabilities which may have an adverse eﬀect on our ﬁnancial position.
Drilling operations generally involve a high degree of risk.  Hazards such as unusual or unexpected geological formations, power outages, labour disruptions, blow‐outs, sour gas leakage, ﬁre, inability to obtain
suitable or adequate machinery, equipment or labour, and other risks are involved. We may become subject to liability for pollution or hazards against which we cannot adequately insure or which we may elect
not to insure.  Incurring any such liability may have a material adverse eﬀect on our ﬁnancial position and operations.
Any change to government regulation/administrative practices may have a negative impact on our ability to operate and our proﬁtability.
The laws, regulations, policies or current administrative practices of any governmental body, organization or regulatory agency in the United States or any other jurisdiction, may be changed, applied or interpreted
in a manner which will fundamentally alter the ability of our company to carry on its business. The actions, policies or regulations, or changes thereto, of any government body or regulatory agency, or other special
interest groups, may have a detrimental eﬀect on our company.  Any or all of these situations may have a negative impact on our ability to operate and/or become proﬁtable.
ITEM 1B.   UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS.
None
ITEM 2.  PROPERTIES
Our principal executive oﬃce is located at Suite 900, 609 West Hastings Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6B 4W4.  We occupy the Vancouver premises on a proportional cost basis for oﬃce rent and
administration services and expenses, on a month to month basis.   We currently have a management services agreement in eﬀect that among other administration and oﬃce services and supplies provides for
oﬃce space.  At March 31, 2008 the monthly fee was $4,250 per month.  Eﬀective January 1, 2009 the fee increased to $7,865 per month.  The fee decreased eﬀective November 1, 2010 to $3,500 per month.  At the
present time, we do not have any oil and gas holdings and there are no plans to acquire any real property interests.
ITEM 3.  LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
We know of no material, active or pending legal proceeding against our company, nor are we involved as a plaintiﬀ in any material proceedings or pending litigation where such claim or action involves damages for
more than 10% of our current assets.  There are no proceedings in which any of our directors, oﬃcers or aﬃliates, or any registered or beneﬁcial shareholders are an adverse party or have a material interest
adverse to us.
ITEM 4.  (REMOVED AND RESERVED)
None
ITEM 5.  MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES
Market for Securities
PART II
Our common stock is quoted for trading on the on the OTCBB under the symbol "NEGY".  Prior to March 13, 2000, our common stock traded on the OTCBB under the symbol "XCNT", which was a result of a change
in our name from Excalibur Contracting, Inc. to our current name. On August 17, 2006 our stock symbol was deleted from the OTC Bulletin Board and resumed trading on the Pink OTC Markets Inc.  The following
quotations (obtained from Stockwatch) reﬂect the high and low bids for our common stock based on inter‐dealer prices, without retail mark‐up, mark‐down or commission and may not represent actual
transactions.  The high and low prices of our common stock for the periods indicated below are as follows:
5 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
Quarter Ended
December 31, 2010
September 30, 2010
June 30, 2010
March 31, 2010
December 31, 2009
September 30, 2009
June 30, 2009
High
$0.010
$0.020
$0.010
$0.090
$0.090
$0.020
$0.080
Low
$0.006
$0.010
$0.010
$0.010
$0.012
$0.012
$0.020
Our shares of common stock are issued in registered form. Interwest Transfer Co., Inc., of 1981 Murray Holladay Road, Suite 100, P.O. Box 17136, Salt Lake City, UT 84117 (Telephone: 801.272.9294, facsimile:
801.277.3147) is the registrar and transfer agent for our shares of common stock.
Holders of our Common Stock
As of January 31, 2011, we had 16,020,000 shares of common stock outstanding and approximately 23 stockholders of record.  This number of stockholders does not include stockholders who hold our securities in
street name. 
Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
None.
Dividend Policy
We have not paid any cash dividends on our common stock and have no present intention of paying any dividends on the shares of our common stock.  Our future dividend policy will be determined from time to
time by our board of directors.
Securities Authorized for Issuance under Equity Compensation Plans
We adopted our current stock option plan, entitled the 1999 Stock Option and Incentive Plan, on May 6, 1999 which was subsequently approved by over 50% of the shares of common stock held by stockholders of
our company.  The plan authorized up to 2,500,000 shares of our common stock to be granted as incentive options.  On February 26, 2003, options to purchase 225,000 common shares were granted to the
Company’s Chief Executive Oﬃcer and Chief Financial Oﬃcer and vested immediately upon grant.  The options were granted at an exercise price of $0.10 expiring February 26, 2008.  The remaining options under
this grant expired unexercised during the year ended March 31, 2008.  The following table provides a summary of the number of options granted under our stock option plan, the weighted average exercise price
and the number of options remaining available for issuance as at March 31, 2009.
Number of Common Shares
to be issued upon exercise of
Weighted‐Average exercise
price of outstanding options
outstanding options
Number of options
remaining available for
further issuance
‐
‐
2,500,000
Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
We did not issue any shares during the ﬁscal years ended March 31, 2009 and 2008.
ITEM 6.   SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
Not applicable
ITEM 7.  MANAGEMENT’ S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our ﬁnancial statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this annual report.  The following discussion contains forward‐looking
statements that reﬂect our plans, estimates and beliefs.  Our actual results could diﬀer materially from those discussed in the forward looking statements.  Factors that could cause or contribute to such diﬀerences
include, but are not limited to, those discussed below and elsewhere in this annual report, particularly in the section entitled "Risk Factors" found under "Item 1.  Description of Business".
Our audited ﬁnancial statements are stated in United States Dollars and are prepared in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
Plan of Operation
For the next twelve months we plan to continue to evaluate joint venture opportunities and oil and gas development and production opportunities.
Cash Requirements
Over the next twelve months we intend to use funds to evaluate new business acquisitions, as follows:
Estimated Funding Required During the Next Twelve Months
General and Administrative
 
Professional Fees
 
 
Total
$70,000
60,000
$130,000
We have suﬀered recurring losses from operations.  The continuation of our company as a going concern is dependent upon our company attaining and maintaining proﬁtable operations and raising additional
capital as needed. Management's plan in this regard is to raise additional capital through a debt or an equity oﬀering.  The ﬁnancial statements do not include any adjustment relating to the recovery and
classiﬁcation of recorded asset amounts or the amount and classiﬁcation of liabilities that might be necessary should our company discontinue operations.
Due to the uncertainty of our ability to meet our current operating expenses noted above, in their report on the annual ﬁnancial statements for the year ended March 31, 2009, our independent auditors included
an explanatory paragraph regarding concerns about our ability to continue as a going concern.  Our ﬁnancial statements contain additional note disclosures describing the circumstances that lead to this disclosure
by our independent auditors.
The continuation of our business is dependent upon obtaining further ﬁnancing, a successful program of exploration, and, ﬁnally achieving a proﬁtable level of operations.  The issuance of additional equity
securities by us could result in a signiﬁcant dilution in the equity interests of our current stockholders.  Obtaining commercial loans, assuming those loans would be available, will increase our liabilities and future
cash commitments.
There are no assurances that we will be able to obtain further funds required for our continued operations.  We are pursuing various ﬁnancing alternatives to meet our immediate and long‐term ﬁnancial
requirements.  There can be no assurance that additional ﬁnancing will be available to us when needed or, if available, that it can be obtained on commercially reasonable terms.  If we are not able to obtain the
additional ﬁnancing on a timely basis, we will be unable to conduct our operations as planned, and we will not be able to meet our other obligations as they become due.  In such event, we will be forced to scale
down or perhaps even cease our operations.
Disclosure of Outstanding Share Data
As at the date of this annual report, we had 16,020,000 shares of common stock issued and outstanding.  We do not have any warrants, options or shares of any other class issued and outstanding as at the date of
this annual report.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS – Years Ended March 31, 2009 and 2008
The following summary of our results of operations should be read in conjunction with our ﬁnancial statements for the year ended March 31, 2009, which are included herein.
Our operating results for the year ended March 31, 2009, for the year ended March 31, 2008 and the changes between those periods for the respective items are summarized as follows:
6 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
Year Ended
March 31, 2009
Year Ended
March 31,
Diﬀerence
Increase/(Decrease) %
2008
Revenue
$100,371
$266,037
(62.3)%
Miscellaneous income
$Nil
$9,394
(100)%
Depletion, depreciation and amortization $Nil
$119,578
(100)%
General and administrative
$101,221
$91,422
10.7%
Interest expense
$147,543
$166,729
(11.5)%
Oil and gas operating expenses
$59,926
$91,180
(34.3)%
Royalty expense
$6,023
$12,615
(52.3)%
(Loss) on sale of properties
Gain on relief of debt
Interest income
Net income (loss)
($46,899)
$480,507
$932
$Nil
$Nil
$936
100%
100%
(0.4)%
$220,198
$(205,157)
207.3%
We generated net income of $220,198 for the year ended March 31, 2009 compared to a net loss of $205,157 for the year ended March 31, 2008.  Net earnings (loss) per common share for the year ended March 31,
2009 was $0.01 compared to $(0.01) per common share for the year ended March 31, 2008.  We determined there was no impairment for the year ended March 31, 2008 and eﬀective June 1, 2008 we sold all of our
oil and gas properties resulting in no further impairment, depletion, depreciation or amortization expenses.  Based on an independent evaluation of our reserves depletion, depreciation and amortization expense
amounts totalled $119,578 for the year ended March 31, 2008.  Revenues for the period ended March 31, 2009 decreased to $100,371 from $266,037 for the year ended March 31, 2008.  The decrease was a due to
the sale of the oil and gas producing properties.  As a result of the sale, royalty and operating expenses decreased as well to $6,023 and $59,926 for the year ended March 31, 2009 from $12,615 and $91,180
respectively in the prior year.    General and administrative expenses increased to $101,221 from $91,422.
Interest expense for ﬁscal 2009 totalled $147,543 compared to $166,729 for ﬁscal 2008.  The decrease reﬂected the lower average outstanding balance of shareholder loans in ﬁscal 2009 versus ﬁscal 2008.
We reported a foreign currency translation gain of $19,768 in ﬁscal 2009 compared to a loss of $123,486 in ﬁscal 2008.  Our revenues and expenses are incurred in Canadian dollars while the reporting currency is
the US dollar.  The value of the Canadian dollar in the current ﬁscal year ended March 31, 2009 remained fairly consistent compared to a sharp rise in the value of the Canadian dollar during the prior ﬁscal year
ended March 31, 2008.  The rise in ﬁscal 2008 resulted in a foreign currency translation loss primarily as a result of our loans payable being due in Canadian dollars.  The Canadian dollar remained fairly consistent,
dropping slightly in value during ﬁscal 2009 resulting in a gain on translation.
The major components of our general and administrative expenses for the year are outlined in the table below:
Year Ended
March 31,
2009
Year Ended
March 31,
2008
Diﬀerence
Increase/(Decrease) %
Administration fees
$62,575
$50,761
Oﬃce & MIS
Consulting Fees
Legal fees
$4,944
$3,186
$7,799
Transfer Agent & Filing Fees
$4,117
$3,819
$3,148
$2,746
$6,862
23.3%
29.5%
1.2%
184.0%
(40.0)%
Accounting
$18,600
$24,086
(22.8)%
Total Expenses
$101,221
$91,422
10.7%
General and administrative expenses increased to $101,222 in ﬁscal 2009 from $91,422 in ﬁscal 2008.  General expenses included an increase in administration fees to $62,575 in ﬁscal 2009 from $50,761 in ﬁscal
2008.  Consulting fees rose slightly to $3,186 for the year ended March 31, 2009 from $3,148 for the prior year ended March 31, 2008.  Oﬃce expenses and Management Information System fees increased to $4,946
in ﬁscal 2009 from $3,819 due primarily to travel charges incurred during the current ﬁscal period of $1,831.  Legal fees increased to $7,799 in ﬁscal 2009 from $2,746 in the prior ﬁscal year mainly due to legal fees
associated with the sale of our oil and gas properties.  Filing fees and transfer agent fees decreased to $4,117 in ﬁscal 2009 from $6,862 in the prior ﬁscal period.  Accounting fees decreased to $18,600 for the year
ended March 31, 2009 from $24,086 in the prior year ended March 31, 2008.  The decrease in ﬁling and accounting fees was due to fewer ﬁlings and accounting reviews booked in the current year.
Liquidity and Financial Condition
Working Capital
Year Ended
March 31,
2009
Year Ended
March 31,
2008
Current Assets
$125,003
$797,671
Current Liabilities
$455,793
$2,263,456
Working Capital (Deﬁciency) ($330,790)
($1,465,785)
Cash Flows
Year Ended March 31, 2009
Year Ended March 31, 2008
Cash ﬂows (used in) Operating Activities
$(645,791)
Cash ﬂows provided by (used in) Investing Activities $1,070,021
Cash ﬂows provided by (used in) Financing Activities $(454,877)
Eﬀect of exchange rate changes on cash
Net increase (decrease) in Cash
Operating Activities
$19,768
$(10,879)
$(42,534)
$(52,944)
$151,459
$(24,260)
$31,721
7 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
Net cash (used in) operating activities was ($645,791) in the year ended March 31, 2009 compared with net cash (used in) operating activities of ($42,534) in the same period in 2008.  The increase in cash (used in)
operating activities of $603,257 is mainly attributed to a decrease in accounts payable of $334,418 and a further decrease of $183,789 in loans payable due to a related party.  Partially oﬀsetting the decrease in
accounts payable was net income for the current year of $220,198 compared to a (loss) of ($205,157) for the prior ﬁscal year ended March 31, 2008, as well as gain on the relief of debt of $480,507, compared to $Nil
in the prior year.
Investing Activities
Net cash (used in) investing in our Company’s oil and gas properties decreased from ($52,945) for the year ended March 31, 2008 to proceeds from the sale of our properties providing cash of $1,070,021in the year
ended March 31, 2009.
Financing Activities
Net cash (used in) ﬁnancing activities was ($454,877) in the year ended March 31, 2009 compared to $151,459 provided by ﬁnancing activities in the year ended March 31, 2008.  The diﬀerence resulted from
payments on the loan amounting to $454,877 for the year ended March 31, 2009 compared to loan proceeds of $151,459 during the year ended March 31, 2008.
Loans Payable
On March 31, 2006, we entered into a revised loan agreement with a related party.  The loan bears interest at 15% per annum, calculated and compounded monthly and payable quarterly.  Any principal amount
outstanding under the loan is payable upon demand.  The loan payable is in Canadian dollars and is secured by a Promissory Note.  As of March 31, 2007, the balance of the loan and accrued interest payable,
converted to US dollars was $851,967.  During the year ended March 31, 2008, we borrowed an additional CDN $160,000 (US $151,459) and together with interest the balance of the loan and accrued interest was
CDN $1,314,101 (US $1,278,433).  During the year ended March 31, 2009 payments applied to our loan amounted to CDN $565,089 (US $454,877).  At March 31, 2009 the loan together with interest totalled CDN
$516,127 (US $409,560).  During the year ended March 31, 2010 we paid an additional CDN $60,603 (US $53,190) and borrowed an additional CDN $4,169 (US $3,915) bringing the total, with accrued interest to CDN
$510,239 (US $502,402) at March 31, 2010.  We borrowed an additional CDN $85,094 (US $83,270) and together with accrued interest the loan balance totalled CDN $659,093 (US $662,671) at December 31, 2010.
Going Concern
The audited ﬁnancial statements accompanying this report have been prepared on a going concern basis, which implies that our company will continue to realize its assets and discharge its liabilities and
commitments in the normal course of business.  Our Company has incurred losses since inception in excess of $7 million and has only generated modest proﬁtable operations when we commenced gas production
in ﬁscal 2006.  We have relied solely on shareholder advances to participate and continue operations.
Our company’s ability to continue as a going concern is contingent upon being able to secure ﬁnancing and attain proﬁtable operations.  Our company is currently evaluating business opportunities and will require
ﬁnancing for acquisition of any new business venture.
Net cash (used in) operating activities in ﬁscal 2009 totalled ($645,791) versus net cash (used in) operating activities of ($42,534) in ﬁscal 2008.  Cash balances were $35,973 and $46,852, as of March 31, 2009 and
March 31, 2008, respectively.
We entered into bridge loan agreements with a related party, in 2003 and 2004 to fund operations.  The terms of these bridge loan agreements provided that any principal amount outstanding is payable upon
demand and bears interest at 15% per annum, payable quarterly. On March 31, 2006, we consolidated and restructured our loans with the related party.  As part of the restructuring, we borrowed an additional
CDN $250,000 (US $203,932).  The new loan bears interest at 15% per annum, calculated and compounded monthly and is payable quarterly. Any principal amount outstanding under the loan is payable upon
demand.  The loan is payable in Canadian dollars and is secured by a Promissory Note.
We made payments that were applied to the loan of CDN $565,089 (US $454,877) in ﬁscal 2009, compared to receiving net proceeds of CDN $160,000 (US $151,459) in ﬁscal 2008.  Accordingly, the principal balances
outstanding under the loan agreement totalled $393,443 at March 31, 2009 versus $1,032,109 at March 31, 2008.  At December 31, 2010 the balance of principal and accrued interest was CDN $659,093 (US
$662,671).
We have limited operating history.  We can only estimate the future needs for capital based on the current status of our operations, our current plans and current economic condition.  Due to the uncertainties
regarding our future activities, we are unable to predict precisely what amount will be used for any particular purpose.
Future Financings
As of December 31, 2010, we had cash of US $1,800.  We currently do not have suﬃcient funds to acquire and develop any future joint ventures.  We anticipate continuing to rely on shareholder loans or equity
sales of our common stock in order to fund our business operations.   Issuances of additional shares will result in dilution to our existing stockholders.  There is no assurance that we will achieve any additional sales
of our equity or arrange for more debt or other ﬁnancing to fund any future activities.
Oﬀ‐Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no  oﬀ‐balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future eﬀect on our ﬁnancial condition, changes in ﬁnancial condition, revenues or expenses, results of
operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to stockholders.
New Accounting Pronouncements
In May 2008, the FASB issued SFAS No. 162, “The Hierarchy of Generally Accepted Accounting Principles”.  SFAS 162 identiﬁes the sources of accounting principles and the framework for selecting the principles to be
used in the preparation of ﬁnancial statements of nongovernmental entities that are presented in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States.  It is eﬀective 60 days following the
SEC’s approval of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board amendments to AU Section 411, “The Meaning of Present Fairly in Conformity With Generally Accepted Accounting Principles”.  The adoption of
this statement did not have a material eﬀect on our company’s ﬁnancial statements.
In May 2008, the FASB issued SFAS No. 163, “Accounting for Financial Guarantee Insurance Contracts – An interpretation of FASB Statement No. 60”.  SFAS 163 requires that an insurance enterprise recognize a claim
liability prior to an event of default when there is evidence that credit deterioration has occurred in an insured ﬁnancial obligation.  It also clariﬁes how Statement 60 applies to ﬁnancial guarantee insurance
contracts, including the recognition and measurement to be used to account for premium revenue and claim liabilities, and requires expanded disclosure about ﬁnancial guarantee insurance contracts.  It is
eﬀective for ﬁnancial statements issued for ﬁscal years beginning after December 15, 2008, except for some disclosures about the insurance enterprise’s risk‐management activities.  SFAS 163 requires that
disclosures about the risk‐management activities of the insurance enterprise be eﬀective for the ﬁrst period beginning after issuance.  Except for those disclosures, earlier application is not permitted.  The adoption
of this statement did not have a material eﬀect on our company’s ﬁnancial statements.
In October 2008, the FASB issued FSP FAX 157‐3, “Determining the Fair Value of a Financial Asset When the Market for That Asset is Not Active” (FSP FAX 157‐3”), to help constituents measure fair value in markets
that are not active.  FSP FAX 157‐3 is consistent with the joint press release the FASB issued with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) on September 30, 2008, which provides general clariﬁcation
guidance on determining fair value under SFAS No. 157 when markets are inactive.  FSP FAS 157‐3 was eﬀective upon issuance, including prior periods for which ﬁnancial statements had not been issued.  The
adoption of FSP 157‐3 did not have a material impact on the Company’s ﬁnancial statements.
In December 2008, the SEC adopted major revisions to its rules governing oil and gas company reporting requirements.  These include the provisions that permit the use of new technologies to determine proved
reserves and allow companies to disclose their probable and possible reserves to investors.  These disclosure requiremtnes also require companies to report the independence and qualiﬁcations of the person
primarily responsible for the preparation or audit of reserve estimates, and to ﬁle reports when a third party is relied upon to prepare or audit reserves estimates.  The new rules also require that oil and gas
reserves be reported and the full‐cost ceiling value calculated using an average price based upon the prior 12‐month period.  The new oil and gas reporting requirements are eﬀective for annual reports on Form 10K
for ﬁscal years ending on or after December 31, 2009, with early adoption not permitted.  Adoption did not have a material impact on our ﬁnancial position, results of operations and ﬁnancial disclosures.
In April 2009, the FASB issued two FASB Staﬀ Positions (“FSP”) intended to provide additional application guidance and enhanced disclosures regarding fair value measurements and impairments of securities.  FSP
No. FAS 157‐4, “Determining Fair Value When the Volume or Level of Activity for the Asset or Liability Have Signiﬁcantly Decreased and Identifying Transactions That Are Not Orderly, as codiﬁed in FASB ASC topic Fair
Value Measurement and Disclosure”, provides additional guidelines for estimating fair value in accordance with FASB SFAS No. 157, Fair Value Measurements (“SFAS 157”).  Adoption did not have a material impact
on our ﬁnancial position, results of operations and ﬁnancial disclosures.
In May 2009, FASB issued ASC 855, Subsequent Events, which establishes general standards for the evaluation, recognition and disclosure of events and transactions that occur after the balance sheet date.
 Although there is new terminology, the standard is based on the same principles as those that currently exist in the auditing standards.  The standard is eﬀective for interim or annual periods ending after June 15,
2009.  The adoption of ASC 855 did not have a material eﬀect on our company’s ﬁnancial statements.
In June 2009, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Codiﬁed (“ASC”) 855 (previously SFAS 165. “Subsequent Events”) which establishes general standards for and disclosures of events that occur after the balance
sheet date but before the ﬁnancial statements are issued or available to be issued. It is eﬀective for interim and annual periods ending after June 15, 2009. Adoption did not have a material impact on our ﬁnancial
statements.
In June 2009, the FASB issued ASC 810 (previously SFAS No. 167) for determining whether to consolidate a variable interest entity.  These amended standards eliminate a mandatory quantitative approach to
determine whether a variable interest gives the entity a controlling ﬁnancial interest in a variable interest entity in favor of a qualitatively focused analysis, and require an ongoing reassessment of whether an
entity is the primary beneﬁciary.  This Statement is eﬀective for reporting periods beginning after November 15, 2009.  Adoption of this ASC did not have a material impact on our ﬁnancial statements.
In June 2009, the FASB issued SFAS No. 168, “The FASB Accounting Standards Codiﬁcation and the Hierarchy of Generally Accepted Accounting Principles”, as codiﬁed in FASB ASC topic “Generally Accepted
8 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
Accounting Principles”, a replacement of FASB Statement No. 162.  This standard establishes only two levels of GAAP, authoritative and non‐authoritative.  This ASC was not intended to change or alter existing
GAAP, and the Company’s adoption eﬀective September 1, 2009, did not have a material impact on our ﬁnancial statements other than to modify certain existing disclosures.
In June 2009, the FASB issued guidance now codiﬁed as ASC subtopic 105‐10, “Generally Accepted Accounting Principles” as the single source of authoritative accounting principles to be applied by non‐government
entities in the preparation of ﬁnancial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP, aside from those issued by the SEC.  This ASU reﬂected the issuance of FASB Statement No. 168.  The Codiﬁcation does not change
current U.S. GAAP, but is intended to simplify user access to all authoritative U.S. GAAP by providing all the authoritative literature related to a particular topic in one place.  The Codiﬁcation is eﬀective for interim
and annual periods ending after September 15, 2009, and as of the eﬀective date, all existing accounting standard documents are superseded.
In June 2009, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2009‐02, “Omnibus Update‐Amendments to Various Topics for Technical Corrections”.  The omnibus ASU detailed amendments to various topics
for technical corrections.  The adoption of ASU 2009‐02 did not have a material impact on our ﬁnancial statements.
In August 2009, the FASB issued ASU 2009‐03, “SEC Update‐Amendments to Various Topics Containing SEC Staﬀ Accounting Bulletins”.  This ASU updated cross‐referenced to Codiﬁcation text.  The adoption of ASU
2009‐03 did not have a material impact on our ﬁnancial statements.
In August 2009, the FASB issued ASU 2009‐05, which amends ASC Topic 820, Measuring Liabilities at Fair Value, which provides additional guidance on the measurement of liabilities at fair value.  These amended
standards clarify that in circumstances in which a quoted price in an active market for the identical liabilities is not available, we are required to use the quoted price of the identical liability when traded as an
asset, quoted prices for similar liabilities, or quoted prices for similar liabilities when traded as assets.  If those quoted prices are not available, we are required to use another valuation technique, such as income
approach or a market approach.  These amended standards are eﬀective from October 1, 2009, and did not have a signiﬁcant impact on our ﬁnancial statements.
In September 2009, the FASB issued ASU 2009‐06, “Income Taxes” (Topic 740), “Implementation Guidance on Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes and Disclosure Amendments for Non‐public Entities”, which
provides implementation guidance on accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, as well as eliminates certain disclosure requirements for non‐public entities.  This update is eﬀective for interim and annual periods
ending after September 15, 2009.  The adoption of this standard did not have an impact on the Company’s ﬁnancial position and results of operations since it provides only implementation and disclosure
amendments.
In September 2009, the FASB issued ASU 2009‐07, “Technical Corrections to SEC Paragraphs”.  This corrected various SEC paragraphs to comment letters.  The adoption of ASU 2009‐07 did not have a material impact
on our ﬁnancial statements.
In September 2009, the FASB issued ASU 2009‐12, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures (Topic 820) – Investments in Certain Entities That Calculate Net Asset Value per Share (or its Equivalent)”.  This ASU
amends Subtopic 820‐10, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures – Overall”, to permit a reporting entity to measure the fair value of certain investments on the basis of the net asset value per share of the
investment (or its equivalent).  This ASU also requires new disclosures, by major category of investments including the attributes of investments within the scope of this amendment to the Codiﬁcation.  The
guidance in this update is eﬀective for interim and annual periods ending after December 15, 2009.  The adoption of this standard did not have an impact on the Company’s ﬁnancial position and results of
operations.
In October 2009, the FASB issued guidance on revenue recognition that will become eﬀective for the company beginning April 1, 2010, with earlier adoption permitted.  Under the new guidance on arrangements
that include software elements, tangible products that have software components that are essential to the functionality of the tangible product will no longer be within the scope of the software revenue
recognition guidance, and software‐enabled products will now be subject to other relevant revenue recognition guidance.  In addition, the FASB issued guidance on revenue arrangements with multiple deliverables
that are outside the scope of the software revenue recognition guidance.  Under the new guidance, when vendor speciﬁc objective evidence or third party evidence for deliverables in an arrangement cannot be
determined, a best estimate of the selling price is required to separate deliverables and allocate arrangements consideration using the relative selling price method.  The new guidance includes new disclosure
requirements on how the application of the relative selling price method aﬀects the timing and amount of revenue recognition.  Adoption of this new guidance did not have a material impact on our ﬁnancial
statements.
In December 2009, the FASB issued ASU 2010‐06 “Fair Market Value Measurements and Disclosures” (Topic 820) “Improving Disclosures about Fair Value Measurements”.  This ASU requires some new disclosures and
clariﬁes some existing disclosure requirements about fair value measurement as set for the in ASC Subtopic 820‐10.  The FASB’s objective is to improve these disclosures and, thus, increase the transparency in
ﬁnancial reporting.  The adoption of this ASU did not have a material impact on our ﬁnancial statements.
In January 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010‐03, “Oil and Gas Reserve Estimation and Disclosures” (“ASU 2010‐03”), which provides amendments to ASC topic “Extractive Activities‐Oil and Gas”.  The objective of ASU
2010‐03 is to align the oil and gas reserve estimation and disclosure requirements of the ASC with the requirements of the SEC’s “Modernization of Oil and Gas Reporting:  Final Rule”.  Similar to the SEC
requirements, the FASB requirements were eﬀective for periods ending on or after December 31, 2009.  The SEC introduced a new deﬁnition of oil and gas producing activities which allows companies to include
volumes in their reserve base from unconventional resources.  The FASB also addresses the impact of changes in the SEC’s rules and deﬁnitions on accounting for oil and gas producing activities.  Initial adoption did
not have an impact on our Company’s ﬁnancial statements because we had sold our oil and gas interests prior to adoption.
In January 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010‐04, “Accounting for Various Topics – Technical Corrections to SEC Paragraphs”.  ASU 2010‐04 makes technical corrections to existing SEC guidance, including the following
topics:  accounting for subsequent investments termination of an interest rate swap, issuance of ﬁnancial statements – subsequent events, use of residential method to value acquired assets other than goodwill,
adjustments in assets and liabilities for holdings for holding gains and losses, and selections of discount rate used for measuring deﬁned beneﬁt obligation.  Adoption did not have a material impact on our ﬁnancial
statements.
In January 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010‐06, “Improving Disclosures about Fair Value Measurements” (ASU 2010‐06”), which provides amendments to ASC topic “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures”.  This
will provide more robust disclosures about (i) the diﬀerent classes of assets and liabilities measured at fair value, (ii) the valuation techniques and inputs used, (iii) the activity in Level 3 fair value measurements,
and (iv) the transfers between Levels 1, 2 and 3.  ASU 2010‐06 is eﬀective for ﬁscal years and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2009.  Adoption did not have a material impact on our ﬁnancial
statements.
In February 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010‐09, “Subsequent Events (Topic 855).”  The amendments remove the requirements for an SEC ﬁler to disclose a date, in both issued and revised ﬁnancial statements,
through which subsequent events have been reviewed.  Revised ﬁnancial statements include ﬁnancial statements revised as a result of either correction or an error or retrospective application of U.S. GAAP.  ASU
2010‐09 is eﬀective for interim or annual ﬁnancial periods ending after June 15, 2010.  The provisions of ASU 2010‐09 did not have a material eﬀect on the ﬁnancial position, results of operations or cash ﬂows of the
Company.
In April 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010‐12, “Income Taxes “ (Topic 740).  ASU 2010‐12 amends FASB Accounting Standard Codiﬁcation subtopic 740‐10 “Income Taxes” to include paragraph 740‐10‐599‐4.  On March
30, 2010 The President signed the “Health Care & Education Aﬀordable Care Act” reconciliation bill that amends its previous Act signed on March 23, 2010.  FASB ASC topic 740, “Income Taxes”, requires the
measurement of current and deferred tax liabilities and assets to be based on provisions of enacted tax law.  The eﬀects of future changes in tax laws are not anticipated”.  Therefore, the diﬀerent enactment dates
of the Act and reconciliation measure may aﬀect registrants with a period end that falls between March 23, 2010 (enactment date of the Act), and March 30, 2010 (enactment date of the reconciliation measure).
However, the announcement states that the SEC would not object if such registrants were to account for the enactment of both the Act and the reconciliation measure in a period ending on or after March 23, 2010,
but notes that the SEC staﬀ “does not believe that it would be appropriate for registrants to analogize to this view in any other fact patterns.”  The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our
ﬁnancial position and results of operations.
In April 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010‐14, “Accounting for Extractive Activities – Oil and Gas.”  ASU 2010‐14 amends paragraph 932‐10‐599‐1 due to SEC Release No. 33‐8995, “Modernization of Oil and Gas
Reporting”.  The amendments to the guidance on oil and gas accounting are eﬀective August 31, 2010, and did not have a signiﬁcant impact on the Company’s ﬁnancial position, as eﬀective June 1, 2008, the
Company sold its oil and gas properties in the Smoky Hill Area of Alberta, Canada.
In May 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010‐19 (ASU 2010‐19), “Foreign Currency (Topic 830):  Foreign Currency Issues:  Multiple Foreign Currency Exchange Rates”.  The amendments in this update are eﬀective as of the
announcement date of March 18, 2010.  The provisions of ASU 2010‐19 did not have a material eﬀect on the ﬁnancial position, results of operations or cash ﬂows of the Company.
On August 12, 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010‐21, “Accounting for Technical Amendments to Various SEC Rules and Schedules – Amendments to SEC Paragraphs Pursuant to Release No. 33‐9026:  Technical
Amendments to Rules, Forms, Schedules and Consolidation of Financial Reporting Policies.”  The ASU reﬂects changes made by the SEC in Final Rulemaking Release No. 33‐9026, which was issued in April 2009 and
amended SEC requirements in Regulation S‐X (17 CFR 210.1‐01 et seq.) and Regulation S‐K (17 CFR 229.10 et seq.) and made changes to ﬁnancial reporting requirements in response to the FASB’s issuance of SFAS
No. 141(R), “Business Combinations” (ASC 805), and SFAS No. 160 “Non‐controlling Interests in Consolidated Financial Statements – an amendment of ARB No. 51” (FASB ASC 810).  The provisions of ASU 2010‐21 did
have a material impact on its ﬁnancial statements.
In December 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010‐29 “Business Combinations (Topic 805): Disclosure of Supplementary Pro‐Forma Information for Business Combinations”. This amendment aﬀects any public entity as
deﬁned by Topic 805, “Business Combinations” that enters into any business combinations on an individual or aggregate basis. The comparative ﬁnancial statements should present and disclose  revenue and
earnings of the combined entity as though the business combination(s) that occurred during the current period had occurred as of the beginning of the comparable prior annual reporting period only.The
amendment also expands the supplemental pro‐forma disclosures to include a description of the nature and amount of material, non‐recurring pro‐forma adjustments directly attributable to the business
combination included in the reported pro‐forma revenue and earnings. The amendment is eﬀective prospectively for business combinations for which the acquisition date is on or after the beginning of the ﬁrst
annual reporting period beginning on or after December 15, 2010. The adoption of ASU 2010‐26 will not have a material eﬀect on the Company’s ﬁnancial statements.
There were  various other updates recently issued, most of which represented technical corrections to the accounting literature or application to speciﬁc industries and are not expected to have a material impact
on the Company’s ﬁnancial position, results of operations or cash ﬂows.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies
The ﬁnancial statements of our company have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. Because a precise determination of many assets and liabilities is
9 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
dependent upon future events, the preparation of ﬁnancial statements for a period necessarily involves the use of estimates which have been made using careful judgment. The ﬁnancial statements have, in
management’s opinion, been properly prepared within reasonable limits of materiality and within the framework of the critical accounting policies summarized below:
Estimates
Our ﬁnancial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles used in the United States.  Preparing ﬁnancial statements requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that aﬀect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses.  These estimates and assumptions are aﬀected by management’s application of accounting policies.  We
believe that understanding the basis and nature of the estimates and assumptions involved with the following aspects of our ﬁnancial statements is critical to an understanding of our ﬁnancials.  Actual results
could diﬀer from those estimates.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Fair value estimates discussed herein are based upon certain market assumptions and pertinent information available to management as of March 31, 2009. The respective carrying value of certain on‐balance‐sheet
ﬁnancial instruments approximated their fair values. These ﬁnancial instruments include cash, accounts payable, and accounts payable to a related party. Fair values were assumed to approximate carrying values
for these ﬁnancial instruments because they are short term in nature and their carrying amounts approximate fair values or they are payable on demand.
Long‐Lived Assets
In accordance with ASU 360‐10‐45, “Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long‐Lived Assets”, the carrying value of intangible assets and other long‐lived assets is reviewed on a regular basis for the existence
of facts or circumstances that may suggest impairment.  We recognize impairment when the sum of the expected undiscounted future cash ﬂows is less than the carrying amount of the asset.  Impairment losses, if
any, are measured as the excess of the carrying amount of the asset over its estimated fair value.
Oil and Gas Properties
We followed the full cost method of accounting for oil and gas operations whereby all costs associated with the exploration for and development of oil and gas reserves, whether productive or unproductive, were
capitalized. Such expenditures include land acquisition costs, drilling, exploratory dry holes, geological and geophysical costs not associated with a speciﬁc unevaluated property, completion and costs of well
equipment. Internal costs were capitalized only if they could be directly identiﬁed with acquisition, exploration, or development activities. As of March 31, 2009, we have not capitalized any internal costs.
The capitalized costs included in the full cost pool are subject to a “ceiling test”, which limits such costs to the aggregate of the estimated present value, using a ten percent discount rate, of the future net revenues
from proved reserves, based on current economic and operating conditions plus the lower of cost and estimated net realizable value of unproven properties.  Expenditures that are considered unlikely to be
recovered are written oﬀ.
On September 30, 2008, we closed on the sale of our oil and gas properties located in the Smoky Hill area of Alberta Canada.  The sale was eﬀective June 1, 2008.
On a quarterly basis our board of directors assess whether or not there is an asset impairment.  The former oil and gas activities were considered to be in the exploration, development and production stage.
We periodically review the carrying amount of our unproved oil and gas properties to determine whether current events or circumstances warrant adjustments to such carrying amounts.  In the year ended March
31, 2003, we recognized an impairment loss related to the abandonment of an initial test well.  In the year ended March 31, 2007, our company obtained an independent evaluation of its reserves and, as a
consequence, determined that there was an impairment and recognized an impairment loss.
Depletion and depreciation of the capitalized costs for producing oil and gas properties will be provided by the unit‐of‐production method based on proved oil and gas reserves.  The Company obtained an
independent evaluation as of March 31, 2008 which established proved reserves.  As a consequence, our company initiated charging depletion and depreciation in the year ended March 31, 2006.
Revenue Recognition
Oil and natural gas revenues were recorded using the sales method whereby our company recognized oil and natural gas revenue based on the amount of oil and gas sold to purchasers when title passes, the
amount is determinable and collection is reasonably assured.  Actual sales of gas are based on sales, net of the associated volume charges for processing fees and for costs associated with delivery, transportation,
marketing, and royalties in accordance with industry standards.  Operating costs and taxes are recognized in the same period of which revenue is earned.
ITEM 7A.
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURE ABOUT MARKET RISK
Not applicable
ITEM 8.  FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Our ﬁnancial statements are stated in United States Dollars (US$) and are prepared in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“US GAAP”).
The following audited ﬁnancial statements are ﬁled as part of this annual report:
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm, dated January 11, 2011
Balance Sheets at March 31, 2009 and 2008
Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the years ended March 31, 2009 and 2008, and Cumulative Amounts from June 1, 2008 (Inception of the Development Stage) through March
31, 2009
Statements of Changes in Stockholders' Equity (Deﬁcit) for the years ended March 31, 2009 and 2008, and Cumulative Amounts from June 1, 2008 (Inception of the Development Stage) through March 31,
2009
Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended March 31, 2009 and 2008, and Cumulative Amounts from June 1, 2008 (Inception of the Development Stage) through March 31, 2009
Notes to the Financial Statements
10 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
StarkSchenkein, LLP
BUSINESS ADVISORS & CPAs
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
Shareholders and Board of Directors
Nation Energy, Inc.
We have audited the accompanying balance sheets of Nation Energy, Inc., as of March 31, 2009 and 2008, and the related statements of operations, stockholders' (deﬁcit), and cash ﬂows for the years then ended
and the development stage period of June 1, 2008, to March 31, 2009.  These ﬁnancial statements are the responsibility of the Company's management.  Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these
ﬁnancial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the ﬁnancial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the ﬁnancial statements. An
audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and signiﬁcant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall ﬁnancial statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
The accompanying ﬁnancial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern.  As discussed in Note 1 to the ﬁnancial statements, the Company has suﬀered recurring
losses from operations, has no current source of operating revenues, and needs to secure ﬁnancing to remain a going concern.  These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a
going concern.  The ﬁnancial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
In our opinion, the ﬁnancial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the ﬁnancial position of Nation Energy, Inc., as of March 31, 2009 and 2008, and the results of its operations,
stockholders' (deﬁcit), and its cash ﬂows for the years then ended and the period June 1, 2008, to March 31, 2009, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
StarkSchenkein, LLP
Denver, Colorado
January 11, 2011
11 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
Nation Energy, Inc.
(A Development Stage Company)
Balance Sheets
March 31, 2009 and 2008
ASSETS
Current assets:
     Cash
     Accounts receivable
     Prepaid expenses
         Total current assets
 
Oil and gas properties, net ‐ full cost method
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' (DEFICIT)
Current liabilities:
      Accounts payable
      Accounts payable and accrued expenses ‐ related party
      Loans payable ‐ related party
             Total current liabilities
 
 Asset retirement obligation
 
 
 Stockholders' (deﬁcit)
      Preferred stock, $.001 par value; 5,000,000
        shares authorized; none outstanding
      Common stock, $.001 par value; 50,000,000
        shares authorized; 16,020,000 shares issued
        and outstanding
      Additional paid‐in capital
      Accumulated (deﬁcit) prior to the development stage
      Accumulated (deﬁcit) during the development stage
      Accumulated comprehensive (loss):   
         Foreign currency translation
March 31,
2009
$       35,973  
84,030  
5,000  
125,003  
 
‐     
 
 $     125,003
$       45,361  
16,989  
393,443  
455,793  
 
‐     
 
 
 
 
‐     
16,020  
 
 
6,868,380  
(6,839,714)  
(199,365)  
 
(176,111)  
(330,790)  
 
 $     125,003
2008
$       46,852
745,819
5,000
797,671
899,819
$  1,697,490
$     920,096
311,251
1,032,109
2,263,456
4,790
‐   
16,020
6,868,380
(7,259,277)
‐
(195,879)
(570,756)
$  1,697,490
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these ﬁnancial statements.
F‐1
12 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
Nation Energy, Inc.
(A Development Stage Company)
Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss)
For the Years Ended March 31, 2009 and 2008
and Cumulative Amounts from June 1, 2008 (Inception of the Development Stage)
For the Years Ended
March 31,
to March 31, 2009
2009
$                 100,371  
Revenue:
 
Direct expenses:
6,023  
     Royalties
59,926  
     Operating
‐     
     Depletion, depreciation and amortization
65,949  
 
 
 
34,422  
    Operating income
 
 
101,221  
General and administrative
 
 
(66,799)  
     (Loss) before other income (expense)
 
 
 
Other income (expense)
(46,899)  
   (Loss) on sale of properties
480,507  
   Gain on relief of debt
(147,543)  
   Interest expense
‐     
   Miscellaneous income
932  
   Interest income
 
 
220,198  
Net income (loss)
 
 
19,768  
Foreign currency translation gain (loss)
 
 
 $                  239,966  
Comprehensive income (loss)
 
 
 
Per share information:
 
 
 
    Weighted average number of common
16,020,000  
       shares outstanding ‐ basic and diluted
 
 
    Net earnings (loss) per common share ‐ basic and diluted  $                         0.01
‐   
‐   
‐   
‐
‐
94,382
(94,382)
$                              ‐
2008
June 1, 2008
(Inception of the
  Development Stage)
 
to March 31, 2009
 
 $                  266,037  
 
12,615  
91,180  
119,578  
223,373  
 
42,664  
 
91,422  
 
(48,758)  
 
 
‐     
‐     
(166,729)  
9,394  
936  
 
(205,157)  
 
(123,486)  
 
 $                (328,643)  
 
 
 
 
16,020,000  
 
 $                      (0.01)
‐   
‐   
(105,808)
‐   
825
$                (168,162)
(199,365)
31,203
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these ﬁnancial statements.
F‐2
13 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
Nation Energy, Inc.
(A Development Stage Company)
Statement of Changes in Stockholders' (Deficit)
for the Years Ended March 31, 2008 and 2009
and Cumulative amounts from June 1, 2008 (Inception of the Development Stage)
Balance at March 31, 2007
 
Comprehensive (loss)
 
Net (loss)
 
Balance at March 31, 2008
 
Comprehensive income
 
Net income (loss)
 
Balance at March 31, 2009
Common Stock
Number of
Shares
16,020,000  
 
‐     
 
‐     
 
16,020,000  
 
‐     
 
‐
Amount
$  16,020  
 
‐     
 
‐     
 
16,020  
 
‐     
 
‐
to March 31, 2009
Accumulated
Comprehensive
Additional
Paid‐in
Capital
$ 6,868,380  
 
‐     
 
‐     
 
6,868,380  
 
‐     
 
‐
Income (loss)
$        (72,393)  
 
(123,486)  
 
‐     
 
(195,879)  
 
19,768  
 
‐
Accumulated
(Deficit)
Prior to the
Development Stage
$     (7,054,120)
‐
(205,157)
(7,259,277)
‐
419,563
Accumulated
(Deficit)
During the
Development
Stage
`  
 
‐     
 
‐     
 
‐     
 
‐     
 
(199,365)
Total
Stockholders'
(Deficit)
$     (242,113)
(123,486)
(205,157)
(570,756)
19,768
220,198
16,020,000
$  16,020
$ 6,868,380
$       (176,111)
$     (6,839,714)
$      (199,365)
$     (330,790)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these ﬁnancial statements.
F‐3
14 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
Nation Energy, Inc.
(A Development Stage Company)
Statements of Cash Flows
For the Years Ended March 31, 2009 and 2008
and Cumulative Amounts from June 1, 2008 (Inception of the Development Stage)
to March 31, 2009
For the Year Ended
March 31,
$                     (199,365)
‐   
‐   
‐
to March 31, 2009
2008
June 1, 2008
(Inception of the
  Development Stage)
 
 
 
 $     (205,157)  
 
 
119,578  
‐     
‐     
 
(423,192)  
187,088  
43,186  
235,963  
(42,534)  
 
 
(52,944)  
‐     
(52,944)  
 
 
151,459  
‐     
151,459  
 
(24,260)  
 
31,721  
 
15,131  
 
 $          46,852  
 
 
 
 
 $                     ‐
116,255
‐   
(10,311)
(564,914)
(658,335)
‐   
1,070,021
1,070,021
‐   
(454,877)
(454,877)
31,203
(11,988)
47,961
$                          35,973
$                        358,601
 $                                     ‐
$                                    ‐   
 $                                    ‐   
 $                                    ‐   
 $                                    ‐
Cash ﬂows from operating activities:
  Net income (loss)
Adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash
  (used in) operating activities:
  Depletion and depreciation
  Loss on sale of properties
  (Gain) on relief of debt
Changes in working capital:
  (Increase) decrease in accounts receivable
  Decrease in prepaid expenses
  Increase (decrease) in accounts payable
  Increase (decrease) in accounts payable ‐ related party
Net cash (used in) operating activities
 
Cash ﬂows from investing activities:
  (Additions) to oil and gas properties
  Proceeds from sale of properties
Net cash provided by (used) in investing activities
 
Cash ﬂows from ﬁnancing activities:
   Proceeds from loan payable ‐ related party
   Payments on loan payable ‐ related party
Net cash provided by (used in) ﬁnancing activities
 
Eﬀect of currency rate change
 
Net increase (decrease) in cash
 
Beginning balance, cash
 
Ending balance, cash
 
Supplemental cash ﬂow information:
  Cash paid for interest
2009
$        220,198  
 
 
‐     
46,899  
(480,507)  
 
85,826  
‐     
(334,418)  
(183,789)  
(645,791)  
 
 
‐     
1,070,021  
1,070,021  
 
 
‐     
(454,877)  
(454,877)  
 
19,768  
 
(10,879)  
 
46,852  
 
 $           35,973  
 
 
 $        358,601
Cash paid for income taxes
 
Non‐cash investing and ﬁnancing activities:
  Accounts receivable pursuant to sale of properties
  Accounts receivable given up pursuant to sale of properties
  Oil and gas properties sold
  Accounts payable relieved pursuant to sale of properties
$                     ‐     
 
 
 
 
 $  (1,239,877)  
 $        745,819  
 $        899,819  
 $      (839,369)
$                     ‐     
 
 
 
 
 $                     ‐     
 $                     ‐     
 $                     ‐     
 $                     ‐
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these ﬁnancial statements.
F‐4
15 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
Nation Energy Inc.
(A Development Stage Company)
Notes to Financial Statements
March 31, 2009 and 2008
Note 1.  NATURE OF OPERATIONS AND ABILITY TO CONTINUE AS A GOING CONCERN
Nation Energy Inc. (the “Company”), was incorporated on April 19, 1988, in the State of Florida as Excalibur Contracting, Inc.  The Company was reincorporated as a Delaware corporation and changed its name to
Nation Energy, Inc. in February 2000. On June 13, 2003, the Company reincorporated as a Wyoming corporation.  The Company was an oil and gas exploration, development and production company with properties
located in Alberta Canada. Eﬀective June 1, 2008, the Company sold all of its oil and gas properties in the Smoky Hill area of Alberta and is currently reviewing other prospects (see Note 3).  To implement any new
business plan, signiﬁcant ﬁnancing will be required and the Company will need to be successful in its eﬀorts to identify, acquire and develop a new business venture.
The accompanying ﬁnancial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, which contemplates continuation of the Company as a going
concern.  The Company has incurred (losses) since inception of ($7,039,079), has a working capital deﬁcit of ($330,790) and is reliant on raising capital to implement its business plan.
The Company is currently in the development stage as deﬁned by Accounting Standards Codiﬁcation subtopic 915‐10 “Development Stage Entities” (“ASC 915‐10”).  Upon the sale of all of its oil and gas assets, the
Company re‐entered the exploration stage.   Consequently, its operations are subject to all the risks inherent in the establishment of a new business enterprise.  For the period from inception through June 1, 2008,
the Company has accumulated a (deﬁcit) of ($6,839,714) and a (deﬁcit) accumulated during the development stage of ($199,365).
The Company’s ability to continue as a going concern is contingent upon being able to secure ﬁnancing and attain sustained proﬁtable operations.  The Company is pursuing ﬁnancing for its operations.
The ﬁnancial statements do not include any adjustments to reﬂect the possible future eﬀects on the recoverability and classiﬁcation of assets or the amounts and classiﬁcation of liabilities that may result from the
possible inability of the Company to continue as a going concern.
Certain prior year amounts have been reclassiﬁed for comparative purposes.
Note 2.  SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid instruments purchased with a maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents.
Estimates
The preparation of ﬁnancial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that aﬀect the reported amounts of assets and
liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the ﬁnancial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.  The Company regularly
evaluates estimates and assumptions.  The Company bases its estimates and assumptions on current facts, historical experience and various other factors that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances,
the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the accrual of costs and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources.  The exact results
experienced by the Company may diﬀer materially and adversely from the Company’s estimates.
Foreign Currency Translation
The Company’s reporting currency is the United States dollar.  The functional currency of the Company is the Canadian dollar.  Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated using
the exchange rate prevailing at the balance sheet date.  Non‐monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated at rates of exchange in eﬀect at the date of the transaction. Average
monthly rates are used to translate revenues and expenses.  Gains and losses arising on translation or settlement of foreign currency denominated transactions or balances are included in the determination of
income.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Fair   value   estimates   discussed   herein   are   based   upon   certain   market   assumptions   and   pertinent   information   available   to   management   as   of   March   31,   2009.    The   respective   carrying   value   of   certain
on‐balance‐sheet ﬁnancial instruments approximated their fair values. These ﬁnancial instruments include cash, accounts receivable, accounts payable and loans payable.  Fair values were assumed to approximate
carrying values for these ﬁnancial instruments because they are short term in nature and their carrying amounts approximate fair values or they are receivable or payable on demand.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
Basic earnings (loss) per common share calculations are determined by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the year.  Diluted earnings (loss)
per common share calculations are determined by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares and dilutive common share equivalents outstanding.  During the periods when they
are anti‐dilutive, common stock equivalents, if any, are not considered in the computation.
Oil and Gas Properties
The Company followed the full cost method of accounting for oil and gas operations whereby all costs associated with the acquisition, exploration for and development of oil and gas reserves, whether productive
or unproductive, were capitalized. Such expenditures include land acquisition costs, drilling, exploratory dry holes, geological and geophysical costs not associated with a speciﬁc unevaluated property, completion
and costs of well equipment.  Internal costs were capitalized only if they were directly identiﬁed with acquisition, exploration, or development activities.  The Company did not capitalized any internal costs.
Eﬀective June 1, 2008, the Company sold its oil and gas properties in the Smoky Hill Area of Alberta, Canada, and from such date is considered a shell company (see Note 3).
Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
The Company follows SFAS No. 130, “Reporting Comprehensive Income”, which establishes standards for the reporting and display of comprehensive income and its components in the ﬁnancial statements. For the
years ended March 31, 2009 and 2008, the only components of comprehensive (loss) were foreign currency translation adjustments.
Segment Reporting
The Company follows SFAS No.131, “Disclosure about Segments of an Enterprise and Related Information”. Certain information is disclosed, per SFAS 131, based on the way management organizes ﬁnancial
information for making operating decisions and assessing performance.  The Company currently operates in one business segment and will evaluate additional segment disclosure requirements as it expands
operations.
Stock‐Based Compensation
The Company has a stock based compensation plan whereby stock options are granted in accordance with the policies of regulatory authorities.  On January 1, 2006, the Company adopted the provisions of SFAS
No.123(R), "Share Based Payments." SFAS 123(R) requires that the cost of share‐based payment transactions (including those with employees and non‐employees) be recognized in the ﬁnancial statements. SFAS
123(R) applies to all share‐based payment transactions in which an entity acquires goods or services by issuing (or oﬀering to issue) its shares, share options, or other equity instruments (except for those held by an
ESOP) or by incurring liabilities (1) in amounts based (even in part) on the price of the entity’s shares or other equity instruments, or (2) that require (or may require) settlement by the issuance of an entity’s shares
or other equity instruments.  There was no material eﬀect on the ﬁnancial statements.
Accounts Receivable
The Company uses the direct write oﬀ method for bad debts. This method expenses uncollectible accounts when they become unrealizable.  Any diﬀerence between this method and the allowance method is not
material.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues from the sale of oil and gas production were recognized when title passed, generally in the month of production.
16 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
Recent Pronouncements
With the exception of those listed below, there have been no recent accounting pronouncements or changes in accounting pronouncements, since the date of these ﬁnancial statements, that are of material
signiﬁcance or have potential material signiﬁcance, to the Company.
In May 2008, the FASB issued SFAS No. 162, “The Hierarchy of Generally Accepted Accounting Principles”.  SFAS 162 identiﬁes the sources of accounting principles and the framework for selecting the principles to be
used in the preparation of ﬁnancial statements of nongovernmental entities that are presented in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States.  It was eﬀective 60 days following
the SEC’s approval of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board amendments to AU Section 411, “The Meaning of Present Fairly in Conformity With Generally Accepted Accounting Principles”.  The adoption
of this statement did not have a material eﬀect on our company’s ﬁnancial statements.
In May 2008, the FASB issued SFAS No. 163, “Accounting for Financial Guarantee Insurance Contracts – An interpretation of FASB Statement No. 60”.  SFAS 163 requires that an insurance enterprise recognize a claim
liability prior to an event of default when there is evidence that credit deterioration has occurred in an insured ﬁnancial obligation.  It also clariﬁes how Statement 60 applies to ﬁnancial guarantee insurance
contracts, including the recognition and measurement to be used to account for premium revenue and claim liabilities, and requires expanded disclosure about ﬁnancial guarantee insurance contracts.  It is
eﬀective  for ﬁnancial  statements issued  for  ﬁscal years  beginning  after  December 15,  2008, except for  some disclosures  about  the insurance enterprise’s risk‐management  activities.   SFAS 163  requires  that
disclosures about the risk‐management activities of the insurance enterprise be eﬀective for the ﬁrst period beginning after issuance.  Except for those disclosures, earlier application is not permitted.  The adoption
of this statement did not have a material eﬀect on our company’s ﬁnancial statements.
In October 2008, the FASB issued FASB Staﬀ Position (“FSP”) FAS 157‐3, “Determining the Fair Value of a Financial Asset When the Market for That Asset Is Not Active” (“FSP FAS 157‐3”), to help constituents measure
fair value in markets that are not active. FSP FAS 157‐3 is consistent with the joint press release the FASB issued with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) on September 30, 2008, which provides general
clariﬁcation guidance on determining fair value under SFAS No. 157 when markets are inactive. FSP FAS 157‐3 was eﬀective upon issuance, including prior periods for which ﬁnancial statements had not been issued.
The adoption of FSP 157‐3 did not have a material impact on the Company’s ﬁnancial statements.
In December 2008, the SEC adopted major revisions to its rules governing oil and gas company reporting requirements. These include provisions that permit the use of new technologies to determine proved
reserves and that allow companies to disclose their probable and possible reserves to investors. These disclosure requirements also require companies to report the independence and qualiﬁcations of the person
primarily responsible for the preparation or audit of reserve estimates, and to ﬁle reports when a third party is relied upon to prepare or audit reserves estimates. The new rules also require that oil and gas
reserves be reported and the full‐cost ceiling value calculated using an average price based upon the prior 12‐month period. The new oil and gas reporting requirements are eﬀective for annual reports on Form
10‐K for ﬁscal years ending on or after December 31, 2009, with early adoption not permitted. Adoption did not have a material impact on our ﬁnancial position, results of operations and ﬁnancial disclosures, as we
disposed of our oil and gas interests eﬀective June 1, 2008 (see Note 3)).
In April 2009, the FASB issued two FSP’s intended to provide additional application guidance and enhanced disclosures regarding fair value measurements and impairments of securities.  FSP No. FAS 157‐4,
“Determining Fair Value When the Volume or Level of Activity for the Asset or Liability Have Signiﬁcantly Decreased and Identifying Transactions That Are Not Orderly, as codiﬁed in FASB ASC topic Fair Value
Measurement and Disclosure”, provides additional guidelines for estimating fair value in accordance with FASB SFAS No. 157, Fair Value Measurements (“SFAS 157”).  Adoption did not have a material impact on our
ﬁnancial position, results of operations and ﬁnancial disclosures.
In June 2009, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Codiﬁcation (“ASC”) 855 (previously SFAS No. 165, “Subsequent Events”), which establishes general standards for and disclosures of events that occur after the
balance sheet date but before the ﬁnancial statements are issued or available to be issued.  It is eﬀective for interim and annual periods ending after June 15, 2009.  There was no material impact on the Company’s
ﬁnancial statements, upon the adoption of this standard.
In June 2009, the FASB issued ASC 810 (previously SFAS No. 167) for determining whether to consolidate a variable interest entity.  These amended standards eliminate a mandatory quantitative approach to
determine whether a variable interest gives the entity a controlling ﬁnancial interest in a variable interest entity in favour of a qualitatively focused analysis, and require an ongoing reassessment of whether an
entity is the primary beneﬁciary.  This Statement is eﬀective for reporting periods beginning after November 15, 2009.  Adoption of this ASC did not impact our ﬁnancial statements.
In June 2009, the FASB issued SFAS No. 168, “The FASB Accounting Standards Codiﬁcation and the Hierarchy of Generally Accepted Accounting Principles”, as codiﬁed in FASB ASC topic “Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles”, a replacement of FASB Statement No. 162.  This standard establishes only two levels of GAAP, authoritative and non‐authoritative.  This ASC was not intended to change or alter existing
GAAP, and the Company’s adoption eﬀective September 1, 2009, did not have any impact on its ﬁnancial statements other than to modify certain existing disclosures.
In June 2009, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2009‐02, “Omnibus Update—Amendments to Various Topics for Technical Corrections”.  This omnibus ASU detailed amendments to various topics
for technical corrections.  The adoption of ASU 2009‐02 did not have a material impact on our ﬁnancial statements.
In August 2009, the FASB issued ASU  2009‐03, “SEC Update — Amendments to Various Topics Containing SEC Staﬀ Accounting Bulletins”.  This ASU updated cross‐references to Codiﬁcation text.  The adoption of
ASU 2009‐03 did not have a material impact on our ﬁnancial statements.
In August 2009, the FASB issued ASU 2009‐05, which amends ASC Topic 820, Measuring Liabilities at Fair Value, which provides additional guidance on the measurement of liabilities at fair value.  These amended
standards clarify that in circumstances in which a quoted price in an active market for the identical liabilities is not available, we are required to use the quoted price of the identical liability when traded as an
asset, quoted prices for similar liabilities, or quoted prices for similar liabilities when traded as assets.  If these quoted prices are not available, we are required to use another valuation technique, such as income
approach or a market approach.  These amended standards are eﬀective from October 1, 2009, and did not have a signiﬁcant impact on our ﬁnancial statements.
In September 2009, the FASB issued ASU 2009‐06, “Income Taxes” (Topic 740), ”Implementation Guidance on Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes and Disclosure Amendments for Non‐public Entities”, which
provides implementation guidance on accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, as well as eliminates certain disclosure requirements for non‐public entities.  This update is eﬀective for interim and annual periods
ending after September 15, 2009. The adoption of this standard did not have an impact on the Company’s ﬁnancial position and results of operations since it provides only implementation and disclosure
amendments.
In September 2009, the FASB issued ASU  2009‐07, “Technical Corrections to SEC Paragraphs”.  This corrected various SEC paragraphs in response to comment letters.  The adoption of ASU 2009‐07 did not have
material impact on our ﬁnancial statements.
In September 2009, the FASB issued ASU  2009‐12, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures (Topic 820) ‐ Investments in Certain Entities That Calculate Net Asset Value per Share (or Its Equivalent)”. This ASU
amends Subtopic 820‐10, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures – Overall”, to permit a reporting entity to measure the fair value of certain investments on the basis of the net asset value per share of the
investment (or its equivalent). This ASU also requires new disclosures, by major category of investments including the attributes of investments within the scope of this amendment to the Codiﬁcation. The guidance
in this update is eﬀective for interim and annual periods ending after December 15, 2009. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on the Company’s ﬁnancial position and results of
operations.
In October 2009, the FASB issued guidance on revenue recognition that became eﬀective for the Company beginning April 1, 2010, with earlier adoption permitted.  Under the new guidance on arrangements that
include software elements, tangible products that have software components that are essential to the functionality of the tangible product will no longer be within the scope of the software revenue recognition
guidance, and software‐enabled products will now be subject to other relevant revenue recognition guidance.  In addition, the FASB issued guidance on revenue arrangements with multiple deliverables that are
outside the scope of the software revenue recognition guidance.  Under the new guidance, when vendor speciﬁc objective evidence or third party evidence for deliverables in an arrangement cannot be determined,
a best estimate of the selling price is required to separate deliverables and allocate arrangements consideration using the relative selling price method.  The new guidance includes new disclosure requirements on
how the application of the relative selling price method aﬀects the timing and amount of revenue recognition.  Adoption of this new guidance did not have a material impact on our ﬁnancial statements.
In December 2009, the FASB issued ASU 2010‐06 “Fair Market Value Measurements and Disclosures” (Topic 820) “Improving Disclosures about Fair Value Measurements”.  This ASU requires some new disclosures and
clariﬁes some existing disclosure requirements about fair value measurement as set forth in ASC Subtopic 820‐10.  The FASB’s objective is to improve these disclosures and, thus, increase the transparency in
ﬁnancial reporting.  The adoption of this ASU did not have a material impact on the Company’s ﬁnancial statements.
In January 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010‐03, “Oil and Gas Reserve Estimation and Disclosures” (“ASU 2010‐03”), which provides amendments to ASC topic “Extractive Activities‐Oil and Gas”. The objective of ASU
2010‐03 is to  align  the oil  and  gas  reserve  estimation   and  disclosure  requirements  of the  ASC  with  the requirements in  the  SEC’s “Modernization  of Oil  and  Gas Reporting: Final  Rule”.  Similar  to  the  SEC
requirements, the FASB requirements were eﬀective for periods ending on or after December 31, 2009.  The SEC introduced a new deﬁnition of oil and gas producing activities which allows companies to include
volumes in their reserve base from unconventional resources.  The FASB also addresses the impact of changes in the SEC’s rules and deﬁnitions on accounting for oil and gas producing activities.  Initial adoption did
not have an impact on our Company’s ﬁnancial statements as we disposed of our oil and gas interests eﬀective June 1, 2008 (see Note 3).
In January 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010‐04, “Accounting for Various Topics – Technical Corrections to SEC Paragraphs“. ASU 2010‐04 makes technical corrections to existing SEC guidance, including the following
topics: accounting for subsequent investments, termination of an interest rate swap, issuance of ﬁnancial statements ‐ subsequent events, use of residential method to value acquired assets other than goodwill,
adjustments in assets and liabilities for holding gains and losses, and selections of discount rate used for measuring deﬁned beneﬁt obligation. The adoption of ASU 2010‐04 did not have a material impact on the
Company’s ﬁnancial statements.
In January 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010‐06, “Improving Disclosures about Fair Value Measurements” (“ASU 2010‐06”), which provides amendments to ASC topic “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures”. This
will provide more robust disclosures about (i) the diﬀerent classes of assets and liabilities measured at fair value, (ii) the valuation techniques and inputs used, (iii) the activity in Level 3 fair value measurements,
and (iv) the transfers between Levels 1, 2 and 3.  ASU 2010‐06 is eﬀective for ﬁscal years and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2009.  Adoption did not have a material impact on our ﬁnancial
statements.
In February 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010‐09 (ASU 2010‐09), "Subsequent Events (Topic 855)."  The amendments remove the requirements for an SEC ﬁler to disclose a date, in both issued and revised ﬁnancial
statements, through which subsequent events have been reviewed.  Revised ﬁnancial statements include ﬁnancial statements revised as a result of either correction of an error or retrospective application of U.S.
17 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
GAAP.  ASU 2010‐09 is eﬀective for interim or annual ﬁnancial periods ending after June 15, 2010.  Adoption of ASU 2010‐09 did not have a material eﬀect on the ﬁnancial position, results of operations or cash
ﬂows of the Company.
In April 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010‐12. “Income Taxes” (Topic 740). ASU No.2010‐12 amends FASB Accounting Standard Codiﬁcation subtopic 740‐10 “Income Taxes” to include paragraph 740‐10‐S99‐4. On March
30, 2010 The President signed the “Health Care & Education Aﬀordable Care Act” reconciliation bill that amends its previous Act signed on March 23, 2010. FASB ASC topic 740, “Income Taxes”, requires the
measurement of current and deferred tax liabilities and assets to be based on provisions of enacted tax law. The eﬀects of future changes in tax laws are not anticipated.” Therefore, the diﬀerent enactment dates
of the Act and reconciliation measure may aﬀect registrants with a period‐end that falls between March 23, 2010 (enactment date of the Act), and March 30, 2010 (enactment date of the reconciliation measure).
However, the announcement states that the SEC would not object if such registrants were to account for the enactment of both the Act and the reconciliation measure in a period ending on or after March 23, 2010,
but notes that the SEC staﬀ “does not believe that it would be appropriate for registrants to analogize to this view in any other fact patterns.” The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on the
Company’s ﬁnancial position and results of operations.
In April 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010‐14, "Accounting for Extractive Activities — Oil & Gas."  ASU 2010‐14 amends paragraph 932‐10‐S99‐1 due to SEC Release No. 33‐8995, "Modernization of Oil and Gas
Reporting”.  The amendments to the guidance on oil and gas accounting are eﬀective August 31, 2010, and did not have a signiﬁcant impact on the Company's ﬁnancial position, as eﬀective June 1, 2008, the
Company sold its oil and gas properties in the Smoky Hill Area of Alberta, Canada (see Note 3).
In May 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010‐19 (ASU 2010‐19), “Foreign Currency (Topic 830): Foreign Currency Issues: Multiple Foreign Currency Exchange Rates”. The amendments in this update are eﬀective as of the
announcement date of March 18, 2010. The provisions of ASU 2010‐19 did not have a material eﬀect on the ﬁnancial position, results of operations or cash ﬂows of the Company.
On   August   2,  2010,  the  FASB  issued   ASU  2010‐21,  “Accounting  for  Technical   Amendments  to   Various  SEC  Rules  and   Schedules—Amendments  to   SEC   Paragraphs  Pursuant  to   Release  No.  33‐9026:  Technical
Amendments to Rules, Forms, Schedules and Codiﬁcation of Financial Reporting Policies.” The ASU reﬂects changes made by the SEC in Final Rulemaking Release No. 33‐9026 , which was issued in April 2009 and
amended SEC requirements in Regulation S‐X ( 17 CFR 210.1‐01 et seq.) and Regulation S‐K ( 17 CFR 229.10 et seq.) and made changes to ﬁnancial reporting requirements in response to the FASB's issuance of SFAS
No. 141(R) , “Business Combinations” (ASC 805), and SFAS No. 160, “Non‐controlling Interests in Consolidated Financial Statements—an amendment of ARB No. 51” ( FASB ASC 810 ).   The provisions of ASU 2010‐21
did not have a material impact on its ﬁnancial statements.
The Company has implemented all new accounting pronouncements that are in eﬀect and that may impact its ﬁnancial statements and does not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements
that have been issued that might have a material impact on its ﬁnancial position or results of operations.
Note 3.  Oil and Gas Properties
On September 18, 2008, Nation and Netco Energy, Inc., entered into a sales and purchase agreement to sell their assets in the Smoky Area of Alberta for total net proceeds of CDN $1,600,000.  The agreement was
eﬀective June 1, 2008. The sale of the oil and gas assets closed September 18, 2008, with a second closing in April 2009, for total net proceeds to Nation of CDN $1,102,939 (US $1,029,385) from Encana, plus CDN
$160,000 (US $ 129,324) from Netco.  The Company is now considered a shell company.
Note 4.  Stockholders’ Equity (Deﬁcit)
Equity Incentive Plan
On May 6, 1999 the Board of Directors adopted a stock option plan (“The Plan”) which was subsequently approved by over 50% of our shareholders.  The Plan allows for the issuance of incentive stock options to
employees, consultants, directors, and others providing service of special signiﬁcance to our company.  The Plan is administered by the Board of Directors.  The Plan provides for the issuance of up to 2,500,000
options.  The exercise price of each option shall be determined by the Board or by the CEO with reference to such factors as current fair market value of the common stock, net book value per share, other
remuneration already being received by the optionee.  No option may be exercised more than ﬁve years from the date of grant and they vest on the date granted.  The Plan does not have an expiry date.
On February 26, 2003, options to purchase a total of 225,000 shares of Common Stock at an exercise price of $0.10 per share were granted to two oﬃcers pursuant to the Plan.  Subsequently, on January 20, 2004,
the Company cancelled 150,000 share options previously granted to one of the oﬃcers.  The Company’s Common Stock was trading at $0.115 per share on the date of the grant.  The fair value of the options was
estimated on the date of the grant utilizing the Black‐Scholes option pricing model with the following weighted average assumptions: expected life of the options of 5‐years, expected volatility of 114.65%, risk‐free
interest rate of 4.2%, and no dividend yield.  The weighted average fair value for the options granted was approximately $0.12 per share.
The changes in the outstanding stock options during the years ended March 31, 2009 and March 31, 2008 are summarized as follows:
Beginning of year
Granted
 Exercised
 Expired
End of period
March 31, 2009
 
 
 
Shares
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price
March 31, 2008
Shares
75,000
          Nil
          Nil
(75,000)
           Nil
Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price
$0.10
At March 31, 2009 and 2008, there were no options outstanding.  The options expired on February 26, 2008.
Note 5.  Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under SFAS 109, "Accounting for Income Taxes", which requires use of the liability method.  SFAS 109 provides that deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded based on
the diﬀerences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts for ﬁnancial reporting purposes, referred to as temporary diﬀerences.  Deferred tax assets and liabilities at the end of each
period are determined using the currently enacted tax rates applied to taxable income in the periods in which the deferred tax assets and liabilities are expected to be settled or realized.
The provision (beneﬁt) for income taxes consists of the following components:
$
Current
Deferred   $
March 31,
2009    
‐‐‐   $
‐‐‐        $
2008  
‐‐‐  
‐‐‐
The tax eﬀects of temporary diﬀerences and carry forwards that give rise to signiﬁcant portions of deferred tax assets and liabilities consist of the following:
Deferred tax assets:
Net operating loss carryforwards
 
Less valuation allowance
$
March 31,
2009
$                    $1,799,000
(1,799,000
‐‐‐
)
$
$
2008
$1,874,000  
 
(1,874,000 )
‐‐‐
A reconciliation of the statutory U.S. federal rate and eﬀective rates is as follows:
Statutory U.S. federal rate
State income taxes
Total
34.00%
     ‐‐‐ %
34.00%
The Company’s provision for income taxes diﬀers from applying the statutory United States federal income tax rate to income before income. The primary diﬀerences result from net operating losses.
Net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $5,290,000 will expire through 2029.  The deferred tax asset has been fully reserved at March 31, 2009.  The change in the valuation allowance during the year
ended March 31, 2009 was $(75,000).
Note 6.  Related Party Transactions
18 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
(a) Administrative Services Agreement
During March 2002, the Company entered into a verbal agreement with a related party, Caravel Management Corp. (“Caravel”), in which Caravel will provide administrative services on a month‐to‐month basis.  On
January 1, 2009, the Company entered into a written agreement revising the previous verbal agreement with Caravel (see Note 7).  The agreement provides for administrative services, oﬃce rent and supplies for US
$7,865 per month.  Total expenses recognized under this agreement for the years ended March 31, 2009 and 2008 were $62,575 and $50,760 respectively.
(b) Loans Payable – Related Party
On March 31, 2006, the Company entered into a revised Demand Promissory Note, which replaces all previous loan agreements with a related party.  The Demand Promissory Note, in the amount of CDN $980,905
bears interest at 15% per annum, calculated and compounded monthly, and is payable quarterly.  Any principal amount outstanding under the loan is payable upon demand.  The loan is payable in Canadian
dollars.  During the year ended March 31, 2009, the Company repaid a portion of the Demand Note in the aggregate amount of CDN $1,115,000 (US $813,478), allocating US $454,877 to principal and US $358,601 to
accrued interest.  As of March 31, 2009, the balance of the loan payable was CDN $477,175 (US $393,443).
Note 7.  Concentration of Customers
Prior to June 1, 2008, the Company marketed all of its products through one customer, Churchill Energy.  Churchill Energy was the operator of the Bolton Property. As discussed in Note 3, eﬀective June 1, 2008, the
Company sold its oil and gas assets and has no further operations.
Note 8.  Subsequent Events
In April 2009, the Company received its ﬁnal payment from Encana pursuant to the sale of its oil and gas properties, of CDN $150,894 (US $ 88,689).
During May and June 2009, the Company made aggregate payments to related party Caravel of CDN  $110,000, allocated in US$ to the payment of accounts payable of $26,030, loan principal of $53,190 and accrued
interest of $16,117.
Eﬀective November 1, 2010 the Company revised its agreement with Caravel to provide administrative services for $3,500 per month.
The Company has evaluated all subsequent transactions from the balance sheet date through the date of issuance of this report, and has determined that all material subsequent events have been disclosed
above.
ITEM 9.  CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
None.
ITEM 9A (T).  CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
Evaluation of disclosure controls and procedures and remediation
As required by Rule 13a‐15 under the Securities Exchange Act, in connection with this annual report on Form 10‐K, under the direction of our Chief Executive Oﬃcer and Chief Financial Oﬃcer, we have evaluated our
disclosure controls and procedures as of March 31, 2009, including the remedial actions discussed below, we have concluded that, as of March 31, 2009, our disclosure controls and procedures were ineﬀective as
discussed in greater detail below.  As of the date of this ﬁling, we are still in the process of remediating such material weaknesses in our internal controls and procedures.  Additionally, we are currently inactive as
we seek new business opportunities.
It should be noted that while our management believes our disclosure controls and procedures provide a reasonable level of assurance, they do not expect that our disclosure controls and procedures or internal
controls will prevent all error and all fraud.  A control system, no matter how well conceived or operated, can provide only reasonable, not absolute, assurance that the objectives of the control system are met.
 Further, the design of a control system must reﬂect the fact that there are resource constraints, and the beneﬁts of controls must be considered relative to their costs.  Because of the inherent limitations in all
control systems, no evaluation of controls can provide absolute assurance that all control issues and instances of fraud, if any, within our company have been detected.  These inherent limitations include the
realities that judgments in decision making can be faulty, and that breakdowns can occur because of simple error or mistake.  Additionally, controls can be circumvented by the individual acts of some persons, by
collusion of two or more people, or by management override of the controls.  The design of any system of internal control is based in part upon certain assumptions about the likelihood of future events, and there
can be no assurance that any design will succeed in achieving its stated goals under all potential future conditions.  Over time, controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or the degree of
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.  Because of the inherent limitations in a cost‐eﬀective control system, misstatements due to error or fraud may occur and not be detected.
Management’s annual report on internal control over ﬁnancial reporting
Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining internal control over ﬁnancial reporting, as such term is deﬁned in Exchange Act Rule 13a‐15(f).  Our management evaluated, under the supervision and
with the participation of our Chief Executive Oﬃcer, the eﬀectiveness of our internal control over ﬁnancial reporting as of March 31, 2009.
Based on its evaluation under the framework in Internal Control – Integrated Framework, issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission, our management concluded that our
internal control over ﬁnancial reporting was not eﬀective as of March 31, 2009, due to the existence of signiﬁcant deﬁciencies constituting material weaknesses, as described in greater detail below.  A material
weakness is a control deﬁciency, or combination of control deﬁciencies, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the annual or interim ﬁnancial statements will not be prevented
or detected on a timely basis.
This annual report does not include an attestation report from our company’s independent registered public accounting ﬁrm regarding internal control over ﬁnancial reporting.  Management’s report was not
subject to attestation by our company’s independent registered public accounting ﬁrm pursuant to temporary rules of the SEC  that permit our company to provide only management’s report in this annual report.
Limitations on Eﬀectiveness of Controls
Our Chief Executive Oﬃcer and Chief Financial Oﬃcer do not expect that our disclosure controls or our internal control over ﬁnancial reporting will prevent all errors and all fraud.  A control system, no matter how
well conceived and operated, can provide only reasonable, not absolute, assurance that the objectives of the control system are met.
Further, the design of a control system must reﬂect the fact that there are resource constraints, and the beneﬁts of controls must be considered relative to their costs.  Because of the inherent limitations in all
control systems, no evaluation of controls can provide absolute assurance that all control issues and instances of fraud, if any, within our company have been detected.  These inherent limitations include the
realities that judgments in decision‐making can be faulty, and that breakdowns can occur because of simple error or mistake.  Additional controls can be circumvented by the individual acts of some persons, by
collusion of two or more people, or by management override of the controls.  The design of any system of controls also is based in part upon certain assumptions about the likelihood of future events, and there
can be no assurance that any design will succeed in achieving its stated goals under all potential future conditions; over time, controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or the degree of
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.  Because of the inherent limitations in a cost‐eﬀective control system, misstatements due to error or fraud may occur and not be detected.
Material Weaknesses Identiﬁed
In connection with the preparation of our ﬁnancial statements for the year ended March 31, 2009, certain signiﬁcant deﬁciencies in internal control became evident to management that represent material
weaknesses, including:
i.
ii.
Lack of a suﬃcient number of independent directors for our board and audit committee.  We currently have no independent director on our board, which is comprised of one director.  As a publicly‐traded
company, we strive to have a majority of our board of directors be independent;
Insuﬃcient segregation of duties in our ﬁnance and accounting functions due to limited personnel.  During the year ended March 31, 2009, we had limited staﬀ that performed nearly all aspects of our
ﬁnancial reporting process, including, but not limited to, access to the underlying accounting records and systems, the ability to post and record journal entries and responsibility for the preparation of the
ﬁnancial statement.  This creates certain incompatible duties and a lack of review over the ﬁnancial reporting process that would likely result in a failure to detect errors in spreadsheets, calculations, or
assumptions used to compile the ﬁnancial statements and related disclosures as ﬁled with the SEC.  These control deﬁciencies could result in a material misstatement of our interim or annual ﬁnancial
statements that would not be prevented or detected;
iii.
Insuﬃcient corporate governance policies.  Although we have a code of ethics which provides broad guidelines for corporate governance, our corporate governance activities and processes are not always
formally documented.  Speciﬁcally, decisions made by the board to be carried out by management should be documented and communicated on a timely basis to reduce the likelihood of any
misunderstandings regarding key decisions aﬀecting our operations and management; and
Plan for Remediation of Material Weaknesses
We intend to take appropriate and reasonable steps to make the necessary improvements to remediate these deﬁciencies.  We intend to consider the results of our remediation eﬀorts and related testing as part of
our year‐end 2010 assessment of the eﬀectiveness of our internal control over ﬁnancial reporting.
19 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
Subject to receipt of additional ﬁnancing, we intend to undertake the below remediation measures to address the material weaknesses described in this annual report.  Such remediation activities include the
following:
1. We continue to recruit at least one, preferably two or more, additional independent board members to join our board of directors and audit committee at such time as additional board members are
retained; and
2. We intend to continue to update the documentation of our internal control processes, including formal risk assessment of our ﬁnancial reporting processes.
Changes in Internal Controls over Financial Reporting
There were no changes in our internal control over ﬁnancial reporting during the fourth quarter of our ﬁscal year ended March 31, 2009 that have materially aﬀected or are reasonably likely to materially aﬀect, our
internal control over ﬁnancial reporting.
ITEM 9B.  OTHER INFORMATION
None
ITEM 10.  DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Directors and Executive Oﬃcers
PART III
Name
Position Held with our Company
Age
Date First
Elected or
Appointed
John R. Hislop
Financial Oﬃcer, Secretary and Director
58
June 4, 1999
Chairman of the Board, President, Chief Executive Oﬃcer, Chief
Summary Background
The following is a brief account of the education and business experience during the past ﬁve years of each director and executive oﬃcer, indicating the principal occupation during that period, and the name and
principal business of the organization in which such occupation and employment were carried out.
John R. Hislop, chairman of the board, president, chief executive oﬃcer, chief ﬁnancial oﬃcer, secretary and director
Mr. Hislop has been the President and Chief Executive Oﬃcer of our company since October 22, 2003 and the Chairman, Chief Financial Oﬃcer, Secretary and a Director of our company since June 1999.  Since 1990,
Mr. Hislop has been working as an independent ﬁnancial consultant and has served as an oﬃcer and director of various emerging growth companies.  Mr. Hislop is currently serving as a Director and/or Oﬃcer on
the following companies: Director of Q Investments Ltd., (formerly Cubix Investments Ltd.), an investment holding company for various public oil and gas companies, since February 1994; Director of XXL Energy
Corp. (formerly Exxel Energy Corp.) since October 15, 2001, Chairman of the Board of XXL Energy Corp. (formerly Exxel Energy Corp.) since July 27, 2006, President and Chief Executive Oﬃcer of XXL Energy Corp.
(formerly Exxel Energy Corp.) since December 31, 2008; and has also served as President and Chief Executive Oﬃcer of XXL Energy Corp. (formerly Exxel Energy Corp.) from October 15, 2001 to July 27, 2006 and
served as Chief Financial Oﬃcer of XXL Energy Corp. (formerly Exxel Energy Corp.) from October 15, 2001 to October 2, 2003; Director of Patriot Petroleum Corp. since April 7, 1999 and served as President and Chief
Executive Oﬃcer of Patriot Petroleum Corp. from October 22, 2003 to November 26, 2010.  In the past ﬁve years, Mr. Hislop has also served as a director of the following companies: Warrior Energy N.V. (formerly
Luxmatic Technologies N.V) from October 1997 to February 2008 (Mr. Hislop also served as President from October 1997 to February 2008 and Chief Executive Oﬃcer from November 2003 to February 2008); and
Bucking Horse Energy Inc. (formerly NRG Investments Inc.) from April 2006 to March 2008 (Mr. Hislop also served as President and Chief Executive Oﬃcer from April 2006 to March 2008).  Mr. Hislop trained as a
Chartered Accountant with Ernst & Young and has a bachelor of Commerce in Finance from the University of British Columbia.
We believe Mr. Hislop is qualiﬁed to serve on our board of directors because of his knowledge of our company’s history and current operations, which he gained from working for our company as described above,
in addition to his education and business experience as described above.
Term of Oﬃce
The directors serve until their successors are elected by the shareholders.  Vacancies on the Board of Directors may be ﬁlled by appointment of the majority of the continuing directors.  The executive oﬃcers serve
at the discretion of the Board of Directors.
Committees of the Board
We do not have an audit or compensation committee at this time.
Family Relationships
None
Signiﬁcant Employees
We have no signiﬁcant employees other than the sole director and oﬃcer described above.
Involvement in Certain Legal Proceedings
Our directors, executive oﬃcers and control persons have not been involved in any of the following events during the past ten years:
1.
2.
any bankruptcy petition ﬁled by or against any business of which such person was a general partner or executive oﬃcer either at the time of the bankruptcy or within two years prior to that time;
any conviction in a criminal proceeding or being subject to a pending criminal proceeding (excluding traﬃc violations and other minor oﬀenses);
3. being subject to any order, judgment, or decree, not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, of any court of competent jurisdiction, permanently or temporarily enjoining, barring,
suspending or otherwise limiting his involvement in any type of business, securities or banking activities; or
4. being found by a court of competent jurisdiction (in a civil action), the Securities and Exchange Commission or the Commodity Futures Trading Commission to have violated a federal or state
securities or commodities law, and the judgment has not been reversed, suspended, or vacated;
5. being the subject of, or party to, any federal or state judicial or administrative order, judgment, decree, or ﬁnding not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated relating to an alleged violation
of: (i) any federal or state securities or commodities law or regulation; or (ii) any law or regulation respecting ﬁnancial institutions or insurance companies including, but not limited to, a temporary
or permanent injunction, order of disgorgement or restitution, civil money penalty or temporary or permanent cease‐and‐desist order, or removal or prohibition order, or (iii) any law or regulation
prohibiting mail or wire fraud or fraud in connection with any business entity; or
6. being the subject of, or a party to, any sanction or order, not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, of any self‐regulatory organization (as deﬁned in Section 3(a) (26) of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934), any registered entity (as deﬁned in Section 1(a) (29) of the Commodity Exchange Act), or any equivalent exchange, association, entity or organization that has disciplinary
authority over its members or persons associated with a member.
Audit Committee Financial Expert
We are a reporting issuer in the Province of British Columbia, National Instrument 52‐110 of the Canadian Securities Administrators requires our company, as a venture issuer, to disclose annually in our annual
report certain information concerning the constitution of our audit committee and our relationship with our independent auditor.  Our board of directors has determined that it does not have an audit committee
member who qualiﬁes as an "audit committee ﬁnancial expert" as deﬁned in Item 407(d)(5)(ii) of Regulation S‐K.  Our audit committee is composed of our directors and oﬃcers.  We believe that the audit
committee members  are  capable  of  analyzing  and  evaluating our  ﬁnancial statements  and  understanding  internal controls  and  procedures  for  ﬁnancial  reporting.  In  addition, we  believe  that  retaining an
independent director who would qualify as an "audit committee ﬁnancial expert" would be overly costly and burdensome and is not warranted in our circumstances given the early stages of our development and
the fact that we have generated minimum revenues to date.
Since the commencement of our company’s most recently completed ﬁnancial year, our company has not relied on the exemptions contained in sections 2.4 or 8 of National Instrument 52‐110.  Section 2.4 (De
Minimis Non‐audit Services) provides an exemption from the requirement that the audit committee must pre‐approve all non‐audit services to be provided by the auditor, where the total amount of fees relates to
20 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
the non‐audit services are not expected to exceed 5% of the total fees payable to the auditor in the ﬁscal year in which the non‐audit services were provided.  Section 8 (Exemptions) permits a company to apply to
a securities regulatory authority for an exemption from the requirements of National Instrument 52‐110 in whole or in part.
The audit committee has adopted speciﬁc policies and procedures for the engagement of non‐audit services as set out in the Audit Committee Charter of our company.  A copy of our company’s Audit Committee
Charter is ﬁled as an exhibit to this annual report on Form 10‐K.
Code of Ethics
Eﬀective July 13, 2004, our company's board of directors adopted a Code of Business Conduct and Ethics that applies to, among other persons, members of our board of directors, our company's oﬃcers including
our president (being our principal executive oﬃcer) and our company's chief ﬁnancial oﬃcer (being our principal ﬁnancial and accounting oﬃcer), contractors, consultants and advisors.  As adopted, our Code of
Business Conduct and Ethics sets forth written standards that are designed to deter wrongdoing and to promote:
(1)  honest and ethical conduct, including the ethical handling of actual or apparent conﬂicts of interest between personal and professional relationships;
(2)  full, fair, accurate, timely, and understandable disclosure in reports and documents that we ﬁle with, or submit to, the Securities and Exchange Commission and in other public communications made by us;
(3)  compliance with applicable governmental laws, rules and regulations;
(4)  the prompt internal reporting of violations of the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics to an appropriate person or persons identiﬁed in the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics; and
(5)  accountability for adherence to the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics.
Our Code of Business Conduct and Ethics requires, among other things, that all of our company's personnel shall be accorded full access to our president and secretary with respect to any matter which may arise
relating to the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics.  Further, all of our company's personnel are to be accorded full access to our company's board of directors if any such matter involves an alleged breach of the
Code of Business Conduct and Ethics by our company oﬃcers.
In addition, our Code of Business Conduct and Ethics emphasizes that all employees, and particularly managers and/or supervisors, have a responsibility for maintaining ﬁnancial integrity within our company,
consistent with generally accepted accounting principles, and federal, provincial and state securities laws. Any employee who becomes aware of any incidents involving ﬁnancial or accounting manipulation or other
irregularities, whether by witnessing the incident or being told of it, must report it to his or her immediate supervisor or to our company's president or secretary.  If the incident involves an alleged breach of the
Code of Business Conduct and Ethics by the president or secretary, the incident must be reported to any member of our board of directors.  Any failure to report such inappropriate or irregular conduct of others is
to be treated as a severe disciplinary matter.  It is against our company policy to retaliate against any individual who reports in good faith the violation or potential violation of our company's Code of Business
Conduct and Ethics by another.
Our Code of Business Conduct and Ethics was ﬁled with the Securities and Exchange Commission as Exhibit 14.1 to our annual report on Form 10‐KSB ﬁled on July 15, 2004.  We will provide a copy of the Code of
Business Conduct and Ethics to any person without charge, upon request.  Requests can be sent to: Nation Energy Inc., Suite 900 ‐ 609 West Hastings Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, V6B 4W4.
Section 16(a) Beneﬁcial Ownership Compliance
Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, requires our executive oﬃcers and directors and persons who own more than 10% of a registered class of our equity securities to ﬁle with the
Securities and Exchange Commission initial statements of beneﬁcial ownership, reports of changes in ownership and annual reports concerning their ownership of our common stock and other equity securities, on
Forms 3, 4 and 5 respectively.  Executive oﬃcers, directors and greater than 10% shareholders are required by the Securities and Exchange Commission regulations to furnish our company with copies of all Section
16(a) reports they ﬁle.
To the best of our knowledge, based solely on our review of the copies of such forms received by us, or written representations from certain reporting persons, we believe that all ﬁling requirements applicable to
our executive oﬃcers, directors and greater than 10% shareholders were complied with other than as disclosed in the table below
Name
Number of Late Reports
Number of Transactions Not
Reported on a Timely Basis
Failure to File Requested
Forms
John R Hislop
3
3
‐
ITEM 11.  EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
The following table summarizes the compensation paid to our president and chief executive oﬃcer during the last ﬁscal year.  No other oﬃcers or directors received annual compensation in excess of $100,000
during the last three complete ﬁscal years.
Annual Compensation
Long Term Compensation(1) Pay‐outs
Name and Principal Position
Year
Salary
Bonus
John Hislop(2)
President, Chief Executive Oﬃcer,
Secretary, Chief Financial Oﬃcer
and Director
2009
2008
2007
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Other Annual
Compensation(1)
Securities
Under
Options/SAR's
Granted
Restricted
Shares or
Restricted
Share Units
LTIP
Pay‐outs
$62,575(3)
$50,760(3)
$51,000(3)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
(1)  The value of perquisites and other personal beneﬁts, securities and property for the named executive oﬃcers that do not exceed the lesser of $50,000 or 10% of the total of the annual salary and bonus is not
reported herein.
(2) Mr. Hislop was appointed the president and chief executive oﬃcer of our company on October 22, 2003.
(3)  On March 31, 2008, a verbal arrangement was eﬀective with Mr. Hislop, for Caravel Management Corp. to receive remuneration in the amount of $4,230 per month for services, oﬃce rent, administration and
supplies. During the ﬁscal year ended March 31, 2009 Mr. Hislop received $4,250 per month until January 1, 2009.  January 1, 2009 through March 31, 2009 he received $7,865.  This arrangement was between our
company and Caravel Management Corp., a private management company owned by Mr. Hislop.
As of the date of this annual report, we have no compensatory plan or arrangement with respect to any oﬃcer that results or will result in the payment of compensation in any form from the resignation,
retirement or any other termination of employment of such oﬃcer's employment with our company, from a change in control of our company or a change in such oﬃcer's responsibilities following a change in
control.
Employment or Consulting Agreements
Other than as described below, we have not entered into any employment or consulting agreements with any of our current oﬃcers, directors or employees.
On January 1, 2009 we entered into a written contract with Caravel Management Corp., to provide oﬃce rent, reception, compliance and accounting services for $7,865 per month.  The agreement commenced on
January 1, 2009 and continues on a month to month basis unless terminated by the parties.  The agreement may be terminated by either party upon 30 days notice.  After one year following the eﬀective date of
the agreement, the monthly fee increases by 3% subject to any required regulatory or stock exchange approval.  Prior to January 1, 2009, we had a verbal contract with Caravel Management Corp., to provide these
services for a fee of $4,250 per month.
There are no arrangements or plans in which we provide pension, retirement or similar beneﬁts for directors or executive oﬃcers, except that our directors and executive oﬃcers may receive stock options at the
discretion of our board of directors.  Other than the management agreements discussed above, we do not have any material bonus or proﬁt sharing plans pursuant to which cash or non‐cash compensation is or
may be paid to our directors or executive oﬃcers, except that stock options may be granted at the discretion of our board of directors.
Stock Options/SAR Grants
There were no stock options or stock appreciation rights made during the ﬁscal year ended March 31, 2009.
Stock Options/SAR Exercise
There were no stock options or stock appreciation rights exercised during the ﬁscal year ended March 31, 2009.
21 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
Long‐Term Incentive Plans
There are no arrangements or plans in which we provide pension, retirement or similar beneﬁts for directors or executive oﬃcers, except that our directors and executive oﬃcers may receive stock options at the
discretion of our board of directors.  We do not have any material bonus or proﬁt sharing plans pursuant to which cash or non‐cash compensation is or may be paid to our directors or executive oﬃcers, except that
stock options may be granted at the discretion of our board of directors.
We have no plans or arrangements in respect of remuneration received or that may be received by our executive oﬃcers to compensate such oﬃcers in the event of termination of employment (as a result of
resignation, retirement, change of control) or a change of responsibilities following a change of control, where the value of such compensation exceeds $60,000 per executive oﬃcer.
Directors Compensation
We reimburse our directors for expenses incurred in connection with attending board meetings but did not pay director's fees or other cash compensation for services rendered as a director in the year ended
March 31, 2009.
No cash compensation was paid to any of our directors for the director's services as a director during the ﬁscal year ended March 31, 2009.  We have no standard arrangement pursuant to which our directors are
compensated for their services in their capacity as directors except for the granting from time to time of incentive stock options.  The board of directors may award special remuneration to any director undertaking
any special services on behalf of our company other than services ordinarily required of a director.  Other than indicated below, no director received and/or accrued any compensation for his services as a director,
including committee participation and/or special assignments.
ITEM 12.  SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
As of January 31, 2011 there were 16,020,000 shares of our common stock outstanding.  The following table sets forth certain information known to us with respect to the beneﬁcial ownership of our common stock
as of that date by (i) each of our directors, (ii) each of our executive oﬃcers, and (iii) all of our directors and executive oﬃcers as a group.  Except as set forth in the table below, there is no person known to us who
beneﬁcially owns more than 5% of our common stock
Title of Class
Name & Address of
Beneﬁcial Owner
Amount and Nature of Beneﬁcial
Ownership(1)
Percent
of Class(2)
Common
Common
5% Stockholders
Common
Common
Notes:
John Hislop (3)
1589 Marpole Avenue
Vancouver, BC, Canada
V6J 2R9
10,003,500 Direct
62.44%
All Directors and Oﬃcers as
a class (1)
10,003,500
62.44%
John Hislop (3)
1589 Marpole Avenue
Vancouver, BC, Canada
V6J 2R9
Jeﬀery Taylor
401‐325 Howe Street
Vancouver, BC, Canada
V6C 1Z7
10,003,500 Direct
62.44%
920,000 Direct
5.74%
(1) Under Rule 13d‐3, a beneﬁcial owner of a security includes any person who, directly or indirectly, through any contract arrangement, understanding, relationship, or otherwise has or shares:  (i) voting
power, which includes the power to vote, or to direct the voting of shares; and (ii) investment power, which includes the power to dispose or direct the disposition of shares.  Certain shares may be deemed
to be beneﬁcially owned by more than one person (if, for example, persons share the power to vote or the power to dispose of the shares).  In addition, shares are deemed to be beneﬁcially owned by a
person if the person has the right to acquire the shares (for example, upon exercise of an option) within 60 days of the date as of which the information is provided.  In computing the percentage ownership
of any person, the amount of shares outstanding is deemed to include the amount of shares beneﬁcially owned by such person (and only such person) by reason of these acquisition rights.
(2) The percentage of class is based on 16,020,000 shares of common stock issued and outstanding as of March 31, 2010.
(3)
John Hislop directly owns 228,000 shares of common stock of the Company and has voting and investment power over an additional 9,775,500 shares of common stock of the Company which he holds
indirectly.
Changes in Control
We are unaware of any contract or other arrangement the operation of which may at a subsequent date result in a change in control of our company.
ITEM 13.CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE
Except as otherwise indicated below, we have not been a party to any transaction, proposed transaction, or series of transactions in which the amount involved exceeds $120,000, and in which, to our knowledge,
any of our directors, oﬃcers, ﬁve percent beneﬁcial security holder, or any member of the immediate family of the foregoing persons has had or will have a direct or indirect material interest.
We receive administrative services and back oﬃce support under a formal written management services agreement with Caravel Management Corp., pursuant to which we are charged $7,865 per month. Caravel
Management Corp. is a private management company that is wholly‐owned by John Hislop, our chairman, president, chief executive oﬃcer, secretary and chief ﬁnancial oﬃcer.  Eﬀective November 1, 2010, the
Company revised its agreement with Caravel Management to provide management services for $3,500 per month.  The agreement with Caravel Management Corp. is on a month to month basis.
On March 31, 2006, we entered into a revised loan agreement with Caravel Management Corp.  The loan bears interest at 15% per annum, calculated and compounded monthly and is payable quarterly.  Any
principal amount outstanding under the loan is payable upon demand.  The loan in payable in Canadian dollars and is secured by a Promissory Note.
During the year ended March 31, 2008, we borrowed an additional CDN $160,000 (US$151,459) and together with interest the balance of the loan and accrued interest was CDN $1,314,101 (US$1,278,433).  During
the year ended March 31, 2009 we made payments that were applied to our totalling CDN $565,089 (US $454,876) and together with interest the balance at March 31, 2009 of principal and accrued interest totalled
CDN $516,127 (US $409,560).  During the year ended March 31, 2010 we paid an additional CDN 60,603 (US $53,190) and borrowed an additional CDN $4,169 (UIS $3,915) and with accrued interest brought the total
loan balance to CDN $510,239 (US $502,402) at March 31, 2010.  During the period ended December 31, 2010, we borrowed an additional CDN $85,094 (US $83,270).  The total loan with accrued interested at
December 31, 2010 was CDN $659,093 (US $662,671).
National Instrument 58‐101
We are a reporting issuer in the Province of British Columbia.  National Instrument 58‐101 of the Canadian Securities Administrators requires our company, as a venture issuer, to disclose annually in our annual
report certain information concerning corporate governance disclosure.
Board of Directors
Our board of directors facilitates its exercise of independent supervision over management by endorsing the guidelines for responsibilities of the board as set out by regulatory authorities on corporate governance
in the United States.   Our board’s primary responsibilities are to supervise the management of our company, to establish an appropriate corporate governance system, and to set a tone of high professional and
ethical standards.
The board is also responsible for:
·
·
22 of 26
Selecting and assessing members of the Board;
Choosing, assessing and compensating the Chief Executive Oﬃcer of our company, approving the compensation of all executive oﬃcers and ensuring that an orderly management succession plan exists;
2/9/2011 13:52
·
·
·
·
·
Reviewing and approving our company’s strategic plan, operating plan, capital budget and ﬁnancial goals, and reviewing its performance against those plans;
Adopting a code of conduct and a disclosure policy for our company, and monitoring performance against those policies;
Ensuring the integrity of our company’s internal control and management information systems;
Approving any major changes to our company’s capital structure, including signiﬁcant investments or ﬁnancing arrangements; and
Reviewing and approving any other issues which, in the view of the Board or management, may require Board scrutiny.
Orientation and Continuing Education
We have an informal process to orient and educate new recruits to the board regarding their role of the board, our committees and our directors, as well as the nature and operations of our business.  This process
provides for an orientation with key members of the management staﬀ, and further provides access to materials necessary to inform them of the information required to carry out their responsibilities as a board
member.  This information includes the most recent board approved budget, the most recent annual report, the audited ﬁnancial statements and copies of the interim quarterly ﬁnancial statements.
The board does not provide continuing education for its directors.  Each director is responsible to maintain the skills and knowledge necessary to meet his or her obligations as directors.
Nomination of Directors
The board is responsible for identifying new director nominees.  In identifying candidates for membership on the board, the board takes into account all factors it considers appropriate, which may include strength
of character, mature judgement, career specialization, relevant technical skills, diversity and the extent to which the candidate would ﬁll a present need on the board.  As part of the process, the board, together
with management, is responsible for conducting background searches, and is empowered to retain search ﬁrms to assist in the nominations process.  Once candidates have gone through a screening process and
met with a number of the existing directors, they are formally put forward as nominees for approval by the board.
Assessments
The board intends that individual director assessments be conducted by other directors, taking into account each director’s contributions at board meetings, service on committees, experience base, and their
general ability to contribute to one or more of our company’s major needs.  However, due to our stage of development and our need to deal with other urgent priorities, the board has not yet implemented such a
process of assessment.
ITEM 14.  PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES
Audit Fees
Our company booked the following aggregate fees billed by StarkSchenkein LLP for professional services rendered for the audit of our annual ﬁnancial statements included in our Annual Report on Form 10‐K for the
ﬁscal years ended March 31, 2009 and 2008 and for the review of quarterly ﬁnancial statements included in our Quarterly Reports were as follows:
Year Ended March 31, 2009
Year Ended March 31, 2008
Audit Fees
$18,600
$24,086
Audit Related Fees $Nil
Tax Fees
All Other Fees
$Nil
$Nil
$Nil
$Nil
$Nil
Total
$18,600
$24,086
In the above table, “audit fees” are fees billed by our company’s external auditor for services provided in auditing our company’s annual ﬁnancial statements for the subject year along with reviews of interim
quarterly ﬁnancial statements and involvement with various ﬁlings in arrears ﬁled earlier in 2008.  The fees recorded in the above noted table may not reﬂect the fees charged for that period due to the various
ﬁlings that are in arrears, the ﬁgures in the table reﬂect all fees billed, not accrued, for reporting period.  “Audit‐related‐fees” are fees not included in audit fees that are billed by the auditor for assurance and
related services that are reasonably related to the performance of the audit review of our company’s ﬁnancial statements.  “Tax fees” are fees billed by the auditor for professional services rendered for tax
compliance, tax advice and tax planning.  “All other fees” are fees billed by the auditor for products and services not included in the foregoing categories.
Policy on Pre‐Approval by Audit Committee of Services Performed by Independent Auditors
The board of directors pre‐approves all services provided by our independent auditors.  All of the above services and fees were reviewed and approved by the board of directors either before or after the respective
services were rendered.
The board of directors has considered the nature and amount of fees billed by StarkSchenkein LLP and believes that the provision of services for activities unrelated to the audit is compatible with maintaining
StarkSchenkein LLP as auditors.
PART IV
ITEM 15.
EXHIBITS, FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES.
Exhibits Required by Item 601 of Regulation S‐K
Exhibit Number and Description
(3)
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
(10)
10.1
Articles of Incorporation/Bylaws
Certiﬁcate of Merger (Delaware) eﬀective June 12, 2003 (incorporated by reference from our Quarterly Report on Form 10‐QSB ﬁled with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 19, 2003)
Certiﬁcate of Merger (Wyoming) eﬀective June 13, 2003 (incorporated by reference from our Quarterly Report on Form 10‐qSB ﬁled with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 19, 2003)
Amended & Restated Bylaws (Wyoming) (incorporated by reference from our Quarterly Report on Form 10‐QSB ﬁled with the Securities and Exchange Commission on November 14, 2003)
Certiﬁcate of Incorporation (incorporated by reference from our Annual Report on Form 10K ﬁled with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 13, 2010).
Material Contracts
1999 Stock Option Plan (incorporated by reference from our Registration Statement on Form 10‐SB ﬁled with the Securities and Exchange Commission on March 31, 2000)
10.2
February 14, 2002).
Farm‐in Agreement with Olympia Energy Inc., dated November 21, 2001 (incorporated by reference from our Quarterly Report on Form 10‐QSB ﬁled with the Securities and Exchange Commission on
10.3
Agreement with Netco Energy Inc. dated January 10, 2005 (incorporated by reference from our Current Report on Form 8‐K ﬁled with the Securities and Exchange Commission on January 28, 2005).
10.4
August 13, 2010).
Demand Promissory Note issued to Caravel Management Corp., dated March 31, 2006 (incorporated by reference from our Annual Report on Form 10K ﬁled with the Securities and Exchange Commission on
10.5
Current Report on Form 8‐K ﬁled with the Securities and Exchange Commission on September 24, 2008).
Petroleum, Natural Gas and Related Rights Conveyance dated September 18, 2008 between Nation Energy Inc., Netco Energy Inc. and EnCana Oil & Gas Partnership (incorporated by reference from our
10.6
and Exchange Commission on August 13, 2010).
Termination Agreement dated September 26, 2008 between Nation Energy Inc., and EnCana Oil and Gas Partnership (incorporated by reference from our Annual Report on Form 10K ﬁled with the Securities
10.7
Securities and Exchange Commission on August 13, 2010).
Management Services Agreement dated January 1, 2009 between Nation Energy Inc., and Caravel Management Corp. (incorporated by reference from our Annual Report on Form 10K ﬁled with the
10.8
Management Services Agreement dated November 1, 2010 between Nation Energy Inc. and Caravel Management Corp.  (incorporated by reference from our Annual Report on Form 10K ﬁled with the
23 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
Securities and Exchange Commission on December 2, 2010).
(14)
14.1
(31)
Code of Ethics
Code of Business Conduct and Ethics (incorporated by reference from our Annual Report on Form 10‐KSB ﬁled with the Securities and Exchange Commission on July 15, 2004).
Section 302 Certiﬁcations
31.1*
Section 302 Certiﬁcation under Sarbanes‐Oxley Act of 2002
(32)
Section 906 Certiﬁcations
32.1*
Section 906 Certiﬁcation under Sarbanes‐Oxley Act of 2002
99.1*
Audit Committee Charter
*Filed herewith
In accordance with Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act, the registrant caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
SIGNATURES
NATION ENERGY INC.
By:    “John R Hislop”
John Hislop, President, Chief Executive Oﬃcer,
Chief Financial Oﬃcer, Secretary, and Director
(Principal Executive Oﬃcer, Principal Financial Oﬃcer  and Principal Accounting Oﬃcer)
Date:    February 9, 2011
24 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
RULE 13a‐14(a) OR 15d‐14(a) UNDER THE SECURITIES EXHANGE ACT OF 1934,
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES‐OXLEY ACT OF 2002
Exhibit 31.1
I, John Hislop, Principal Executive Oﬃcer and Principal Financial Oﬃcer, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10‐K of Nation Energy Inc.;
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under
2.
which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
Based on my knowledge, the ﬁnancial statements, and other ﬁnancial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the ﬁnancial condition, results of operations and cash ﬂows
3.
of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
I am responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as deﬁned in Exchange Act Rules 13a‐15(e) and 15d‐15(e)) and internal control over ﬁnancial reporting (as deﬁned in
4.
the Exchange Act Rule 13a‐15(f) and 15d‐15(f)) for the registrant and have:
(a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under my supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the
registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
(b) Designed such internal control over ﬁnancial reporting, or caused such internal control over ﬁnancial reporting to be designed under my supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
reliability of ﬁnancial reporting and the preparation of ﬁnancial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
(c) Evaluated the eﬀectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report my conclusions about the eﬀectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of
the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
(d) Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over ﬁnancial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent ﬁscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth ﬁscal quarter in the
case of an annual report) that has materially aﬀected, or is reasonably likely to materially aﬀect, the registrant’s internal control over ﬁnancial reporting; and
I have disclosed, based on my most recent evaluation of internal control over ﬁnancial reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons
5.
performing the equivalent function):
(a) All signiﬁcant deﬁciencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over ﬁnancial reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely aﬀect the registrant’s ability to record,
process, summarize and report ﬁnancial information; and
(b) Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a signiﬁcant role in the registrant’s internal controls over ﬁnancial reporting.
Date: February 9, 2011
“John R Hislop”___________________________
John Hislop, President and Secretary
(Principal Executive Oﬃcer and Principal Financial Oﬃcer)
25 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350, AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES‐OXLEY ACT OF 2002
EXHIBIT 32.1
I, John Hislop, President, Chief Executive Oﬃcer, Chairman of the Board and Chief Financial Oﬃcer, hereby certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes‐Oxley Act of
2002, that:
(a)
the Annual Report on Form 10‐K of Nation Energy Inc. for the year ended March 31, 2009 (“the Report) fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934; and
(b) the information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the ﬁnancial condition and results of operations of Nation Energy Inc.
Dated:  February 9, 2011
“John R Hislop”
John Hislop
President, Chief Executive Oﬃcer, Chairman of
the Board and Chief Financial Oﬃcer
Nation Energy Inc.
A signed original of this written statement required by Section 906, or other document authenticating, acknowledging, or otherwise adopting the signature that appears in typed form within the electronic version of this
written statement required by Section 906, has been provided to Nation Energy Inc. and will be retained by Nation Energy Inc. and furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission or its staﬀ upon request.
26 of 26
2/9/2011 13:52