
EX-10.1 2 preferredunitpurchaseagree.htm EXHIBIT 10.1 Exhibit
Execution Version
CLASS A CONVERTIBLE PREFERRED UNIT
PURCHASE AGREEMENT
DATED JULY 31, 2016
BY AND AMONG
MID-CON ENERGY PARTNERS, LP
AND
THE PURCHASERS NAMED ON SCHEDULE A HERETO
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ARTICLE I 
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 1.01    Definitions    1
SECTION 1.02    Accounting Procedures and Interpretation    7
ARTICLE II 
SALE AND PURCHASE
SECTION 2.01    Sale and Purchase    8
SECTION 2.02    Funding Notices    8
SECTION 2.03    Closing    9
SECTION 2.04    Independent Nature of Purchasers’ Obligations and Rights    9
ARTICLE III 
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF THE PARTNERSHIP
SECTION 3.01    Formation and Qualification    9
SECTION 3.02    Capitalization    10
SECTION 3.03    SEC Documents    10
SECTION 3.04    Independent Accountants    11
SECTION 3.05    Independent Reserve Engineer    11
SECTION 3.06    Litigation    11
SECTION 3.07    No Material Adverse Change    11
SECTION 3.08    Authority; Enforceability    11
SECTION 3.09    Approvals    12
SECTION 3.10    Compliance with Law    12
SECTION 3.11    Valid Issuance    12
SECTION 3.12    Absence of Defaults and Conflicts    12
SECTION 3.13    Absence of Labor Dispute    13
SECTION 3.14    Possession of Intellectual Property    13
SECTION 3.15    Permits    13
SECTION 3.16    Title to Property    13
SECTION 3.17    Reserve Estimates    14
SECTION 3.18    Environmental Laws    14
SECTION 3.19    No Preemptive Rights    14
SECTION 3.20    Investment Company Status    15
SECTION 3.21    MLP Status    15
SECTION 3.22    No Registration Required    15
SECTION 3.23    No Integration    15
SECTION 3.24    Certain Fees    15
SECTION 3.25    Form S-3 Eligibility    15
SECTION 3.26    Tax Returns    15
SECTION 3.27    Insurance    16
SECTION 3.28    Compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act    16
SECTION 3.29    ERISA Compliance    16
SECTION 3.30    No Restrictions on Distributions    16
SECTION 3.31    Related Party Transactions    16
SECTION 3.32    OFAC    16
SECTION 3.33    FCPA    17
SECTION 3.34    Money Laundering Laws    17
ARTICLE IV 
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF EACH PURCHASER
SECTION 4.01    Valid Existence    17
SECTION 4.02    No Consents; Violations, Etc    17
SECTION 4.03    Investment    18
SECTION 4.04    Nature of Purchaser    18
SECTION 4.05    Receipt of Information    18
SECTION 4.06    Restricted Securities    18
SECTION 4.07    Certain Fees    18
SECTION 4.08    Legend    18
SECTION 4.09    Reliance on Exemptions    19
SECTION 4.10    Authority    19
ARTICLE V 
COVENANTS
SECTION 5.01    Taking of Necessary Action    19
SECTION 5.02    Public Announcements    19
SECTION 5.03    Disclosure; Public Filings    20
SECTION 5.04    NASDAQ Listing of Additional Shares    20
SECTION 5.05    Use of Proceeds    20
SECTION 5.06    ATM Program    20
ARTICLE VI 
CLOSING CONDITIONS
SECTION 6.01    Conditions to Closing.    20
SECTION 6.02    Partnership Deliveries    21
SECTION 6.03    Purchaser Deliveries    22
ARTICLE VII 
INDEMNIFICATION, COSTS AND EXPENSES
SECTION 7.01    Indemnification by the Partnership    23
SECTION 7.02    Indemnification by Purchasers    23
SECTION 7.03    Indemnification Procedure    23
SECTION 7.04    Tax Treatment    24
ARTICLE VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION 8.01    Interpretation    24
SECTION 8.02    Survival of Provisions    25
SECTION 8.03    No Waiver; Modifications in Writing    25
SECTION 8.04    Binding Effect; Assignment    25
SECTION 8.05    Communications    26
SECTION 8.06    Entire Agreement    27
SECTION 8.07    Governing Law; Submission to Jurisdiction    27
SECTION 8.08    Waiver of Jury Trial    27
SECTION 8.09    Execution in Counterparts    27
SECTION 8.10    Termination    27
SECTION 8.11    Recapitalization, Exchanges, Etc    28
SECTION 8.12    Specific Performance    28
Schedules and Exhibits:
Schedule A    —    List of Purchasers and Purchase Prices
Schedule 8.05    —    Notice and Contact Information
Exhibit A    —    Term Sheet
Exhibit B    —    Form of General Partner Officer’s Certificate
Exhibit C    —    Form of Purchaser’s Officer’s Certificate
Exhibit D    —    Form of General Partner Waiver
Exhibit E    —    Form of Joinder Agreement
CLASS A CONVERTIBLE PREFERRED UNIT 
PURCHASE AGREEMENT
CLASS A CONVERTIBLE PREFERRED UNIT PURCHASE AGREEMENT dated July 31, 2016
(this “Agreement”), by and among Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP, a Delaware limited partnership
(the “Partnership”), and each of the Purchasers listed in Schedule A attached hereto (each
referred to herein as a “Purchaser” and collectively, the “Purchasers”).
WHEREAS, the Partnership desires to issue and sell to the Purchasers, and each Purchaser
desires to purchase from the Partnership, certain Class A Convertible Preferred Units (as defined
below);
WHEREAS, concurrently with the consummation of the transactions contemplated by this
Agreement, the General Partner (as defined herein) will execute and deliver an amendment, in
the form and substance to be mutually agreed on in good faith by the Parties, reflecting the
applicable terms of the Term Sheet (the “Partnership Agreement Amendment”) to the Partnership
Agreement (as defined herein), which amendment shall establish the terms of the Class A
Convertible Preferred Units; and
WHEREAS, concurrently with the consummation of the transactions contemplated by this
Agreement, the Partnership and the Purchasers will enter into a registration rights agreement, in
the form and substance to be mutually agreed on in good faith by the Parties, reflecting the
applicable terms of the Term Sheet (the “Registration Rights Agreement”), pursuant to which the
Partnership will provide the Purchasers with certain registration rights with respect to the
Conversion Units (as defined below).
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants and agreements set forth herein
and for good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which are hereby
acknowledged, the Partnership and each of the Purchasers, severally and not jointly, hereby
agree as follows:
ARTICLE I 
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 1.01
    Definitions. As used in this Agreement, and unless the context requires a different meaning,
the following terms have the meanings indicated:
“Action” against a Person means any lawsuit, action, proceeding, investigation, inquiry, or
complaint before any Governmental Authority, mediator or arbitrator.
“Affiliate” means, with respect to a specified Person, any other Person, whether now in existence
or hereafter created, directly or indirectly controlling, controlled by or under direct or indirect
common control with such specified Person. For purposes of this definition, “control” (including,
with correlative meanings, “controlling,” “controlled by,” and “under common control with”) means
the power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of such Person,
directly or indirectly, whether through the ownership of voting securities, by contract or otherwise.
For the avoidance of doubt, for purposes of this Agreement, any fund, entity or account managed,
advised or sub-advised, directly or indirectly, by a Purchaser or any of its Affiliates, or the direct or
indirect equity owners, including general partners of a Purchaser or any of its Affiliates, shall be
considered an Affiliate of such Purchaser.
“Agreement” has the meaning given to such term in the introductory paragraph hereof.
“Amended Partnership Agreement” means the Partnership Agreement, as amended as of the
Closing Date, including pursuant to the Partnership Agreement Amendment.
“Anticipated Closing Date” has the meaning given to such term in Section 2.02.
“ATM Managers” means RBC Capital Markets, LLC, Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, UBS
Securities LLC, Raymond James & Associates, Inc. and MLV & Co. LLC.
“ATM Program” means the at-the-market offering program to which the Distribution Agreement
relates.
“Board” means the board of directors of the General Partner.
“Bonanza” means Bonanza Capital, Ltd., a Texas limited partnership.
“Business Day” means any day other than (a) a Saturday or Sunday or (b) a day on which banks
located in Tulsa, Oklahoma are authorized or obligated to close.
“Cawley Gillespie” has the meaning given to such term in Section 3.05.
“Class A Convertible Preferred Units” means Class A Convertible Preferred Units representing
limited partner interests in the Partnership, the terms of which are to be set forth in the Amended
Partnership Agreement.
“Closing” means the consummation of the purchase and sale of the Purchased Units on the
Closing Date hereunder.
“Closing Date” has the meaning given to such term in Section 2.03.
“Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
“Common Units” means common units representing limited partner interests in the Partnership,
the terms of which are set forth in the Partnership Agreement.
“Conversion Units” means Common Units issuable upon conversion of any of the Class A
Convertible Preferred Units.
“Credit Agreement” shall mean, the Credit Agreement, dated as of April 23, 2012, as amended,
by and among the Operating Subsidiary, as borrower, the Partnership, as guarantor, Wells Fargo
Bank, National Association, as administrative agent and collateral agent, and the other financial
institutions party thereto.
“Delaware LLC Act” means the Delaware Limited Liability Company Act.
“Delaware LP Act” means the Delaware Revised Uniform Limited Partnership Act.
“Designation Notice” has the meaning given to such term in Section 2.01(b).
“Designation Units” has the meaning given to such term in Section 2.01(b).
“Distribution Agreement” means the Equity Distribution Agreement by and among the
Partnership, the General Partner and the Operating Subsidiary and the ATM Managers, dated
May 5, 2015.
“Environmental Laws” has the meaning given to such term in Section 3.18.
“ERISA” means the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended, and the
regulations and published interpretations thereunder.
“ERISA Affiliate” means, with respect to the Partnership Entities, any trade or business (whether
or not incorporated) under common control with the Partnership Entities within the meaning of
Section 414(b) or (c) of the Code and Sections 414(m) and (o) of the Code for purposes of
provisions relating to Section 412 of the Code.
“Exchange Act” means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended from time to time, and
the rules and regulations of the SEC promulgated thereunder.
“Expense Notice” has the meaning given to such term in Section 2.02.
“FCPA” means the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977, as amended, and the rules and
regulations thereunder.
“Founders” means S. Craig George, Charles R. Olmstead and Jeffrey Olmstead, collectively.
“Funding Notice” has the meaning given to such term in Section 2.02.
“GAAP” means generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America in effect
from time to time.
“General Partner” means Mid-Con Energy GP, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and the
general partner of the Partnership.
“Governmental Authority” means, with respect to any Person, the country, state, county, city and
political subdivisions in which any Person or such Person’s Property is located or which
exercises valid jurisdiction over any such Person or such Person’s Property, and any court,
agency, department, commission, board, bureau, instrumentality, official or other regulatory
(including self-regulated organizations or other non-governmental regulatory authorities) of any of
them and any monetary authorities that exercise valid jurisdiction over any such Person or such
Person’s Property. Unless otherwise specified, all references to Governmental Authority herein
shall mean a Governmental Authority having jurisdiction over, where applicable, any of the
Partnership Entities or their Properties.
“GP LLC Agreement” means the Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement
of the General Partner dated as of December 11, 2011, as amended to date.
“Grant Thornton” has the meaning given to such term in Section 3.04.
“Indemnified Party” has the meaning given to such term in Section 7.03.
“Indemnifying Party” has the meaning given to such term in Section 7.03.
“Joinder Agreement” has the meaning given to such term in Section 2.01(b).
“Law” or “Laws” means any federal, state, local or foreign order, writ, injunction, judgment,
settlement, award, decree, statute, law, ordinance rule or regulation.
“Leased and Subleased Properties” has the meaning given to such term in Section 3.16.
“Lock-Up Agreement” means the Lock-Up Agreement, in form and substance to be mutually
agreed on in good faith by the Parties, reflecting the applicable terms of the Term Sheet.
“Lien” means any mortgage, claim, pledge, lien (statutory or otherwise), security agreement,
conditional sale or trust receipt or a lease, consignment or bailment, preference or priority,
assessment, deed of trust, charge, easement, servitude or other encumbrance upon or with
respect to any property of any kind.
“LTIP” means the Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended.
“Mid-Con Energy Operating” means Mid-Con Energy Operating, LLC, a Delaware limited liability
company and Affiliate of the General Partner.
“Monitoring Agreement” means the Monitoring Agreement, in form and substance to be mutually
agreed on in good faith by the Parties, reflecting the applicable terms of the Term Sheet.
“Multiemployer Plan” has the meaning given to such term in Section 3.29.
“NASDAQ” means National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation System
Global Select Market.
“New Investor” has the meaning given to such term in Section 2.01(c).
“OFAC” means the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the U.S. Treasury Department.
“Operating Subsidiary” means Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC, a Delaware limited liability
company and wholly-owned Subsidiary of the Partnership.
“Organizational Documents” means (a) in the case of a corporation, its charter and by-laws; (b) in
the case of a limited or general partnership, its partnership certificate, certificate of formation or
similar organizational document and its partnership agreement; (c) in the case of a limited liability
company, its articles of organization, certificate of formation or similar organizational documents
and its operating agreement, limited liability company agreement, membership agreement or
other similar agreement; (d) in the case of a trust, its certificate of trust, certificate of formation or
similar organizational document and its trust agreement or other similar agreement; and (e) in the
case of any other entity, the organizational and governing documents of such entity.
“Outstanding” has the meaning given to such term in the Partnership Agreement.
“Partnership” has the meaning given to such term in the introductory paragraph of this
Agreement.
“Partnership Agreement” means the First Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited
Partnership, dated as of December 20, 2011, as amended to date.
“Partnership Agreement Amendment” has the meaning given to such term in the recitals to this
Agreement.
“Partnership Bank Account” means the bank account designated as such by the Partnership
pursuant to the Funding Notice.
“Partnership Documents” means (a) the Credit Agreement and (b) all other contracts, indentures,
mortgages, deeds of trust, loan or credit agreements, bonds, notes, debentures, evidences of
indebtedness, swap agreements, leases or other instruments or agreements to which any of the
Partnership Entities is a party or by which any of the Partnership Entities is bound or to which any
of the property or assets of the Partnership Entities is subject that, solely in the case of this clause
(b), are material with respect to the Partnership Entities taken as a whole.
“Partnership Entities” means the Partnership and the Operating Subsidiary.
“Partnership Material Adverse Effect” means any change, event or effect that, individually or
together with any other changes, events or effects, (a) has a material adverse effect on (i) the
legality, validity or enforceability of any Transaction Agreement, or (ii) the financial condition,
business, assets or results of operations of the Partnership Entities, considered as a single
enterprise, or (b) the ability of the Partnership or the General Partner to perform its obligations
under the Transaction Agreements in full on a timely basis. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
“Partnership Material Adverse Effect” shall not include any effect to the extent resulting or arising
from: (i) any change in general economic conditions in the industries or markets in which any of
the Partnership Entities operate that do not have a disproportionate effect on the Partnership
Entities, considered as a single enterprise; (ii) any engagement in hostilities pursuant to a
declaration of war, or the occurrence of any military or terrorist attack; (iii) changes in GAAP or
other accounting principles, except to the extent such change has a disproportionate effect on the
Partnership Entities, considered as a single enterprise; (iv) changes in commodity prices, except
to the extent such change has a disproportionate effect on the Partnership Entities, considered as
a single enterprise; or (v) other than for purposes of Section 3.12, the consummation of the
transactions contemplated hereby.
“Partnership Related Parties” has the meaning given to such term in Section 7.02.
“Party” or “Parties” means the Partnership and the Purchasers party to this Agreement,
individually or collectively, as the case may be.
“Per Unit Price” means $2.15.
“Permits” has the meaning given to such term in Section 3.15.
“Person” means any individual, corporation, company, voluntary association, partnership, joint
venture, trust, limited liability company, unincorporated organization or government or any
agency, instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, or any other form of entity.
“PIK Units” means a Class A Convertible Preferred Unit issued pursuant to a Class A Convertible
Preferred Unit distribution, as contemplated by the applicable terms of the Term Sheet.
“Plan” has the meaning given to such term in Section 3.29.
“Property” or “Properties” means any interest or interests in any kind of property or asset, whether
real, personal or mixed, or tangible or intangible (including intellectual property).
“Purchase Price” means, with respect to each Purchaser, the dollar amount set forth opposite
such Purchaser’s name under the heading “Purchase Price” on Schedule A hereto, as adjusted
in accordance with Section 8.11, if applicable; provided, that in no event will the Purchase Price
applicable to such Purchaser be increased without the prior written consent of such Purchaser.
“Purchased Units” means, with respect to each Purchaser, the number of Class A Convertible
Preferred Units equal to the quotient determined by dividing (a) the Purchase Price set forth
opposite such Purchaser’s name under the heading “Purchase Price” on Schedule A hereto by
(b) the Per Unit Price.
“Purchaser” and “Purchasers” have the meanings given to such terms in the introductory
paragraph of this Agreement.
“Purchaser Designee” has the meaning given to such term in Section 2.01(b).
“Purchaser Material Adverse Effect” means any material adverse effect on the ability of a
Purchaser to perform its obligations under the Transaction Agreements on a timely basis.
“Purchaser Related Parties” has the meaning given to such term in Section 7.01.
“Registration Rights Agreement” has the meaning given to such term in the recitals to this
Agreement.
“Reimbursable Legal Expenses” means the out-of-pocket legal expenses actually incurred by
Bonanza prior to the Closing in connection with the consummation of the transactions
contemplated by the Transaction Agreements; provided, however, that the Reimbursable Legal
Expenses shall not exceed $25,000 in the aggregate.
“Representatives” of any Person means the Affiliates, control persons, officers, directors,
employees, agents, counsel, investment bankers and other representatives of such Person.
“Sarbanes-Oxley Act” means the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder or implementing the provisions thereof.
“SEC” means the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.
“SEC Documents” has the meaning given to such term in Section 3.03.
“Securities Act” means the Securities Act of 1933, as amended from time to time, and the rules
and regulations of the SEC promulgated thereunder.
“Securities Act Regulations” means the rules and regulations of the SEC promulgated under the
Securities Act.
“Standstill Agreement” means the Standstill Agreement by and between the Partnership and the
Purchasers, in form and substance to be mutually agreed on in good faith by the Parties,
reflecting the applicable terms of the Term Sheet.
“Subsidiary” means, as to any Person, (a) any corporation, limited liability company, general
partnership or other entity (other than a limited partnership) of which at least a majority of the
outstanding equity interest having by the terms thereof ordinary voting power to elect a majority of
the board of directors of such corporation, limited liability company, general partnership or other
entity is at the time directly or indirectly owned or controlled by such Person or one or more of its
Subsidiaries and (b) any limited partnership of which (i) a majority of the voting power to elect a
majority of the board of directors or board of managers of the general partner of such limited
partnership and (ii) a majority of the outstanding limited partner interests is at the time directly or
indirectly owned or controlled by such Person.
“Term Sheet” means the Term Sheet, attached hereto as Exhibit A, reflecting the Parties’ mutual
understanding of certain material terms relating to this Agreement and the substance of the
Transaction Agreements.
“Third Party Claim” has the meaning given to such term in Section 7.03.
“Transaction Agreements” means, collectively, this Agreement, the Registration Rights
Agreement, the Partnership Agreement Amendment, the Standstill Agreement, the Monitoring
Agreement, the Lock-Up Agreement and any amendments, supplements, continuations or
modifications thereto. References to the Partnership Agreement Amendment shall be deemed to
include the Amended Partnership Agreement unless the context requires otherwise.
SECTION 1.02
    Accounting Procedures and Interpretation. Unless otherwise specified in this Agreement, all
accounting terms used herein shall be interpreted, all determinations with respect to accounting
matters under this Agreement shall be made, and all financial statements and certificates and
reports as to financial matters required to be furnished to the Purchasers under this Agreement
shall be prepared, in accordance with GAAP applied on a consistent basis during the periods
involved (except, in the case of unaudited statements, as permitted by Form 10-Q promulgated by
the SEC) and in compliance as to form in all material respects with applicable accounting
requirements and with the published rules and regulations of the SEC with respect thereto.
ARTICLE II
     
SALE AND PURCHASE
SECTION 2.01
    Sale and Purchase.
(a)
    Subject to the terms and conditions hereof, the Partnership will issue and sell to each
Purchaser on the Closing Date, and each Purchaser hereby agrees, severally and not jointly, to
purchase from the Partnership on the Closing Date, such Purchaser’s respective Purchased
Units, as set forth on Schedule A hereto.
(b)
    By written notice to the Partnership (a “Designation Notice”), a Purchaser may designate an
Affiliate or another Purchaser (a “Purchaser Designee”) to acquire all or any portion of the
Purchased Units otherwise issuable to such Purchaser at Closing (such Purchased Units, the
“Designated Units”), and such Purchaser Designee shall, if not already a signatory to this
Agreement, execute and deliver to the Partnership a joinder agreement, in the form attached
hereto as Exhibit E (a “Joinder Agreement”), pursuant to which such Purchaser Designee shall
agree (i) to join and become a party to this Agreement; (ii) to be bound by all covenants,
agreements, representations, warranties and acknowledgments attributable to the Purchasers
hereunder, as if made by, and with respect to, such Purchaser Designee; and (iii) to perform all
obligations and duties required of a Purchaser with respect to Purchased Units. Upon receipt by
the Partnership of (x) a Designation Notice, executed by the designating Purchaser and
acknowledged in writing by the Purchaser Designee, specifying the name of the Purchaser
Designee and the number of Purchased Units to be designated thereby, and (y) a fully executed
Joinder Agreement, if applicable, Schedule A and Schedule 8.05 hereto shall be amended,
without further action of any Party hereto, to include such Purchaser Designee and, with respect
to Schedule A, to reflect the designation of the Designated Units from the designating Purchaser
to such Purchaser Designee.
(c)
    By written notice to the Purchasers, the Partnership may, without further action of any Party
hereto, amend Schedule A and Schedule 8.05 hereto to include one or more additional
Purchasers (each, a “New Investor”), to whom the Partnership will issue and sell on the Closing
Date, subject to the terms and conditions hereof, Purchased Units with an aggregate Purchase
Price not to exceed $5.0 million. Prior to the Partnership’s amendment of Schedule A and
Schedule 8.05 hereto, each New Investor shall execute and deliver to the Partnership a Joinder
Agreement, pursuant to which such New Investor shall agree (i) to join and become a party to this
Agreement; (ii) to be bound by all covenants, agreements, representations, warranties and
acknowledgments attributable to the Purchasers hereunder, as if made by, and with respect to,
such New Investor; and (iii) to perform all obligations and duties required of a Purchaser with
respect to Purchased Units.
SECTION 2.02
    Funding Notices. On or prior to the tenth Business Day prior to the date on which the
Partnership reasonably anticipates a Closing to occur (the “Anticipated Closing Date”), the
Partnership shall deliver a written notice (the “Funding Notice”) to each of the Purchasers
(a) specifying the Anticipated Closing Date, (b) directing each such Purchaser to pay the
Purchase Price for its Purchased Units by wire transfer(s) of immediately available funds to the
Partnership Bank Account, prior to 10:00 a.m. Central Time on the Closing Date, and
(c) specifying wiring instructions for wiring funds into the Partnership Bank Account. Within one
Business Day following the delivery by the Partnership of the Funding Notice, Bonanza shall
deliver a written notice (the “Expense Notice”) to the Partnership, specifying the amount of
Reimbursable Legal Expenses.
SECTION 2.03
    Closing. Subject to the terms and conditions hereof, the Closing shall take place remotely via
electronic exchange of documents and signatures on the first Business Day after satisfaction or
waiver of the conditions set forth in Sections 6.01(a), 6.01(b) and 6.01(c) has occurred (other than
those conditions that are by their terms to be satisfied at the Closing) (the date of the Closing
being referred to herein as the “Closing Date”); provided that the Closing Date shall not be earlier
than the date set forth in the applicable Funding Notice unless mutually agreed by the Parties.
SECTION 2.04
    Independent Nature of Purchasers’ Obligations and Rights. The respective representations,
warranties and obligations of each Purchaser under the Transaction Agreements are several and
not joint with the obligations of any other Purchaser, and no Purchaser shall be responsible in
any way for the representations and warranties or the performance of the obligations of any other
Purchaser under any Transaction Agreement. The failure or waiver of performance under any
Transaction Agreement by any Purchaser, or on its behalf, does not excuse performance by any
other Purchaser. Nothing contained in any Transaction Agreement, and no action taken by any
Purchaser pursuant thereto, shall be deemed to constitute the Purchasers as a partnership, an
association, a joint venture or any other kind of entity, or create a presumption that the
Purchasers are in any way acting in concert or as a group with respect to such obligations or the
transactions contemplated by the Transaction Agreements. Each Purchaser shall be entitled to
independently protect and enforce its rights, including without limitation, the rights arising out of
this Agreement or out of the Registration Rights Agreement, and it shall not be necessary for any
other Purchaser to be joined as an additional party in any proceeding for such purpose; provided
that any enforcement of an indemnity claim may only be initiated by holders of a majority of the
Purchased Units then outstanding. The failure or waiver of performance by any Purchaser does
not excuse performance by any other Purchaser.
ARTICLE III
     
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF THE PARTNERSHIP
The Partnership represents and warrants to the Purchasers that the representations and
warranties set forth in this ARTICLE III are true and correct as of the date of this Agreement and
as of the Closing Date.
SECTION 3.01
    Formation and Qualification. The General Partner and each of the Partnership Entities has
been duly formed and is validly existing and in good standing under the Laws of the State or
other jurisdiction of its organization and has the requisite power and authority, and has all
governmental licenses, authorizations, consents and approvals necessary, to own, lease, use or
operate its Properties and carry on its business as now being conducted, except where the
failure to obtain such licenses, authorizations, consents and approvals would not be reasonably
likely, individually or in the aggregate, to have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect. The
General Partner and each of the Partnership Entities is duly qualified or licensed and in good
standing as a foreign corporation, limited partnership, limited liability company or unlimited
liability company, as applicable, and is authorized to do business in each jurisdiction in which
the ownership or leasing of its Properties or the character of its operations makes such
qualification necessary, except where the failure to obtain such qualification, license,
authorization or good standing would not be reasonably likely, individually or in the aggregate, to
have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect.
SECTION 3.02
    Capitalization.
(a)
    The Purchased Units shall have those rights, preferences, privileges and restrictions
governing the Class A Convertible Preferred Units as reflected in the Amended Partnership
Agreement.
(b)
    As of the date hereof, the Founders own 100% of the membership interests in the General
Partner. Such membership interests have been duly authorized and validly issued in accordance
with the GP LLC Agreement and are fully paid (to the extent required by the GP LLC Agreement)
and nonassessable (except as such nonassessability may be affected by matters described in
Sections 18-607 and 18-804 of the Delaware LLC Act).
(c)
    The General Partner is the sole general partner of the Partnership and owns an interest in the
Partnership (the “GP Interest”), and at the Closing Date, will be the sole general partner of the
Partnership and will own the GP Interest. Such GP Interest has been duly authorized and validly
issued in accordance with the Partnership Agreement, and the General Partner owns such GP
Interest free and clear of all Liens (except restrictions on transferability as described in the SEC
Documents), other than those created by or arising under the Delaware LP Act.
(d)
    As of the date hereof, other than the GP Interest and its indirect ownership interests in the
Operating Subsidiary, the General Partner does not own, directly or indirectly, any equity or long-
term debt securities of any corporation, partnership, limited liability company, joint venture,
association or other entity. As of the date hereof, other than the Partnership’s ownership of the
Operating Subsidiary, none of the Partnership or the Operating Subsidiary owns, directly or
indirectly, any equity or long-term debt securities of any corporation, partnership, limited liability
company, joint venture, association or other entity.
(e)
    All outstanding Common Units and the limited partner interests represented thereby have been
duly authorized and validly issued in accordance with the Partnership Agreement and are fully
paid (to the extent required under the Partnership Agreement) and nonassessable (except as
such nonassessability may be affected by Sections 17-303, 17-607 and 17-804 of the Delaware
LP Act).
(f)
    The Partnership’s currently outstanding Common Units are registered pursuant to
Section 12(b) of the Exchange Act and are quoted on the NASDAQ, and the Partnership has
taken no action designed to terminate the registration of such Common Units under the
Exchange Act nor has the Partnership received any notification that the SEC is contemplating
terminating such registration.
SECTION 3.03
    SEC Documents.    The Partnership has filed with the SEC all reports, schedules and
statements required to be filed by it under the Exchange Act on a timely basis since January 1,
2015 (all such documents filed prior to the date hereof, collectively, the “SEC Documents”). The
SEC Documents, including any audited or unaudited financial statements and any notes thereto
or schedules included therein, at the time filed, (a) complied as to form in all material respects
with applicable requirements of the Exchange Act and Securities Act and the applicable
accounting requirements and with the published rules and regulations of the SEC with respect
thereto, (b) were prepared in accordance with GAAP applied on a consistent basis during the
periods involved (except as may be indicated in the notes thereto or, in the case of unaudited
statements, as permitted by Form 10-Q of the SEC), (c) fairly present (subject in the case of
unaudited statements to normal, recurring and year-end audit adjustments) in all material
respects the consolidated financial position of the Partnership as of the dates thereof and the
consolidated results of its operations and cash flows for the periods then ended and (d) did not
contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact required to be stated
therein or necessary in order to make the statements therein, in light of the circumstances under
which they were made, not misleading.
SECTION 3.04
    Independent Accountants. Grant Thornton LLP (“Grant Thornton”), who certified the audited
consolidated financial statements of the Partnership Entities as of December 31, 2015 and 2014
and for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014, and 2013 are independent public
accountants as required by the Securities Act, the Securities Act Regulations and the standards
of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board.
SECTION 3.05
    Litigation. Except as described in the SEC Documents, no Action by or before any court or
governmental or other regulatory or administrative agency, authority or body or any arbitrator
involving any of the Partnership Entities or their property is pending, or to the knowledge of any of
the Partnership Entities, threatened that would reasonably be expected, individually or in the
aggregate, to have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect or prevent the performance by the
Partnership of its obligations under this Agreement or the consummation by the Partnership of
the transactions contemplated by this Agreement.
SECTION 3.06
    No Material Adverse Change. Since December 31, 2015, (a) none of the Partnership Entities
has, directly or indirectly, sustained any material loss or interference with its business from fire,
explosion, flood or other calamity, whether or not covered by insurance, or from any labor dispute
or court or governmental Action, order or decree and (b) since such date, there has not been any
change in the capitalization or material increase in long-term debt of the Partnership Entities, or
any adverse change in or affecting the condition (financial or otherwise), Properties, assets,
liabilities, results of operations, earnings, business or prospects of the Partnership Entities, taken
as a whole, in each case as would not reasonably be expected to have a Partnership Material
Adverse Effect.
SECTION 3.07
    Authority; Enforceability. The Partnership and the General Partner have all necessary limited
partnership and limited liability company, as applicable, power and authority to execute, deliver
and perform their obligations under the Transaction Agreements to which they are parties and to
consummate the transactions contemplated thereby; the execution, delivery and performance by
the Partnership and the General Partner of the Transaction Agreements to which they are parties
and the consummation of the transactions contemplated thereby have been duly authorized by
all necessary action on their part; and, assuming the due authorization, execution and delivery by
the other parties thereto, each of the Transaction Agreements to which either the Partnership or
the General Partner is a party will constitute the legal, valid and binding obligations of the
Partnership or the General Partner, as applicable, enforceable in accordance with their terms,
except as such enforceability may be limited by bankruptcy, insolvency, fraudulent transfer and
similar Laws affecting creditors’ rights generally or by general principles of equity, including
principles of commercial reasonableness, fair dealing and good faith.
SECTION 3.08
    Approvals. No authorization, consent, approval, waiver, license, qualification or written
exemption from, nor any filing, declaration, qualification or registration with, any Governmental
Authority or any other Person is required in connection with the execution, delivery or
performance by the Partnership of the Transaction Agreements to which it is a party or the
issuance and sale of the Purchased Units, except (a) as required by the SEC in connection with
the Partnership’s obligations under the Registration Rights Agreement or (b) as may be required
under the state securities or “Blue Sky” Laws.
SECTION 3.09
    Compliance with Law. None of the Partnership Entities is in violation of any Law applicable to
such Partnership Entity, except as would not, individually or in the aggregate, have a Partnership
Material Adverse Effect. The Partnership Entities each possess all Permits issued by the
appropriate regulatory authorities necessary to conduct their respective businesses, except
where the failure to possess such Permits would not, individually or in the aggregate, have a
Partnership Material Adverse Effect, and none of the Partnership Entities has received any notice
of proceedings relating to the revocation or modification of any such certificate, authorization or
permit, except where such potential revocation or modification would not, individually or in the
aggregate, have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect.
SECTION 3.10
    Valid Issuance. The offer and sale of the Purchased Units and the limited partner interests
represented thereby will be duly authorized by the Partnership pursuant to the Amended
Partnership Agreement and, when issued and delivered to the Purchasers against payment
therefor in accordance with the terms of this Agreement, will be validly issued, fully paid (to the
extent required by and the Amended Partnership Agreement), nonassessable (except as such
nonassessability may be affected by Sections 17-303, 17-607 and 17-804 of the Delaware LP
Act), and will be free of any and all Liens and restrictions on transfer, other than restrictions on
transfer under the Amended Partnership Agreement and under applicable state and federal
securities Laws. Upon issuance in accordance with the terms of the Amended Partnership
Agreement, the Conversion Units and PIK Units will be duly authorized by the Partnership
pursuant to the Amended Partnership Agreement and will be validly issued, fully paid (to the
extent required by the Amended Partnership Agreement), nonassessable (except as such
nonassessability may be affected by Sections 17-303, 17-607 and 17-804 of the Delaware LP
Act), and will be free of any and all Liens and restrictions on transfer, other than restrictions on
transfer under the Amended Partnership Agreement and under applicable state and federal
securities Laws.
SECTION 3.11
    Absence of Defaults and Conflicts. None of the Partnership Entities is in violation of its
Organizational Documents or in default in the performance or observance of any obligation,
agreement, covenant or condition contained in any Partnership Document, except for such
defaults that would not reasonably be expected, individually or in the aggregate, to result in a
Partnership Material Adverse Effect. Neither the execution, delivery and performance by the
Partnership or the General Partner of the Transaction Agreements to which it is a party (including
issuance of the Conversion Units in accordance with the terms of the Transaction Agreements)
nor the issuance and sale of the Purchased Units and compliance by the Partnership or the
General Partner with its obligations under the Transaction Agreements to which it is a party will,
whether with or without the giving of notice or passage of time or both, require any consent,
approval or notice under, or will constitute a violation or breach of, the Amended Partnership
Agreement or the GP LLC Agreement, conflict with or constitute a breach of, or default under, or
result in the creation or imposition of any Lien upon any property or assets of the Partnership
Entities pursuant to, any Partnership Documents, except for such conflicts, breaches, defaults or
Liens that would not reasonably be expected, individually or in the aggregate, to result in a
Partnership Material Adverse Effect, nor will such action result in any violation of the provisions
of the Organizational Documents of any of the Partnership Entities or any applicable Law,
judgment, order, writ or decree of any government, government instrumentality or court, domestic
or foreign, having jurisdiction over the Partnership Entities or any of their respective assets,
Properties or operations.
SECTION 3.12
    Absence of Labor Dispute.  No labor problem or dispute with the employees of Mid-Con
Energy Operating exists or, to the knowledge of any of the Partnership Entities, is threatened or
imminent, and the Partnership is not aware of any existing or imminent labor disturbance by the
employees of any of the principal suppliers, contractors or customers of the Partnership Entities
that would reasonably be expected, individually or in the aggregate, to result in a Partnership
Material Adverse Effect.
SECTION 3.13
    Possession of Intellectual Property.  The Partnership Entities own, possess, license or have
adequate rights to use, on reasonable terms, all material patents, patent rights, patent
applications, licenses, inventions, copyrights, inventions, know-how (including trade secrets and
other unpatented and/or unpatentable proprietary or confidential information, systems or
procedures), trademarks, service marks, trade and service mark registrations, trade names,
service names, software, internet addresses, domain names and other intellectual property that is
described in the SEC Documents or that is necessary for the conduct of their respective
businesses as currently conducted or as proposed to be conducted and as described in the SEC
Documents, except where the failure to have such licenses or rights to use such intellectual
property would not reasonably be expected, individually or in the aggregate, to have a
Partnership Material Adverse Effect.
SECTION 3.14
    Permits.  The Partnership Entities have such material licenses, certifications, permits,
consents, franchises, approvals, clearances and authorizations of governmental or other
regulatory authorizations (“Permits”) as are necessary to conduct their business as currently
conducted or to own, lease and operate its Properties in the manner described in the SEC
Documents, except as described in the SEC Documents. The Partnership Entities are in
compliance with the terms and conditions of such Permits, except where the failure to so comply
would not reasonably be expected, individually or in the aggregate, to result in a Partnership
Material Adverse Effect.
SECTION 3.15
    Title to Property.  The Operating Subsidiary has (a) good, valid and defensible title to the
interests in the oil and gas Properties supporting the estimates of its net proved reserves
contained in the SEC Documents, (b) good and indefeasible title to all real property owned by it,
other than the oil and gas Properties covered by clause (a), and (c) good title to all personal
property described in the SEC Documents as being owned by it, in each case free and clear of
all Liens except (i) such as are described in the SEC Documents, (ii) such as arise in connection
with the Credit Agreement, or (iii) such as do not (individually or in the aggregate) materially
interfere with the use made or proposed to be made of such Properties by the Partnership
Entities as described in the SEC Documents. The working interests derived from oil, gas and
mineral leases or mineral interests, which constitute a portion of the real property held or leased
by the Operating Subsidiary, reflect in all material respects the right of the Operating Subsidiary
to explore for, develop and produce hydrocarbons from such real property, and the care taken by
the Operating Subsidiary and any of its predecessors in interest who are or were affiliates of the
Partnership Entities with respect to acquiring or otherwise procuring such leases or mineral
interests was generally consistent with standard industry practices in the areas in which the
Operating Subsidiary and any of its predecessors who are or were affiliates of the Partnership
Entities operates for acquiring or procuring leases and interests therein to explore for, develop
and produce hydrocarbons. All real property and buildings held under lease or sublease by the
Operating Subsidiary, except the oil and gas Properties covered by clause (a) above (the
“Leased and Subleased Properties”), are held by it under valid, subsisting and enforceable
leases or subleases, as the case may be, subject to exceptions that do not materially interfere
with the use made and proposed to be made of such Leased and Subleased Properties by the
Operating Subsidiary as described in the SEC Documents, and all such leases and subleases
are in full force and effect. The Operating Subsidiary has not received any notice of any claim that
has been asserted by anyone adverse to the rights of the Operating Subsidiary under any of the
leases or subleases mentioned in the prior sentence above or affecting or questioning the rights
of the Operating Subsidiary to the continued possession of the Leased and Subleased Properties
under any such lease or sublease except for such claims that would not reasonably be expected,
individually or in the aggregate, to have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect.
SECTION 3.16
    Reserve Estimates. The historical information underlying the estimates of oil and gas reserves
of the Partnership Entities, which were supplied by the Partnership Entities to Cawley Gillespie
for purposes of auditing the reserve information included in the SEC Documents, including,
without limitation, production, volumes and rates, costs of operation and development, current
prices for production, agreements relating to current and future operations and sales of
production, was true and correct in all material respects on the dates of such reserve reports and
was prepared in all material respects in accordance with customary industry practices. Other than
normal production of the reserves, intervening market commodity price fluctuations, fluctuations
in demand for such products, adverse weather conditions, unavailability or increased costs of
rigs, equipment, supplies or personnel, the timing of third party operations and other factors, in
each case as described in the SEC Documents, the Partnership is not aware of any facts or
circumstances that (i) would result in a material adverse change in the aggregate net reserves, or
the present value of future net cash flows therefrom, as described in the SEC Documents, or (ii)
cause them to believe that such estimates do not fairly reflect the oil and gas reserves of the
Partnership Entities. Estimates of such reserves and present values as described in the SEC
Documents comply in all material respects with the applicable requirements of Regulation S-X
and Subpart 1200 of Regulation S-K under the Securities Act.
SECTION 3.17
    No Preemptive Rights. The holders of outstanding Common Units are not entitled to
preemptive rights to subscribe for (a) any of the Class A Convertible Preferred Units to be issued
and sold to the Purchasers pursuant to this Agreement or (b) the Conversion Units to be issued
upon conversion of the Class A Convertible Preferred Units.
SECTION 3.18
    Investment Company Status. The Partnership is not, and upon the issuance and sale of the
Purchased Units as herein contemplated and the application of the net proceeds therefrom, the
Partnership will not be, an “investment company” or an entity “controlled” by an “investment
company” as such terms are defined in the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, and
the rules and regulations of the SEC promulgated thereunder.
SECTION 3.19
    MLP Status. The Partnership is properly treated as a partnership for United States federal
income tax purposes and has, for each taxable year beginning after December 31, 2011 during
which the Partnership was in existence, met the gross income requirements of Section 7704(c)(2)
of the Internal Revenue Code. The Partnership expects to meet the gross income requirements of
Section 7704(c)(2) of the Code for its taxable year ending December 31, 2016.
SECTION 3.20
    No Registration Required. Assuming the accuracy of the representations and warranties of the
Purchasers contained in this Agreement and their compliance with the agreements set forth in
this Agreement, the sale and issuance of the Purchased Units (and the Conversion Units)
pursuant to this Agreement is exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act, and
neither the Partnership nor, to the Partnership’s knowledge, any authorized Representative
acting on its behalf has taken or will take any action hereafter that would cause the loss of such
exemption. The issuance and sale of the Purchased Units and the issuance of the Conversion
Units upon conversion of the Class A Convertible Preferred Units do not contravene the rules
and regulations of the NASDAQ.
SECTION 3.21
    No Integration. Neither the Partnership nor any of its Affiliates has, directly or indirectly through
any Representative, made any offers or sales of any security of the Partnership or solicited any
offers to buy any security that is or will be integrated with the sale of the Purchased Units in a
manner that would require the offer and sale of the Purchased Units to be registered under the
Securities Act.
SECTION 3.22
    Certain Fees. No fees or commissions are or will be payable by the Partnership to brokers,
finders or investment bankers with respect to the sale of any of the Purchased Units or the
consummation of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement.
SECTION 3.23
    Form S-3 Eligibility. The Partnership is eligible to register the resale of the Conversion Units by
the Purchasers on a registration statement on Form S-3 under the Securities Act.
SECTION 3.24
    Tax Returns. The Partnership Entities have filed all foreign, federal, state and local tax returns
that are required to be filed or have obtained extensions thereof, except where the failure so to
file would not reasonably be expected, individually or in the aggregate, to result in a Partnership
Material Adverse Effect, and have paid all taxes (including, without limitation, any estimated
taxes) required to be paid and any other assessment, fine or penalty, to the extent that any of the
foregoing is due and payable, except for any such tax, assessment, fine or penalty that is
currently being contested in good faith by appropriate actions and except for such taxes,
assessments, fines or penalties the nonpayment of which would not reasonably be expected,
individually or in the aggregate, to result in a Partnership Material Adverse Effect.
SECTION 3.25
    Insurance. The Partnership Entities maintain, or are entitled to the benefits of, insurance
covering their Properties, operations, personnel and businesses against such losses and risks as
is reasonably adequate to protect them and their businesses in a manner consistent with other
businesses similarly situated in similar industries. All policies of insurance insuring the
Partnership Entities or any of their respective businesses, assets, employees, officers and
directors are in full force and effect as of the date hereof; and the Partnership Entities are in
compliance with the terms of such policies in all material respects.
SECTION 3.26
    Compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. The General Partner, the Partnership Entities and,
to the knowledge of the Partnership, the officers and directors of the General Partner, in their
capacities as such are in compliance in all material respects with all applicable provisions of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and the rules and regulations promulgated therewith that are
effective and applicable to the Partnership.
SECTION 3.27
    ERISA Compliance. Each “employee benefit plan” (within the meaning of Section 3(3) of
ERISA) for which any of the Partnership Entities or any ERISA Affiliate (as defined below) would
have any liability (each a “Plan”), including the LTIP, has been maintained in material
compliance with its terms and with the material requirements of all applicable statutes, rules and
regulations, including ERISA and the Code, and, to the knowledge of the Partnership, each
“multiemployer plan” (as defined in Section 4001 of ERISA) to which the Partnership Entities or
any ERISA Affiliate contributes (a “Multiemployer Plan”) is in material compliance with all
applicable statutes, rules and regulations, including ERISA and the Code. None of the
Partnership Entities or any ERISA Affiliate has incurred or reasonably expects to incur any
material liability under (i) Title IV of ERISA with respect to termination of, or withdrawal from, any
“employee benefit plan” or (ii) Sections 412, 4971 or 4975 of the Code. Except where
noncompliance would not reasonably be expected to have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect,
each “employee benefit plan” established or maintained by the Partnership Entities or any ERISA
Affiliate that is intended to be qualified under Section 401 of the Code is so qualified and nothing
has occurred, whether by action or failure to act, which would be reasonably likely to cause the
loss of such qualification.
SECTION 3.28
    No Restrictions on Distributions. None of the Partnership Entities is a party to or otherwise
bound by any instrument or agreement that limits or prohibits or could limit or prohibit, directly or
indirectly, the Partnership from redeeming the Purchased Units pursuant to their terms or making
distributions on the Purchased Units or the Conversion Units, and no Partnership Entity is a party
to or otherwise bound by any instrument or agreement that limits or prohibits or could limit or
prohibit, directly or indirectly, any Partnership Entity from making distributions on its limited or
general partnership interests, limited liability company interests, or other equity interest, as the
case may be, except in each case (a) pursuant to the Credit Agreement, (b) for prohibitions
mandated by the Laws of the jurisdiction of formation of such Subsidiary and (c) as described in
the SEC Documents.
SECTION 3.29
    Related Party Transactions. There are no business relationships or related party transactions
involving the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries or, to the knowledge of any of the Partnership
Entities, any other Person that are required to be described in the SEC Documents that have not
been described as required.
SECTION 3.30
    OFAC. No Partnership Entity nor, to the knowledge of any of the Partnership Entities, any
Representative of the Partnership Entities is currently subject to any U.S. sanctions administered
by the OFAC; and the Partnership Entities will not directly or indirectly use the proceeds of the
transactions contemplated hereby, or lend, contribute or otherwise make available such
proceeds to any other person or entity, for the purpose of financing the activities of any person
currently subject to any U.S. sanctions administered by OFAC.
SECTION 3.31
    FCPA. No Partnership Entity nor, to the knowledge of any of the Partnership Entities, any
Representative of the Partnership Entities has made any payment of funds of the Partnership
Entities or received or retained any funds in violation of any Law, including the FCPA, which
payment, receipt or retention is of a character required to be disclosed in the SEC Documents.
SECTION 3.32
    Money Laundering Laws. The operations of the Partnership Entities are and have been
conducted at all times in compliance with applicable financial recordkeeping and reporting
requirements of the Currency and Foreign Transactions Reporting Act of 1970, as amended, the
money laundering statutes of all jurisdictions, the rules and regulations thereunder and any
related or similar rules, regulations or guidelines issued, administered or enforced by any
Governmental Authority (collectively, “Money Laundering Laws”); and no Action by or before any
court or Governmental Authority or any arbitrator or non-governmental authority involving the
Partnership Entities with respect to Money Laundering Laws is pending or, to the knowledge of
the Partnership Entities, threatened.
ARTICLE IV
     
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF EACH PURCHASER
Each Purchaser, severally and not jointly, represents and warrants to the Partnership with
respect to itself (and not with respect to any other Purchaser) as follows as of the date of this
Agreement and as of the Closing Date:
SECTION 4.01
    Valid Existence. Such Purchaser, if not an individual, (a) is duly organized, validly existing and
in good standing under the Laws of its respective jurisdiction of organization and (b) has the
requisite power, and has all material governmental licenses, authorizations, consents and
approvals necessary to own its Properties and carry on its business as its business is now being
conducted, except where the failure to obtain such licenses, authorizations, consents and
approvals would not reasonably be expected, individually or in the aggregate, to have a
Purchaser Material Adverse Effect.
SECTION 4.02
    No Consents; Violations, Etc. The execution, delivery and performance of the Transaction
Agreements to which such Purchaser is a party by such Purchaser and the consummation of the
transactions contemplated thereby will not (a) require any consent, approval or notice under, or
constitute a violation or breach of, the Organizational Documents of such Purchaser, if not an
individual, (b) constitute a violation or breach of, or a default (or an event that, with notice or lapse
of time or both, would constitute such a default or give rise to any right of termination, cancellation
or acceleration) under, any note, bond, mortgage, lease, loan or credit agreement or other
material instrument, obligation or agreement to which such Purchaser is a party or by which such
Purchaser or any of its Properties may be bound, (c) violate any provision of any Law or any
order, judgment or decree of any court or Governmental Authority having jurisdiction over such
Purchaser or its Properties, except in the cases of clauses (b) and (c) where such violation,
breach or default, would not reasonably be expected, individually or in the aggregate, to have a
Purchaser Material Adverse Effect.
SECTION 4.03
    Investment. The Purchased Units are being acquired for such Purchaser’s own account, or the
accounts of clients for whom such Purchaser exercises discretionary investment authority, not as
a nominee or agent, and with no present intention of distributing the Purchased Units or any part
thereof, and such Purchaser has no present intention of selling or granting any participation in or
otherwise distributing the same, in any transaction in violation of the securities Laws of the
United States of America or any state, without prejudice, however, to such Purchaser’s right at all
times to sell or otherwise dispose of all or any part of the Purchased Units or the Conversion
Units under a registration statement under the Securities Act and applicable state securities
Laws or under an exemption from such registration available thereunder (including, without
limitation, if available, Rule 144 promulgated under the Securities Act).
SECTION 4.04
    Nature of Purchaser. Such Purchaser represents and warrants to, and covenants and agrees
with, the Partnership that, (a) it is an individual or an institution that is an “accredited investor” as
defined in Rule 501(a) under the Securities Act, (b) by reason of its business and financial
experience it has such knowledge, sophistication and experience in business and financial
matters so as to be capable of evaluating the merits and risks of the prospective investment in the
Purchased Units, is able to bear the economic risk of such investment and, at the present time,
would be able to afford a complete loss of such investment and (c) it is not acquiring the
Purchased Units with a view to, or for offer or sale in connection with, any distribution thereof that
could result in such Purchaser being an “underwriter" within the meaning of section 2(11) of the
Securities Act or result in any violation of the registration requirements of the Securities Act.
SECTION 4.05
    Receipt of Information. Such Purchaser acknowledges that it (a) has access to the SEC
Documents, (b) has been provided a reasonable opportunity to ask questions of and receive
answers from Representatives of the Partnership regarding such matters and (c) has sought such
financial, accounting, legal and tax advice as it has considered necessary to make an informed
investment decision with respect to the acquisition of the Purchased Units. Neither such inquiries
nor any other due diligence investigations conducted at any time by such Purchasers shall
modify, amend or affect such Purchasers’ right (i) to rely on the Partnership’s representations and
warranties contained in ARTICLE III above or (ii) to indemnification or any other remedy based
on, or with respect to the accuracy or inaccuracy of, or compliance with, the representations,
warranties, covenants and agreements in any Transaction Agreement.
SECTION 4.06
    Restricted Securities. Such Purchaser understands that the Purchased Units it is purchasing
are characterized as “restricted securities” under the federal securities Laws inasmuch as they
are being acquired from the Partnership in a transaction not involving a public offering and that
under such Laws and applicable regulations such securities may be resold without registration
under the Securities Act only in certain limited circumstances. In this connection, such Purchaser
represents that it is knowledgeable with respect to Rule 144 of the SEC promulgated under the
Securities Act.
SECTION 4.07
    Certain Fees. No fees or commissions will be payable by such Purchaser to brokers, finders,
or investment bankers with respect to the sale of any of the Purchased Units or the
consummation of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement.
SECTION 4.08
    Legend. It is understood that the certificates evidencing the Purchased Units will bear the
following legend:
“These securities have not been registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the
“Securities Act”), or the securities laws of any state or other jurisdiction. These securities may not
be sold or offered for sale, pledged or hypothecated except pursuant to an effective registration
statement under the Securities Act or pursuant to an exemption from registration thereunder, in
each case in accordance with all applicable securities laws of the states or other jurisdictions,
and in the case of a transaction exempt from registration, such securities may only be transferred
if the transfer agent for such securities has received documentation satisfactory to it that such
transaction does not require registration under the Securities Act.”
SECTION 4.09
    Reliance on Exemptions. Each Purchaser understands that the Purchased Units are being
offered and sold to such Purchaser in reliance upon specific exemptions from the registration
requirements of United States federal and state securities Laws and that the Partnership is
relying upon the truth and accuracy of, and Purchaser’s compliance with, the representations,
warranties, agreements, acknowledgments and understandings of Purchaser set forth herein in
order to determine the availability of such exemptions and the eligibility of Purchaser to acquire
the Purchased Units.
SECTION 4.10
    Authority. Such Purchaser has all necessary power and authority to execute, deliver and
perform its obligations under the Transaction Agreements to which such Purchaser is a party and
to consummate the transactions contemplated thereby; the execution, delivery and performance
by such Purchaser of the Transaction Agreements and the consummation of the transactions
contemplated thereby, have been duly authorized by all necessary action on its part; and,
assuming the due authorization, execution and delivery by the other parties thereto, the
Transaction Agreements to which it is a party constitute the legal, valid and binding obligation of
such Purchaser, enforceable in accordance with its terms, except as such enforceability may be
limited by bankruptcy, insolvency, fraudulent transfer and similar Laws affecting creditors’ rights
generally or by general principles of equity, including principles of commercial reasonableness,
fair dealing and good faith.
ARTICLE V
     
COVENANTS
SECTION 5.01
    Taking of Necessary Action. Each of the Parties hereto shall use its commercially reasonable
efforts promptly to take or cause to be taken all action and promptly to do or cause to be done all
things necessary, proper or advisable under applicable Law and regulations to consummate and
make effective the transactions contemplated by this Agreement. Without limiting the foregoing,
the Partnership and each Purchaser shall use its commercially reasonable efforts to make all
filings and obtain all consents of Governmental Authorities that may be necessary or, in the
reasonable opinion of the Purchasers or the Partnership, as the case may be, advisable for the
consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Transaction Agreements.
SECTION 5.02
    Public Announcements. The initial press release with respect to the transactions contemplated
hereby shall be in a form to be reasonably agreed upon by the Partnership and Bonanza.
Thereafter, except as required by applicable Law, neither the Partnership nor the Purchasers
shall make any press release or other public announcement with respect to the transactions
contemplated hereby without the prior written consent of the other Party (which consent shall not
be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed).
SECTION 5.03
    Disclosure; Public Filings. The Partnership may, without prior written consent or notice, (i) file
the Transaction Agreements as exhibits to Exchange Act reports, if required by applicable Law
and (ii) disclose such information with respect to any Purchaser as required by applicable Law or
the rules or regulations of the NASDAQ or other exchange on which securities of the Partnership
are listed or traded.
SECTION 5.04
    NASDAQ Listing of Additional Shares. The Partnership shall, prior to the Closing Date, file a
listing of additional shares with the NASDAQ to list the Conversion Units and will otherwise use
its reasonable commercial efforts to list the Conversion Units on the NASDAQ and maintain such
listing.
SECTION 5.05
    Use of Proceeds. The Partnership will use the net proceeds from the sale of Class A
Convertible Preferred Units under this Agreement to fund the acquisition of certain properties in
Nolan County, Texas, and any excess will be used for other general partnership purposes,
including the repayment of indebtedness.
SECTION 5.06
    ATM Program. The Partnership will provide notice to the ATM Managers suspending the
offering of Common Units under the ATM Program, effective for the period beginning on the
Closing Date and ending on the fifth anniversary of the Closing Date, and will provide a copy of
the same to Bonanza on or prior to the Closing Date.
ARTICLE VI
     
CLOSING CONDITIONS
SECTION 6.01
    Conditions to Closing.
(a)
    Mutual Conditions. The respective obligation of each Party to consummate the purchase and
issuance and sale of Purchased Units at Closing shall be subject to the satisfaction on or prior to
the Closing Date of each of the following conditions (any or all of which may be waived by a
particular Party on behalf of itself in writing, in whole or in part, to the extent permitted by
applicable Law):
(i)
    no Law shall have been enacted or promulgated, and no action shall have been taken, by any
Governmental Authority of competent jurisdiction that temporarily, preliminarily or permanently
restrains, precludes, enjoins or otherwise prohibits the consummation of the transactions
contemplated by this Agreement or makes the transactions contemplated by this Agreement
illegal; and
(ii)
    there shall not be pending any Action by any Governmental Authority seeking to restrain,
preclude, enjoin or prohibit the transactions contemplated by this Agreement.
(b)
    Each Purchaser’s Conditions. The respective obligation of each Purchaser to consummate the
purchase of its Purchased Units on the Closing Date in accordance with Schedule A hereto shall
be subject to the satisfaction on or prior to the Closing Date, as applicable, of each of the
following conditions (any or all of which may be waived by a particular Purchaser only on behalf
of itself in writing, in whole or in part):
(i)
    the Partnership shall have performed and complied with the covenants and agreements
contained in this Agreement that are required to be performed and complied with by the
Partnership on or prior to the Closing Date;
(ii)
    the representations and warranties of the Partnership contained in this Agreement that are
qualified by materiality or Partnership Material Adverse Effect shall be true and correct when
made and as of the Closing Date, and all other representations and warranties of the Partnership
shall be true and correct in all material respects when made and as of the Closing Date, in each
case as though made at and as of the Closing Date (except that representations made as of a
specific date shall be required to be true and correct as of such date only); and
(iii)
    the Partnership shall have delivered, or caused to be delivered, to the Purchasers the
Partnership’s closing deliveries described in Section 6.02.
(c)
    The Partnership’s Conditions. The obligation of the Partnership to consummate the sale of the
Purchased Units to each of the Purchasers on the Closing Date shall be subject to the
satisfaction on or prior to the Closing Date, as applicable, of each of the following conditions with
respect to each Purchaser individually and not the Purchasers jointly (any or all of which may be
waived by the Partnership in writing, in whole or in part, to the extent permitted by applicable
Law):  
(i)
    each Purchaser shall have performed and complied with the covenants and agreements
contained in this Agreement that are required to be performed and complied with by that
Purchaser on or prior to the Closing Date;
(ii)
    the representations and warranties of each Purchaser contained in this Agreement that are
qualified by materiality or Purchaser Material Adverse Effect shall be true and correct when made
and as of the Closing Date, and all other representations and warranties of such Purchaser shall
be true and correct in all material respects when made and as of the Closing Date, in each case
as though made at and as of the Closing Date (except that representations made as of a specific
date shall be required to be true and correct as of such date only); and
(iii)
    each Purchaser shall have delivered, or caused to be delivered, to the Partnership such
Purchaser’s closing deliveries set forth in Section 6.03.
SECTION 6.02
    Partnership Deliveries. At Closing, subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement, the
Partnership will deliver, or cause to be delivered, to each Purchaser or Bonanza, as applicable:
(a)
    evidence of issuance of a certificate evidencing the Purchased Units or the Purchased Units
credited to book-entry accounts maintained by the transfer agent, as the case may be, bearing
the legend or restrictive notation set forth in Section 4.08, and meeting the requirements of the
Amended Partnership Agreement, free and clear of any Liens, other than transfer restrictions
under the Amended Partnership Agreement and applicable federal and state securities laws;
(b)
    a certificate of the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware, dated as of a recent date, to the
effect that each of the General Partner and the Partnership is in good standing;
(c)
    an Officer’s Certificate, substantially in the form attached to this Agreement as Exhibit B;
(d)
    the Partnership Agreement Amendment, duly executed by the General Partner;
(e)
    the Registration Rights Agreement, duly executed by the General Partner on behalf of the
Partnership;
(f)
    the Monitoring Agreement, duly executed by the General Partner;
(g)
    the Standstill Agreement, duly executed by the General Partner;
(h)
    Lock-Up Agreements, duly executed by the Founders and Mid-Con Energy III, LLC;
(i)
    a certificate of the Secretary or Assistant Secretary of the General Partner, on behalf of the
Partnership, dated the Closing Date, certifying as to (i) the certificate of formation of the General
Partner, the GP LLC Agreement, the certificate of limited partnership of the Partnership, and the
Partnership Agreement, (ii) board resolutions authorizing the execution and delivery of the
Transaction Agreements and the consummation of the transactions contemplated thereby and
(iii) the incumbent officers authorized to execute the Transaction Agreements, setting forth the
name and title and bearing the signatures of such officers;
(j)
    a cross receipt, dated the Closing Date, executed by the Partnership confirming that the
Partnership has received such Purchaser’s Purchase Price;
(k)
    a duly executed waiver of the General Partner with respect to certain of its rights under the
Partnership Agreement, in substantially the form attached hereto as Exhibit D; and
(l)
    payment to Bonanza, by wire transfer of immediately available funds, of an amount equal to the
Reimbursable Legal Expenses set forth in the Expense Notice.
SECTION 6.03
    Purchaser Deliveries. At Closing, subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement, each
Purchaser will deliver, or cause to be delivered, to the Partnership:
(a)
    payment to the Partnership, by wire transfer(s) of immediately available funds to the
Partnership Bank Account, of such Purchaser’s Purchase Price;
(b)
    the Registration Rights Agreement, duly executed by such Purchaser;
(c)
    if not an individual, an Officers’ certificate, substantially in the form attached to this Agreement
as Exhibit C;
(d)
    the Monitoring Agreement, duly executed by Bonanza;
(e)
    the Standstill Agreement, duly executed by such Purchaser;
(f)
    a cross receipt, dated the Closing Date, executed by such Purchaser confirming that such
Purchaser has received the Purchased Units being purchased by such Purchaser on such
Closing Date pursuant hereto; and
(g)
    a completed Internal Revenue Service Form W-9, Form W-8BEN or applicable substitute form.
ARTICLE VII
     
INDEMNIFICATION, COSTS AND EXPENSES
SECTION 7.01
    Indemnification by the Partnership. The Partnership agrees to indemnify each Purchaser and
its Representatives (collectively, “Purchaser Related Parties”) (a) from costs, losses, liabilities,
damages, or expenses, and (b) hold each of them harmless against, any and all actions, suits,
proceedings (including any investigations, litigation or inquiries), demands, and causes of action
as a result of, arising out of, or in any way related to the breach of any of the representations,
warranties or covenants of the Partnership contained herein or in any certificate or instrument
delivered by or on behalf of the Partnership hereunder, and in connection therewith, and promptly
upon demand, pay or reimburse each of them for all costs, losses, liabilities, damages, or
expenses of any kind or nature whatsoever, including, without limitation, the reasonable fees and
disbursements of counsel and all other reasonable expenses incurred in connection with
investigating, defending or preparing to defend any such matter that may be incurred by them or
asserted against or involve any of them (whether or not a party thereto), provided that such claim
for indemnification relating to a breach of any representation or warranty is made prior to the
expiration of such representations or warranties to the extent applicable.
SECTION 7.02
    Indemnification by Purchasers. Each Purchaser agrees, severally and not jointly, to indemnify
the Partnership, the General Partner and their respective Representatives (collectively,
“Partnership Related Parties”) from, and hold each of them harmless against, any and all actions,
suits, proceedings (including any investigations, litigation, or inquiries), demands and causes of
action and, in connection therewith, and promptly upon demand, pay or reimburse each of them
for all costs, losses, liabilities, damages, or expenses of any kind or nature whatsoever,
including, without limitation, the reasonable fees and disbursements of counsel and all other
reasonable expenses incurred in connection with investigating, defending or preparing to defend
any such matter that may be incurred by them or asserted against or involve any of them as a
result of, arising out of, or in any way related to the breach of any of the representations,
warranties or covenants of such Purchaser contained herein or in any certificate or instrument
delivered by such Purchaser hereunder; provided that such claim for indemnification relating to a
breach of any representation or warranty is made prior to the expiration of such representation or
warranty; and provided further, that in no event will such Purchaser be liable under this Section
7.02 for any amount in excess of its Purchase Price.
SECTION 7.03
    Indemnification Procedure. Promptly after any Partnership Related Party or Purchaser Related
Party (hereinafter, the “Indemnified Party”) has received notice of any indemnifiable claim
hereunder, or the commencement of any action, suit or proceeding by a third party, which the
Indemnified Party believes in good faith is an indemnifiable claim under this Agreement (each a
“Third Party Claim”), the Indemnified Party shall give the indemnitor hereunder (the “Indemnifying
Party”) written notice of such claim or the commencement of such action, suit or proceeding, but
failure to so notify the Indemnifying Party will not relieve the Indemnifying Party from any liability
it may have to such Indemnified Party hereunder except to the extent that the Indemnifying Party
is materially prejudiced by such failure. Such notice shall state the nature and the basis of such
claim to the extent then known. The Indemnifying Party shall have the right to defend and settle,
at its own expense and by its own counsel who shall be reasonably acceptable to the
Indemnified Party, any such matter as long as the Indemnifying Party pursues the same diligently
and in good faith. If the Indemnifying Party undertakes to defend or settle, it shall promptly notify
the Indemnified Party of its intention to do so, and the Indemnified Party shall cooperate with the
Indemnifying Party and its counsel in all commercially reasonable respects in the defense thereof
and the settlement thereof. Such cooperation shall include furnishing the Indemnifying Party with
any books, records and other information reasonably requested by the Indemnifying Party and in
the Indemnified Party’s possession or control. Such cooperation of the Indemnified Party shall be
at the cost of the Indemnifying Party. After the Indemnifying Party has notified the Indemnified
Party of its intention to undertake to defend or settle any such asserted liability, and for so long as
the Indemnifying Party diligently pursues such defense, the Indemnifying Party shall not be liable
for any additional legal expenses incurred by the Indemnified Party in connection with any
defense or settlement of such asserted liability; provided, however, that the Indemnified Party
shall be entitled, at its expense, to participate in the defense of such asserted liability and the
negotiations of the settlement thereof. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, the
Indemnifying Party shall not settle any indemnified claim without the consent of the Indemnified
Party, unless the settlement thereof imposes no liability or obligation on, involves no admission
of wrongdoing or malfeasance by, and includes a complete release from liability of, the
Indemnified Party.
SECTION 7.04
    Tax Treatment. All indemnification payments under this ARTICLE VII shall be adjustments to
the Per Unit Price except as otherwise required by applicable Law.
ARTICLE VIII
     
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION 8.01
    Interpretation. Article, Section, Schedule, and Exhibit references are to this Agreement, unless
otherwise specified. All references to instruments, documents, contracts, and agreements are
references to such instruments, documents, contracts, and agreements as the same may be
amended, supplemented, and otherwise modified from time to time, unless otherwise specified.
The word “including” shall mean “including but not limited to.” Whenever a party has an
obligation under the Transaction Agreements, the expense of complying with such obligation
shall be an expense of such party unless otherwise specified therein. Whenever any
determination, consent or approval is to be made or given by a Purchaser under the Transaction
Agreements, such action shall be in such Purchaser’s sole discretion, unless otherwise specified
therein. The meaning assigned to each term defined herein shall be equally applicable to both
the singular and the plural forms of such term and vice versa, and words denoting any gender
shall include all genders as the context requires. Where a word or phrase is defined herein, each
of its other grammatical forms shall have a corresponding meaning. A reference to any Party to
this Agreement or a Person party to any other agreement or document shall include such Party’s
successors and permitted assigns If any provision in the Transaction Agreements is held to be
illegal, invalid, not binding, or unenforceable, such provision shall be fully severable and the
Transaction Agreements shall be construed and enforced as if such illegal, invalid, not binding or
unenforceable provision had never comprised a part of the Transaction Agreements, and the
remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect. The Transaction Agreements have
been reviewed and negotiated by sophisticated parties with access to legal counsel and shall not
be construed against the drafter.
SECTION 8.02
    Survival of Provisions. The representations and warranties set forth in Sections 3.01, 3.02,
3.03, 3.08, 3.09, 3.11, 3.19, 3.21, 3.22, 3.23, 3.24, 4.01, 4.03, 4.04, 4.05, 4.06, 4.07, 4.08, 4.09
and 4.10 of this Agreement shall survive the execution and delivery of this Agreement
indefinitely, and the other representations and warranties set forth in this Agreement shall survive
until the date that is 30 days following the filing of the Partnership’s Annual Report on Form 10-K
for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2017 regardless of any investigation made by or on
behalf of the Partnership or any Purchaser. The covenants made in this Agreement or any other
Transaction Agreement shall survive the Closing indefinitely until performed and remain
operative and in full force and effect regardless of acceptance of any of the Purchased Units and
payment therefor and repayment, conversion, exercise, redemption or repurchase thereof. All
indemnification obligations of the Partnership and the Purchasers pursuant to this Agreement
shall remain operative and in full force and effect unless such obligations are expressly
terminated in a writing by the Parties, regardless of any purported general termination of this
Agreement.
SECTION 8.03
    No Waiver; Modifications in Writing.
(a)
    Delay. No failure or delay on the part of any Party in exercising any right, power, or remedy
hereunder shall operate as a waiver thereof, nor shall any single or partial exercise of any such
right, power, or remedy preclude any other or further exercise thereof or the exercise of any right,
power, or remedy. The remedies provided for herein are cumulative and are not exclusive of any
remedies that may be available to a Party at Law or in equity or otherwise.
(b)
    Specific Waiver; Amendment. Except as otherwise provided herein, no amendment, waiver,
consent, modification or termination of any provision of this Agreement shall be effective, unless
signed by each of Parties or each of the original signatories thereto affected by such amendment,
waiver, consent, modification or termination. Any amendment, supplement or modification of or to
any provision hereof, any waiver of any provision hereof and any consent to any departure by the
Partnership from the terms of any provision hereof shall be effective only in the specific instance
and for the specific purpose for which made or given. Except where notice is specifically required
by this Agreement, no notice to or demand on the Partnership in any case shall entitle the
Partnership to any other or further notice or demand in similar or other circumstances.
SECTION 8.04
    Binding Effect; Assignment.
(a)
    Binding Effect. This Agreement shall be binding upon the Partnership, each Purchaser and
their respective successors and permitted assigns. Except as expressly provided in this
Agreement, this Agreement shall not be construed so as to confer any right or benefit upon any
Person other than the Parties to this Agreement and as provided in ARTICLE VII, and their
respective successors and permitted assigns.
(b)
    Assignment of Rights. All or any portion of the rights and obligations of any Purchaser under
this Agreement may be transferred by such Purchaser without the consent of the Partnership,
subject to the restrictions set forth in, and compliance with the requirements of, Section 2.01(b).
Any transfer or attempted transfer of the rights and obligations of a Purchaser under this
Agreement, other than in accordance with Section 2.01(b), shall be null and void and of no force
and effect.
SECTION 8.05
    Communications. All notices and demands provided for hereunder shall be in writing and shall
be given by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, telecopy, air courier
guaranteeing overnight delivery, electronic mail or personal delivery to the following addresses:
(a)
    If to any Purchaser or Bonanza:
To such Purchaser’s address listed on Schedule 8.05 hereof or such other address as such
Purchaser shall have specified by written notice to the Partnership.
With a copy, in the case of Bonanza or Purchasers who are Affiliates of Bonanza, to (which shall
not constitute notice):
Jackson Walker L.L.P.
2323 Ross Ave.
Suite 600
Dallas, Texas 75201
Attention: Jeffrey M. Sone
Email: jsone@jw.com
(b)
    If to the Partnership:
Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP
2431 East 61st Street
Suite 850
Tulsa, Oklahoma 74136
Attention: Charles L. McLawhorn, III
Email: cmclawhorn@midcon-energy.com
With a copy to (which shall not constitute notice):
Andrews Kurth LLP
1350 I Street, NW
Suite 1100
Washington, DC 20005
Attention: William J. Cooper
Email: bcooper@andrewskurth.com
or to such other address as the Partnership or such Purchaser may designate in writing. All
notices and communications shall be deemed to have been duly given: at the time delivered by
hand, if personally delivered; at the time of transmittal, if sent via electronic mail prior to 5:00 p.m.,
Central Time on the date submitted; on the next succeeding Business Day, if sent via electronic
mail at or after 5:00 p.m., Central Time on the date submitted; upon actual receipt if sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or regular mail, if mailed; when receipt acknowledged, if
sent via facsimile; and upon actual receipt when delivered to an air courier guaranteeing
overnight delivery.
SECTION 8.06
    Entire Agreement. This Agreement and the other Transaction Agreements are intended by the
Parties as a final expression of their agreement and intended to be a complete and exclusive
statement of the agreement and understanding of the Parties hereto and thereto in respect of the
subject matter contained herein and therein. There are no restrictions, promises, warranties or
undertakings, other than those set forth or referred to herein and therein, with respect to the rights
granted by the Partnership or a Purchaser set forth herein and therein. This Agreement and the
other Transaction Agreements supersede all prior agreements and understandings between the
Parties with respect to such subject matter. The Schedules and Exhibits referred to herein and
attached hereto are incorporated herein by this reference, and unless the context expressly
requires otherwise, are incorporated in the definition of “Agreement.”
SECTION 8.07
    Governing Law; Submission to Jurisdiction. This Agreement, and all claims or causes of action
(whether in contract or tort) that may be based upon, arise out of or relate to this Agreement or the
negotiation, execution or performance of this Agreement (including any claim or cause of action
based upon, arising out of or related to any representation or warranty made in or in connection
with this Agreement), will be construed in accordance with and governed by the laws of the State
of Delaware.  The Parties hereby submit to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of any U.S. federal or
state court located in Dallas, Texas in any action, suit or proceeding arising out of or based upon
this Agreement or any of the transactions contemplated hereby. The Parties hereby irrevocably
waive, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable Law, any objection which they may now or
hereafter have to the laying of venue of any such dispute brought in such court or any defense of
inconvenient forum for the maintenance of such dispute.  Each of the Parties hereto agrees that a
judgment in any such dispute may be enforced in other jurisdictions by suit on the judgment or in
any other manner provided by Law.
SECTION 8.08
    Waiver of Jury Trial. THE PARTIES TO THIS AGREEMENT EACH HEREBY WAIVES, AND
AGREES TO CAUSE ITS AFFILIATES TO WAIVE, TO THE FULLEST EXTENT PERMITTED
BY LAW, ANY RIGHT TO TRIAL BY JURY OF ANY CLAIM, DEMAND, ACTION OR CAUSE
OF ACTION (A) ARISING UNDER THIS AGREEMENT OR (B) IN ANY WAY CONNECTED
WITH OR RELATED OR INCIDENTAL TO THE DEALINGS OF THE PARTIES HERETO IN
RESPECT OF THIS AGREEMENT OR ANY OF THE TRANSACTIONS RELATED HERETO,
IN EACH CASE WHETHER NOW EXISTING OR HEREAFTER ARISING, AND WHETHER IN
CONTRACT, TORT, EQUITY OR OTHERWISE.  THE PARTIES TO THIS AGREEMENT EACH
HEREBY AGREES AND CONSENTS THAT ANY SUCH CLAIM, DEMAND, ACTION OR
CAUSE OF ACTION SHALL BE DECIDED BY COURT TRIAL WITHOUT A JURY AND THAT
THE PARTIES TO THIS AGREEMENT MAY FILE AN ORIGINAL COUNTERPART OF A
COPY OF THIS AGREEMENT WITH ANY COURT AS WRITTEN EVIDENCE OF THE
CONSENT OF THE PARTIES HERETO TO THE WAIVER OF THEIR RIGHT TO TRIAL BY
JURY.
SECTION 8.09
    Execution in Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in any number of counterparts
and by different Parties hereto in separate counterparts, including facsimile or .pdf format
counterparts, each of which counterparts, when so executed and delivered, shall be deemed to
be an original and all of which counterparts, taken together, shall constitute but one and the same
Agreement.
SECTION 8.10
    Termination.
(a)
    Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, this Agreement may be terminated at any time
at or prior to the Closing by the mutual written consent of the Partnership and the Purchasers
entitled to purchase a majority of the Purchased Units in accordance with Schedule A, or, with
respect to any Purchaser, that Purchaser and the Partnership.
(b)
    Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, this Agreement shall automatically terminate
at any time at or prior to the Closing:
(i)
    if a statute, rule, order, decree or regulation shall have been enacted or promulgated, or if any
action shall have been taken by any Governmental Authority of competent jurisdiction which
permanently restrains, precludes, enjoins or otherwise prohibits the consummation of the
transactions contemplated by this Agreement or makes the transactions contemplated by this
Agreement illegal; or
(ii)
    if the Closing shall not have occurred on or before August 12, 2016.
(c)
    In the event of the termination of this Agreement as provided in Section 8.10(a) or Section
8.10(b), this Agreement shall forthwith become null and void. In the event of such termination,
there shall be no liability on the part of any Party hereto, except with respect to the requirement to
comply with any confidentiality agreement in favor of the Partnership; provided that nothing
herein shall relieve any party from any liability or obligation with respect to any willful breach of
this Agreement.
SECTION 8.11
    Recapitalization, Exchanges, Etc. The provisions of this Agreement shall apply to the full
extent set forth herein with respect to any and all equity interests of the Partnership or any
successor or assign of the Partnership (whether by merger, consolidation, sale of assets or
otherwise) that may be issued in respect of, in exchange for or in substitution of, the Purchased
Units, and shall be appropriately adjusted for combinations, unit splits, recapitalizations and the
like of the Class A Convertible Preferred Units or the Common Units occurring after the date of
this Agreement.
SECTION 8.12
    Specific Performance. Damages in the event of breach of this Agreement by a Party hereto
may be difficult, if not impossible, to ascertain, and it is therefore agreed that each such Party, in
addition to and without limiting any other remedy or right it may have, will have the right to an
injunction or other equitable relief in any court of competent jurisdiction, enjoining any such
breach, and enforcing specifically the terms and provisions hereof, and each of the Parties hereto
hereby waives any and all defenses it may have on the ground of lack of jurisdiction or
competence of the court to grant such an injunction or other equitable relief. The existence of this
right will not preclude any such Party from pursuing any other rights and remedies at law or in
equity that such Party may have.
(Signature Pages Follow)
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties hereto execute this Agreement, effective as of the date first
above written.
MID-CON ENERGY PARTNERS, LP
By: Mid-Con Energy GP, LLC,
its General Partner
By:     /s/ Jeffrey R. Olmstead    
Name: Jeffrey R. Olmstead
Title: Chief Executive Officer
BONANZA MASTER FUND, LTD.
By: Bonanza Capital, Ltd., its investment     manager
By: Bonanza Fund Management, Inc.,
its general partner
By:     /s/ Bernay Box    
Name: Bernay Box
Title: President
BONANZA CAPITAL, LTD.
By: Bonanza Fund Management, Inc.,
its general partner
By:     /s/ Bernay Box    
Name: Bernay Box
Title: President
THE CUSHING RENAISSANCE FUND
By: Cushing Asset Management, LP.,
is investment adviser
By: Swank Capital, LLC, its general partner
By:     /s/ Jerry V. Swank    
Name: Jerry V. Swank
Title: Managing Member
THE CUSHING FOCUSED MLP FUND, LP
By: Cushing Asset Management, LP.,
its general partner
By: Swank Capital, LLC., its general partner
By:     /s/ Jerry V. Swank    
Name: Jerry V. Swank
Title: Managing Member
THE CUSHING ENERGY INCOME FUND
By: Cushing Asset Management, L.P.,
its investment adviser
By: Swank Capital, LLC., its general partner
By:     /s/ Jerry V. Swank    
Name: Jerry V. Swank
Title: Managing Member
MAINSTAY CUSHING ENERGY INCOME FUND
By: Cushing Asset Management, L.P.,
its investment subadvisor
By: Swank Capital, LLC., its general partner
By:     /s/ Jerry V. Swank    
Name: Jerry V. Swank
Title: Managing Member
GOFF REN HOLDINGS, LLC,
By:     /s/ Keith B. Ohnmeis    
Name: Keith B. Ohnmeis
Title:     Manager
GOFF MCEP HOLDINGS, LLC,
By: Its Manager: Goff Capital, Inc.
By:     /s/ John C. Goff    
Name: John C. Goff
Title:    President
RR ENERGY HOLDINGS, LLC
By:     /s/ Robert Raymond    
Name: Robert Raymond
Title:     Sole Member
JAMES R. REIS 1999 REVOCABLE LIVING TRUST
By:     /s/ James R. Reis    
Name: James R. Reis
Title:     Trustee
GAINSCO, INC.
By:     /s/ Terrence J. Lynch    
Name: Terrence J. Lynch
Title:     Senior Vice President
AUSTIN FAMILY PARTNERS
By:     /s/ J. Winston Krause    
Name: J. Winston Krause
Title: Partner
THE GOFF FAMILY FOUNDATION
By:     /s/ John Goff    
Name: John Goff
Title: Sole Director
SCG VENTURES LP
By: Stallings Mgmt LLC,
its manager
By:     /s/ Robert W. Stallings    
Name: Robert W. Stallings
Title: President
Class A Convertible Preferred
Purchaser
 
The Cushing Energy Income Fund
Mainstay Cushing Energy Income Fund
The Cushing Renaissance Fund
The Cushing Focused MLP Fund, LP
Bonanza Master Fund, Ltd.
Goff REN Holdings, LLC
Goff MCEP Holdings, LLC
Austin Family Partners
The Goff Family Foundation
GAINSCO, Inc.
SCG Ventures LP
James R. Reis 1999 Revocable Living
Trust
RR Energy Holdings, LLC
TOTAL
Units
 
116,279
348,837
465,116
232,558
930,233
2,139,535
2,046,512
465,116
232,558
1,395,349
465,116
232,558
232,558
9,302,325
Exhibit A
Purchase Price
$250,000.00
$750,000.00
$1,000,000.00
$500,000.00
$2,000,000.00
$4,600,000.00
$4,400,000.00
$1,000,000.00
$500,000.00
$3,000,000.00
$1,000,000.00
$500,000.00
$500,000.00
$20,000,000.00
Term Sheet
This Term Sheet has been prepared for discussion purposes only and does not create a binding
obligation or commitment on the part of any of the parties referenced herein, their respective
affiliates or representatives of such parties or affiliates.
ISSUER:
PURCHASERS:
SECURITIES:
INVESTMENT/
AMOUNT:
NUMBER OF
UNITS/ UNIT
PRICE:
USE OF
PROCEEDS:
ANTICIPATED
SIGNING,
Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP (the “Partnership”).
Bonanza Capital, Ltd. or its assign (“Bonanza”) and certain co-investors
(collectively, the “Purchasers”).
Class A Preferred Units (“Preferred Units”) representing limited partner
interests in the Partnership, which will be convertible into common units
representing limited partner interests in the Partnership (“Common Units”)
and have such terms as described below.
The Partnership expects to issue up to $25.0 million of Preferred Units upon
closing of the sale of the Preferred Units (the “Transaction”). All the Preferred
Units issued pursuant to this Transaction shall be purchased and sold for the
same price per Preferred Unit.
On the closing date (“Closing Date”), each Purchaser will purchase a number
of Preferred Units equal to the aggregate purchase price in U.S. Dollars to be
paid by such Purchaser divided by $2.15 (the “Unit Purchase Price”).
Net proceeds to the Partnership from the Transaction will be used to fund the
acquisition of certain properties in Nolan County, Texas and any excess will
be used for general partnership purposes, including the repayment of
indebtedness.
Definitive documents to be executed prior to or on August 1, 2016, followed
ANNOUNCEMENT
AND CLOSING
DATE:
by the public announcement of the Transaction on such date.
Close the Transaction prior to or on August 12, 2016.
DISTRIBUTIONS:
ATM PROGRAM:
VOTING RIGHTS:
PROTECTIVE
PROVISIONS:
The Partnership will pay to the Holders (as defined below) of Preferred Units
a cumulative, quarterly distribution in arrears on all Preferred Units then
outstanding (subject customary anti-dilution adjustments) (i) in cash at an
annual rate of 8.00%, or (ii) in the event that the Partnership’s existing
secured indebtedness prevents the payment of a cash distribution to all
Holders, in kind (additional Preferred Units) at an annual rate of 10.00%.
Such distributions will be paid for each such quarter within 45 days after such
quarter end; provided that the distribution for the quarter ending September
30, 2016 will be prorated.
The Partnership will suspend its existing at-the-market offering (“ATM”)
program effective as of the Closing Date until the fifth anniversary of the
Closing Date. The consent of the Holders of a majority of the outstanding
Preferred Units shall be required to lift the suspension of the ATM program.
In addition to the rights set forth under “ATM Program” above and under
“Protective Provisions” below, Holders of the Preferred Units shall be entitled
to vote with the holders of the Common Units as a single class on all matters
on an as converted basis.
The General Partner will provide written notice to the Purchasers that the
20% “vote blocker” in the Partnership Agreement will not apply to any of the
Purchasers (as permitted under clause (iv) of the definition of “Outstanding”
in the Partnership Agreement) or any Purchaser by virtue of acting in concert
with the other Purchasers.
Without the consent of the Holders of a majority of the outstanding Preferred
Units, (i) no action shall be taken that adversely affects any of the rights,
preferences or privileges of the Preferred Units, (ii) the terms of the Preferred
Units shall not be amended, (iii) the Partnership shall not issue any
additional Preferred Units or any equity security senior or pari passu in right
of distribution or in liquidation to the Preferred Units, and (iv)  the Partnership
shall not incur any indebtedness for borrowed money (other than under the
existing credit facility, including any increase in the borrowing base
thereunder or any amendment or restatement thereof, and trade accounts
payable arising in the ordinary course of business).
On the fifth anniversary of the Closing Date, a Holder will be entitled to elect to
cause the Partnership to redeem all or any portion of such Holder’s Preferred
Units for cash at the Unit Purchase Price, and any remaining Preferred Units will
thereafter be converted to Common Units on a one-for-one basis, subject
adjustment for splits, reverse splits, subdivisions, combinations and
reclassifications of the Common Units.
Upon conversion or redemption of Preferred Units on the fifth anniversary of the
Closing date, the Partnership shall pay any distributions (to the extent accrued
TERM,
REDEMPTION,
MANDATORY
CONVERSION:
and unpaid as of the then most recent Preferred Units distribution date) on the
converted or redeemed units in cash.
At any time after the six-month anniversary of the Closing Date and prior to the
first to occur of (i) the fifth anniversary of the Closing Date or (ii) the
consummation of a Change of Control, a Holder may elect to convert all or a
portion of its Preferred Units into Common Units on a one-for-one basis, subject
adjustment for splits, reverse splits, subdivisions, combinations and
reclassifications of the Common Units; provided that any Holder electing
conversion request the conversion of at least the lesser of (i) 100% of such
Holder’s remaining Preferred Units or (ii) $1,000,000 of Preferred Units, based
on the Unit Purchase Price.
The Preferred Units will convert, on a one-for-one basis, subject to customary
adjustments for splits, reverse splits, subdivisions, combinations and
reclassifications of the Common Units.
Upon conversion of Preferred Units, the Partnership shall pay any distributions
(to the extent accrued and unpaid as of the then most recent Preferred Units
distribution date) on the converted units in cash.
CONVERSION
AT HOLDER’S
ELECTION:
SETTLEMENT
OF
CONVERSION:
Immediately prior to the effectiveness of a Change of Control of the Partnership, a
Holder may elect to:
(i) have such Holder’s Preferred Units converted into Common Units, plus
accrued but unpaid distributions to the conversion date; or
(ii) if the Partnership is the surviving entity of the Change of Control, continue to
hold its Preferred Units.
If a Holder does not elect to convert all of its Preferred Units into Common Units
upon the effectiveness of a Change of Control, then, unless the Partnership is the
surviving entity of the Change of Control, the Partnership shall redeem any
remaining Preferred Units, in cash:
(i) prior to the second anniversary of the Closing Date, at 150% of the Unit
Purchase Price;
CHANGE OF
CONTROL:
(ii) on or after the second but prior to the third anniversary of the Closing Date, at
130% of the Unit Purchase Price; and
(iii) on or after the third but prior to the fourth anniversary of the Closing Date, at
110% of the Unit Purchase Price; and
(iv) thereafter, at the Unit Purchase Price,
in each case, plus accrued but unpaid distributions to the redemption date.
“Change of Control” means the occurrence of any of the following events: (i) the
current owners of the General Partner have ceased to directly or indirectly own at
least 50% of the voting securities and the equity interests of the General Partner,
(ii) the General Partner is removed or withdraws in accordance with the
applicable terms of the Partnership Agreement, (iii) the Partnership’s Common
Units are no longer publicly traded on The NASDAQ Stock Market (“NASDAQ”)
or another national securities exchange or (iv) the sale, lease, transfer,
conveyance or other disposition (including by way of merger or consolidation), in
one or a series of related transactions, of all or substantially all of the assets of
the Partnership and its subsidiaries taken as a whole to any “person” (as such
term is used in Sections 13(d) of the Exchange Act).
Except as set forth under “Term, Redemption, Mandatory Conversion” and
“Change of Control” above, Holders will have no right to cause the Partnership to
redeem the Preferred Units. Except as set forth under “Term, Redemption,
Mandatory Conversion” and “Change of Control” above, the Partnership will have
no right to redeem the Preferred Units.
REDEMPTION:
Prior to the first anniversary of the Closing Date (the “Transfer Limitation
Period”), other than transfers to affiliates or to any other Purchaser, no
Purchaser shall transfer any Preferred Units owned by such Purchaser
without approval of the Partnership.
After the Transfer Limitation Period, each Purchaser may freely transfer any
Preferred Units owned by such Purchaser, other than to any party or group (as
defined by Section 13D of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended)
that after such transfer would own more than 15% of the outstanding Common
Units on an as converted basis.
In addition, no Holder will be permitted to transfer its Preferred Units (i) if such
transfer would cause a technical termination under Section 708 of the Internal
Revenue Code and (ii) such transfer is to a Competitor (as defined below).
“Competitor” means any person or entity that (i) (a) is an operating company
(and not a financial institution, private equity fund or infrastructure fund) and
(b) is engaged in the ownership, acquisition, exploitation or development of
producing oil and natural gas properties, or (ii) is the general partner of a
publicly traded master limited partnership
During the period commencing on the Closing Date and ending on the
second anniversary thereof, without the prior written consent of the
Partnership, the Holders of Preferred Units and their affiliates will not, directly
or indirectly:
•
    “short” any securities of the Partnership; or
•
    take any action, or seek to assist, advise, influence, induce or cause any
other person (within the meaning of Section 13(d)(3) of the Exchange Act) to
take any action, in connection with the removal of the General Partner as the
general partner of the Partnership or the election of a successor general
TRANSFER
RESTRICTIONS:
STANDSTILL:
partner of the Partnership.
Nothing herein shall limit the Holders or any of them from discussing with the
General Partner the nomination and election of a designee of a Holder to the
Board of Directors of the General Partner or such designee’s subsequent
service as a member of the Board.
Resale Shelf. The Partnership shall use its reasonable best efforts to (i) within
90 days of the Closing Date, file a registration statement (which will not be an
automatic shelf registration statement) registering resales of Common Units
issued or to be issued upon conversion of the Preferred Units, (ii) have the
registration statement declared effective within 180 days after the Closing
Date (the “Effectiveness Deadline”) and (iii) continually maintain the
effectiveness of the registration statement until all securities registered
pursuant to such registration statement have been sold or the third
anniversary of the Effectiveness Deadline. In addition, from and after the first
anniversary of the Closing Date, Holders of an aggregate of at least
$1,000,000 of Preferred Units (based on the Unit Purchase Price) shall have
piggyback registration rights on all Partnership registrations, subject to
customary carve backs, and Holders of an aggregate of at least $5,000,000 of
Preferred Units (based on the Unit Purchase Price) shall have demand
registration rights; provided that the Holders shall be entitled to a demand
registration right not more frequently than once during any twelve month
period. The Partnership shall bear the expenses of the demand and
piggyback registrations, other than underwriting discounts and commissions
and the Holders’ respective costs of counsel.
Lock-up. The Partnership will cause the Founders and Yorktown (each, as
defined herein) to deliver lock-up agreements pursuant to which such persons
will agree not to sell any Common Units for the six months following the
effectiveness of the registration statement, subject to customary exceptions
and as tolled by any periods during which the registration statement is
withdrawn or sales thereunder are suspended.
Nasdaq Listing. On or prior to the Effectiveness Deadline, the Common Units
issuable upon conversion of the Preferred Units will be approved for listing on
the NASDAQ, subject to official notice of issuance.
REGISTRATION
RIGHTS/NASDAQ
LISTING:
LIQUIDATION
PREFERENCE:
RANKING:
In the event of any liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Partnership, each
Preferred Unit will receive in preference to the holders of all existing classes or
series of equity securities of the Partnership a per unit amount equal to the Unit
Purchase Price (subject to any customary anti-dilution adjustments), plus all
accrued and unpaid distributions on such Preferred Units (the “Liquidation
Preference”).
The Preferred Units will rank senior to all existing classes or series of equity
securities of the Partnership with respect to distribution rights and liquidation
preference.
The Partnership shall pay to Bonanza the reasonable out-of-pocket legal fees
EXPENSES:
MONITORING
FEE:
CERTAIN
DEFINITIONS:
and expenses incurred by it in connection with the Transaction, subject to a
maximum aggregate amount of $25,000.
During the period beginning on the Closing Date and ending on the date on
which Bonanza no longer owns at least $1,000,000 of the Preferred Units, the
Partnership will pay to Bonanza a monitoring fee in the amount of $50,000 per
quarter, subject to proration for any partial quarters.
“Holders” means the Purchasers and any subsequent owners of any Preferred
Units.
“Partnership Agreement” means the Amended and Restated Agreement of
Limited Partnership of Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP.
“Founders” means Charles R. Olmstead, S. Craig George and Jeffrey R.
Olmstead, collectively.
“Yorktown” means Yorktown Partners LLC, Yorktown Energy Partners VI, L.P.,
Yorktown Energy Partners VII, L.P., Yorktown Energy Partners VIII, L.P.,
Yorktown Energy Partners IX, L.P. and Yorktown Energy Partners X, L.P.,
collectively.
GOVERNING
LAW:
Delaware.
[Form of General Partner Officer’s Certificate]
Mid-Con Energy GP, LLC
Officer’s Certificate
[Closing Date], 2016
Pursuant to Section 6.02(c) of the Class A Convertible Preferred Unit Purchase Agreement by
and among Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP, a Delaware limited partnership (the “Partnership”), and
each of the Purchasers party thereto, dated July 31, 2016 (the “Purchase Agreement”), the
undersigned, being the Chief Executive Officer of Mid-Con Energy GP, LLC, a Delaware limited
liability company, acting in its capacity as the general partner of Partnership, hereby certifies as
follows:
1.The Partnership has performed and complied with the covenants and agreements contained in
the Purchase Agreement that are required to be performed and complied with by the Partnership
on or prior to the Closing Date.
2.The representations and warranties of the Partnership contained in the Purchase Agreement
that are qualified by materiality or Partnership Material Adverse Effect were true and correct when
made and are true and correct on the date hereof (as though made at and as of the date hereof),
and all other representations and warranties were true and correct in all material respects when
made and are true and correct in all material respects as of the date hereof (as though made at
and as of the date hereof), other than those representations and warranties of the Partnership
contained in the Purchase Agreement that expressly relate to a different date, in which case, they
are correct in all material respects as of such date.
Capitalized terms used but not defined in this Officer’s Certificate shall have the respective
meanings ascribed to them in the Purchase Agreement.
(Signature page follows)
The undersigned has executed this Officer’s Certificate as of the date first written above, in his
capacity as Chief Executive Officer of Mid-Con Energy GP, LLC, a Delaware limited liability
company, acting in its capacity as the general partner of the Partnership.
Jeffrey R. Olmstead
Chief Executive Officer
Mid-Con Energy GP, LLC
[Form of Purchaser’s Officer’s Certificate]
Officer’s Certificate
[Closing Date], 2016
Pursuant to Section 6.03(c) of the Class A Convertible Preferred Unit Purchase Agreement by
and among Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP, a Delaware limited partnership, and each of the
Purchasers party thereto, dated July 31, 2016 (the “Purchase Agreement”), the undersigned,
being the President, Chief Executive Officer or other authorized officer of the Purchaser set forth
on the signature page hereto, hereby certifies in his or her capacity as such, and not in his or her
individual capacity, solely with respect to such Purchaser as follows:
1.The Purchaser has performed and complied with the covenants and agreements contained in
the Purchase Agreement that are required to be performed and complied with by the Purchaser
on or prior to the Closing Date.
2.The representations and warranties of the Purchaser contained in the Purchase Agreement
that are qualified by materiality or Purchaser Material Adverse Effect were true and correct when
made and are true and correct as of the date hereof (as though made at and as of the date
hereof), and all other representations and warranties were true and correct in all material
respects when made and are true and correct in all material respects as of the date hereof (as
though made at and as of the date hereof), other than those representations and warranties of the
Purchaser contained in the Purchase Agreement that expressly relate to a different date, in which
case, they are correct in all material respects as of such date.
Capitalized terms used but not defined in this Officer’s Certificate shall have the respective
meanings ascribed to them in the Purchase Agreement.
(Signature page follows)
The undersigned has executed this Officer’s Certificate as of the date first written above.
[Name of Officer]
[Title]
Form of General Partner Waiver
[Date], 2016
Mid-Con Energy GP, LLC (the “General Partner”), a Delaware limited liability company and the
general partner of Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP (the “Partnership”), hereby waives any
preemptive rights it may hold pursuant to Section 5.7 of the First Amended and Restated
Agreement of Limited Partnership of the Partnership, dated as of December 20, 2011, as
amended (the “Partnership Agreement”), with respect to the Partnership’s privately negotiated
Class A Convertible Preferred Unit Purchase Agreement, dated as of July 31, 2016 (the
“Purchase Agreement”), by and among the Partnership and each of the Purchasers set forth in
Schedule A thereto (collectively, the “Purchasers”), pursuant to which the Partnership has agreed
to issue and sell (i) to the Purchasers an aggregate 9,302,325 Class A Convertible Preferred
Units representing limited partner interests in the Partnership (and any Conversion Units
issuable upon conversion of any Class A Convertible Preferred Units) for an aggregate purchase
price of $20,000,000, and (ii) to any New Investors (as defined in the Purchase Agreement)
additional Class A Convertible Preferred Units (and any Conversion Units issuable upon
conversion of such additional Class A Convertible Preferred Units) with an aggregate purchase
price not to exceed $5,000,000.
The General Partner, in its capacity as the general partner of the Partnership, hereby notifies the
Purchasers, in accordance with clause (iv) of the definition of “Outstanding” in the Partnership
Agreement, that the Vote Blocker (as defined below) set forth in the definition of “Outstanding”
shall not apply to any Purchaser, individually or by virtue of such Purchaser acting in concert with
one or more other Purchasers.
As used herein, “Vote Blocker” means the limitation set forth in the definition of “Outstanding” in
the Partnership Agreement that provides that any Person or Group that beneficially owns 20% or
more of the Partnership Interests of any class then Outstanding shall not be entitled to vote any of
the Partnership Interests of any class owned by such Person or Group on any matter nor shall
any of the Partnership Interests of any class owned by such Person or Group be considered
Outstanding when sending notices of a meeting of Limited Partners to vote on any matter,
calculating required votes, determining the presence of a quorum or for any other similar
purposes under the Partnership Agreement.
Capitalized terms used but not defined herein shall have the meaning assigned to such terms in
the Partnership Agreement.
(Signature page follows)
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned executes this General Partner Waiver, effective as of
the date first above written.
 
MID-CON ENERGY GP, LLC
By:            
Name: Jeffrey R. Olmstead
Title: Chief Executive Officer
[Form of Joinder Agreement]
JOINDER AGREEMENT
FOR
CLASS A CONVERTIBLE PREFERRED UNIT
SECURITIES PURCHASE AGREEMENT
The undersigned hereby agrees, effective as of August ___, 2016, to become a party to that
certain Class A Convertible Preferred Unit Purchase Agreement, dated as of July 31, 2016, by
and among Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP (the “Partnership”) and each of the purchasers listed on
Schedule A thereto (the “Purchase Agreement”), and, for all purposes of the Purchase
Agreement, to be included within the term “Purchasers” (as defined in the Purchase Agreement).
By execution and delivery of this Joinder Agreement, the undersigned hereby agrees (i) to be
bound by all covenants, agreements, representations, warranties and acknowledgements
attributable to the Purchasers under the Purchase Agreement, as if made by, and with respect to,
the undersigned; and (ii) to perform all obligations and duties required of a Purchaser with
respect to its Purchased Units. Capitalized terms used herein, but not otherwise defined herein,
shall have the meanings assigned to such terms in the Purchase Agreement.
The mailing and e-mail address to which notices should be sent to the undersigned, for purposes
of the Purchase Agreement, are set forth below:
PURCHASER:
Purchaser:
By:        
Name:    
Title:
Mailing Address:                        
                                
                                
Attention:                             
E-mail:
