
Stockholm 6 April 2011
NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING IN
LUNDIN PETROLEUM AB
The  shareholders  of  Lundin  Petroleum  AB  (publ)  are  hereby  invited  to  the  Annual  General 
Meeting  of  the  Shareholders  to  be  held  on  Thursday  5  May  2011  at  1  p.m.  (Swedish  time). 
Location: Spegelsalen at Grand Hotel, Södra Blasieholmshamnen 8 in Stockholm.
Attendance at the meeting
Shareholders wishing to attend the meeting shall:
-
-
be recorded in the share register maintained by Euroclear Sweden AB on Friday 29 April 
2011; and
notify Lundin Petroleum of their intention to attend the meeting no later than Friday 29 
April 2011 through the website www.lundin-petroleum.com (only applicable to 
individuals) or by mail to Lundin Petroleum AB, c/o Computershare AB, P.O. Box 610,   
SE - 182 16 Danderyd, Sweden, by telephone Int +46-8-518 01 554 or by e-mail 
info@computershare.se.
Shareholders whose shares are registered in the name of a nominee must temporarily register, 
through  the  nominee,  the  shares  in  their  own  names  in  order  to  be  entitled  to  attend  the 
meeting. Such registration must be effected by Friday 29 April 2011.
Shareholders  may  attend  the  Annual  General  Meeting  through  a  proxy.  A  shareholder  shall  in 
such  a  case  issue  a  written and dated proxy signed by the shareholder. Proof of authorisation 
(through  a  certificate  of  registration  or  similar)  shall  be  attached  to  proxies  issued  by  legal 
entities.  A  proxy  form  is  available  on  the  Company’s  website  www.lundin-petroleum.com  and 
will be sent to shareholders upon request.
Proposed agenda
1.  Opening of the meeting. 
2.  Election of Chairman of the meeting. 
3.  Preparation and approval of the voting register. 
4.  Approval of the agenda. 
5.  Election of one or two persons to approve the minutes. 
6.  Determination as to whether the meeting has been duly convened. 
7.  Speech by the Chief Executive Officer.  
8.  Presentation  of  the  annual  report  and  the  auditors’  report,  the  consolidated  financial
statements and the auditors’ Group report.
9.  Resolution  in  respect  of  adoption  of  the  income  statement  and  the  balance  sheet  and  the
consolidated income statement and consolidated balance sheet.
10. Resolution  in  respect  of  appropriation  of  the  Company’s  result  according  to  the  adopted
balance sheet.
1
11. Resolution in respect of discharge from liability of the members of the Board and the Chief
Executive Officer.
12. Presentation by the Nomination Committee:
 
 
 

The work of the Nomination Committee 
Proposal for election of Chairman of the Board and other members of the Board 
Proposal for remuneration of the Chairman and other members of the Board 
Proposal for remuneration of the auditors
13. Resolution in respect of the number of members of the Board to be elected at the meeting. 
14. Resolution in respect of remuneration of the Chairman and other members of the Board. 
15. Election of Chairman of the Board and of other members of the Board.  
16. Resolution in respect of remuneration of the auditors. 
17. Presentation of proposals in relation to:
 
 


The 2011 Policy on Remuneration for the Executive Management 
Remuneration of Board members for special assignments outside the directorship 
Authorization  of  the  Board  to  resolve  new  issue  of  shares  and  convertible 
debentures 
Authorization of the Board to resolve repurchase and sale of shares
18. Resolution in respect of the 2011 Policy on Remuneration for the Executive Management. 
19. Resolution in respect of remuneration of Board members for special assignments outside the
directorship.
20. Resolution to authorize the Board to resolve new issue of shares and convertible debentures. 
21. Resolution to authorize the Board to resolve repurchase and sale of shares. 
22. Resolution regarding the nomination process for the AGM in 2012. 
23. Other matters. 
24. Closing of the meeting. 
 
Proposals for resolutions 
Resolution  in  respect  of  appropriation  of  the  Company’s  result  according  to  the 
adopted balance sheet (item 10)
The Board of Directors proposes that no dividend is declared for the financial year 2010.
Resolutions  in  respect  of  Chairman  of  the  meeting,  number  of  Board  members,  fees 
payable  to  the  Board  members  and  auditors  and  election  of  Chairman  of  the  Board 
and of other members of the Board (items 2 and 13-16)
Lundin Petroleum AB’s Nomination Committee, consisting of Ian H. Lundin (appointed by Lorito 
Holdings  (Guernsey)  Ltd.,  Landor  Participations  Inc.  and  Zebra  Holdings  and  Investment 
(Guernsey) Ltd. and Chairman of the Board of Directors), Magnus Unger (Member of the Board 
of Directors and Chairman of the Nomination Committee), KG Lindvall (appointed by Swedbank 
Robur  fonder),  Anders  Algotsson  (appointed  by AFA  Försäkring)  and  Ossian Ekdahl (appointed 
by Första AP-fonden), jointly representing approximately 39 per cent of the voting rights for all 
the shares in Lundin Petroleum AB, proposes the following:
  Election of Ian H. Lundin as Chairman of the meeting.
2
  Election of eight members of the Board of Directors with no deputy members. 
  Re-election of the members of the Board Ian. H. Lundin, Magnus Unger, William A. Rand, 
Lukas  H.  Lundin,  C.  Ashley  Heppenstall,  Dambisa  F.  Moyo  and  Asbjørn  Larsen  and 
election  of  Kristin  Færøvik  as  a  new  member  of  the  Board.  Kristin  Færøvik  is  currently 
the  Executive  Vice  President  Offshore  of Bergen  Group.  Before  joining  Bergen Group in 
2010, she was associated with Marathon Petroleum Company since 2003, where she held 
several  positions,  including  the  position  of  Managing  Director  of  Marathon  Petroleum 
Company (Norway). She also has extensive international experience from various senior 
positions  within  BP.  Kristin  Færøvik  holds  a  Master  of  Science  degree  in  Petroleum 
Engineering from the University of Trondheim (formerly NTH).
  Re-election of Ian H. Lundin as Chairman of the Board of Directors. 
  A  total  compensation  to  the  Board  of  Directors  of  SEK  4.2  million  to  be  divided  as 
follows.  SEK  800’000  to  the  Chairman,  SEK  400’000  to  other  members  of  the  Board 
except  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  C.  Ashley  Heppenstall  and  SEK  100’000  for  each 
assignment  in  the  Committees  of  the  Board  of  Directors  (in  total  not  more  than  SEK 
1’000’000 for committee work).
  Payment of auditors’ fees upon approval of their invoice.
Resolution  in  respect  of  the  2011  Policy  on  Remuneration  for  the  Executive 
Management (item 18) 
The  Board  of  Directors’  proposal  for  the  2011  Policy  on  Remuneration  for  Lundin  Petroleum’s 
Executive  Management  entails  that  it  is  the  aim  of  Lundin  Petroleum  to  recruit,  motivate  and 
retain  high  calibre  Executives  capable  of  achieving  the  objectives  of  the  Group,  and  to 
encourage and appropriately reward performance in a manner that enhances shareholder value. 
Accordingly,  the  Group  operates a  Policy on Remuneration which ensures that there is a clear 
link  to  business  strategy  and  a  close  alignment  with  shareholder  interests  and  current  best 
practice,  and  aims  to  ensure  that  the  Executive  Management  is  rewarded  fairly  for  its 
contribution to the Group’s performance.
There  are  four  key  elements  to  the  remuneration  package  of  Executive  Management  in  the 
Group:  a)  Basic  salary;  b)  Yearly  variable  salary;  c)  Long-term  Incentive  Plan  (LTIP);  and  d) 
Other benefits.
Remuneration  of  Board  members  for  special  assignments  outside  the  directorship 
(item 19)
Shareholders  jointly  representing  approximately  30  per  cent  of  the  voting  rights  for  all  the 
shares  in  the  Company  propose  that  an  amount  of  not  more  than  SEK  2.5  million  in  total  be 
available for remuneration of Board members for special assignments outside the directorship.
Authorization to resolve new issue of shares and convertible debentures (item 20)
The  Board  of  Directors  proposes  that  the  Board  is  authorized  to  decide,  at  one  or  more 
occasions until the next Annual General Meeting:
(i)
to  issue  new  shares with consideration in cash or in kind or by set-off or otherwise 
with  conditions  and  thereby  be  able  to  resolve  to  disapply  the  shareholders  pre-
emption  rights.  To  the  extent  the  new  shares  are  issued  with  disapplication  of  the
3
shareholders  pre-emption  rights  they  shall  be  issued  at  a  subscription  price  that 
closely corresponds to the market price of the shares at the time of the issue; and
(ii)
to issue convertible debentures with consideration in cash or in kind or by set-off or 
otherwise with conditions and thereby be able to resolve to disapply the shareholders 
pre-emption rights. To the extent the convertible debentures are issued with disappli-
cation  of  the  shareholders  pre-emption  rights  they  shall  be  issued  at  a  subscription 
price  that  closely  corresponds  to  market  value  based  on  the  market  price  of  the 
shares at the time of the issue of the convertible debentures.
The reason for disapplying the shareholders’ pre-emption rights is to enable Lundin Petroleum 
to make business acquisitions or other major investments. The total number of shares that can 
be  issued  based  on  the  authorization  may  not  exceed  35’000’000.  If  the  authorization  is 
exercised  in  full,  the  newly  issued  shares  would  constitute  approximately  ten  per  cent  of  the 
share capital.
Authorization to resolve repurchase and sale of shares (item 21)
The Board of Directors proposes that the Board is authorized, during the period until the next 
Annual General Meeting, to decide on repurchases and sales of Lundin Petroleum shares on the 
NASDAQ  OMX  Stockholm  Exchange  or  the  Toronto  Stock  Exchange  (the  “Exchanges”).  The 
maximum number of shares repurchased shall be such that shares held in treasury from time to 
time  do  not  exceed  five  per  cent  of  all  shares  of  the  Company.  Repurchase  of  shares  on  the 
Exchanges may take place only at a price within the spread between the highest bid price and 
lowest  ask  price  as  registered  from  time  to  time  on  the  Exchanges.  The  repurchases  shall  be 
made  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  concerning  the  purchase  of  a  company’s  own  shares 
under applicable stock exchange rules and regulations.
The  purpose  of  the  authorization  is  to  provide  the  Board  of  Directors  with  an  instrument  to 
optimize  Lundin  Petroleum’s  capital  structure  and  thereby  create  added  value  for  the 
shareholders  and  to  secure  Lundin  Petroleum’s  obligations  under  its  incentive  plans.  The 
authorization shall also include the right to secure the obligations under the incentive plans by 
the acquisition of derivatives. Repurchased shares may not be transferred to employees.
Resolution regarding the nomination process for the AGM in 2012 (item 22)
The  Nomination  Committee  proposes  that  the  Annual  General  Meeting  decides  that  the 
nomination process for the Annual General Meeting in 2012 shall follow the same procedure as 
the current year, meaning that the Chairman of the Board shall invite three or four of the larger 
shareholders  of  the  Company  based  on  the  shareholdings  as  per  1  August  2011  to  form  a 
Nomination  Committee.  The  names  of  the  members  of  the  Nomination  Committee  shall  be 
announced  not  later  than  six  months  prior  to  the  Annual  General  Meeting  in  2012.  If  the 
shareholding in the Company is significantly changed before the Nomination Committee’s work 
is  completed,  or  if  a  member  leaves  the  Nomination  Committee  before  its  work  has  been 
completed,  a  change  in  the  composition  of  the  Nomination  Committee  may  take  place.  The 
Nomination  Committee  shall  remain  in  office  until  a  new  Nomination  Committee  has  been 
appointed.  The  Nomination  Committee  shall  appoint  its  Chairman  within  the  Nomination 
Committee. The Nomination Committee shall prepare the following proposals for resolutions to 
the Annual General Meeting in 2012: (i) proposal for Chairman of the meeting; (ii) proposal for
4
members  of  the  Board  of  Directors;  (iii)  proposal  for  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors;  (iv) 
proposal for remuneration of the members of the Board of Directors, distinguishing between the 
Chairman and other members of the Board and remuneration for Committee work; (v) proposal 
for  election  of  auditors  of  the  Company  (when  needed),  (vi)  proposal  for  remuneration  of  the 
Company’s auditors; and (vii) proposal for principles of the nomination process for the AGM in 
2013.
Further information
Lundin Petroleum AB’s share capital amounts to SEK 3’179’105,80, represented by 317’910’580 
shares. Each share carries one vote. Lundin Petroleum AB holds, as per 6 April 2011, 6’882’638 
own shares which cannot be represented at the Annual General Meeting.
The Board of Directors and the Chief Executive Officer shall, if a shareholder so request and the 
Board considers that it may do so without significant damage to the Company, give information 
at the Annual General Meeting regarding circumstances that could affect the assessment of an 
item on the agenda and circumstances that could affect the assessment of the Company’s or a 
subsidiary’s  financial  situation.  The  duty  to  give  information  also  applies  to  the  Company’s 
relationship with another Group company and the consolidated financial statements.
The  Nomination  Committee’s  complete  proposal  regarding  items  2,  13-16  and  22,  including  a 
motivated  opinion  regarding  the  proposal  for  the  Board  of  Directors,  is  available  on  Lundin 
Petroleum’s  website  www.lundin-petroleum.com.  The  following  information  will  further  be 
available  at  Lundin  Petroleum’s  office  (Hovslagargatan  5  in  Stockholm)  and  on  Lundin 
Petroleum’s  website  www.lundin-petroleum.com  no  later  than  14  April  2011:  the  Board  of 
Directors  complete  proposal  for  resolutions  regarding  items  18  and  20-22;  the  shareholder 
proposal  for  resolution  regarding  item  19;  and  Lundin  Petroleum’s  annual  report,  the  audit 
report,  the  statement  of  the  auditors  regarding  the  application  of  guidelines  for  remuneration 
and the Board of Director’s report on the evaluation of the Policy on Remuneration etc.
All documents will be sent to shareholders free of charge upon request.
Stockholm in April 2011
LUNDIN PETROLEUM AB (publ)
The Board of Directors
Lundin  Petroleum  is  a  Swedish  independent  oil  and  gas  exploration  and  production  company  with  a  well  balanced 
portfolio of world-class assets in Europe, South East Asia, Russia and Africa. The Company is listed at the NASDAQ OMX, 
Stockholm  (ticker  "LUPE")  and  at  the  Toronto  Stock  Exchange  (TSX)  (ticker  “LUP”).  Lundin  Petroleum  has proven and 
probable reserves of 187 million barrels of oil equivalent (MMboe). 
 
For further information, please contact:
C. Ashley Heppenstall,  
President and CEO 
Tel: +41 22 595 10 00 
 
or 
 
Maria Hamilton 
Head of Corporate Communications 
maria.hamilton@lundin.ch 
Tel: +41 22 595 10 00 
Tel: +46 8 440 54 50
5
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS 
Certain  statements  made  and  information  contained  herein  constitute  "forward-looking  information"  (within  the  meaning  of  applicable 
Canadian  securities  legislation).  Such  statements  and  information  (together,  "forward  looking  statements")  relate  to  future  events, 
including the Company's future performance, business prospects or opportunities. Forward-looking statements include, but are not limited 
to,  statements  with  respect  to  estimates  of  reserves  and  or  resources,  future  production  levels,  future  capital  expenditures  and  their 
allocation to exploration and development activities, future drilling and other exploration and development activities, ultimate recovery of 
reserves  or  resources  are  based  on  forecasts  of  future  results,  estimates  of  amounts  not  yet  determinable  and  assumptions  of 
management.
All statements other than statements of historical fact may be forward-looking statements. Statements concerning proven and probable 
reserves and resource estimates may also be deemed to constitute forward-looking statements and reflect conclusions that are based on 
certain assumptions that the reserves and resources can be economically exploited. Any statements that express or involve discussions 
with respect to predictions, expectations, beliefs, plans, projections, objectives, assumptions or future events or performance (often, but 
not always, using words or phrases such as "seek", "anticipate", "plan", "continue", "estimate", "expect", "may", "will", "project", "predict", 
"potential", "targeting", "intend", "could", "might", "should", "believe" and similar expressions) are not statements of historical fact and may 
be "forward-looking statements". Forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may 
cause actual results or events to differ materially from those anticipated in such forward-looking statements.  No assurance can be given 
that these expectations and assumptions will prove to be correct and such forward-looking statements should not be unduly relied upon. 
 These statements speak only as on the date of this news release and the Company does not intend, and does not assume any obligation, 
to update these forward-looking statements, except as required by applicable laws. These forward-looking statements involve risks and 
uncertainties  relating  to,  among  other  things,  operational  risks  (including  exploration  and  development  risks),  productions  costs, 
availability of drilling equipment and access, reliance on key personnel, reserve estimates, health, safety and environmental issues, legal 
risks  and  regulatory  changes,  competition,  geopolitical  risk,  financial  risks.  These  risks  and  uncertainties  are  described  in  more  detail 
under the heading “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in the Company’s 2009 annual report.  Readers are cautioned that the foregoing list of 
risk factors should not be construed as exhaustive. Actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-
looking statements.   Forward looking statements included in this new release are expressly qualified by this cautionary statement.
6