
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, DC. 20549
Proxy Statement Pursuant to Section 14(3)
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
(Amendment No. )

Filed by the Registrant

Filed by a Party other than the Registrant El

Check the appropriate box:

El Preliminary Proxy Statement El Confidential, for Use of the Commission

Deﬁnitive Proxy Statement Only (as permitted by Rule 14a-6(e)(2))

El Deﬁnitive Additional Materials

U Soliciting Material Pursuant to §240. l4a-12

Newmont Mining Corporation
(Name of registrant as speciﬁed in its charter)
(Name of person(s) ﬁling proxy statement, if other than the registrant)

Payment of Filing Fee (Check the appropriate box):

El No fee required.

D Fee computed on table below per Exchange Act Rules 14a-6(i)(4) and 0—11.

(1) Title of each class of securities to which transaction applies:

(2) Aggregate number of securities to which transaction applies:

(3) Per unit price or other underlying value of transaction computed pursuant to Exchange Act Rule 0-1 1 (set forth the amount
on which the ﬁling fee is calculated and state how it was determined):

(4) Proposed maximum aggregate value of transaction:

(5) Total fee paid:

El Fee paid previously with preliminary materials.

El Check box if any part of the fee is offset as provided by Exchange Act Rule 0—1 l(a)(2) and identify the ﬁling for which the
offsetting fee was paid previously. Identify the previous ﬁling by registration statement number, or the Form or Schedule and the
date of its filingr
(1) Amount Previously Paid:

(2) Form, Schedule or Registration Statement Not:


(3) Filing Party:
(4) Date Filed:


Newmont Mining Corporation
6363 South Fiddler's Green Circle
NE  T Greenwood Village, Colorado 80111 USA
Notice of 2012 Annual Meeting of Stockholders
Date of Meeting: Tuesday: April 24, 2012
Time: 11:00 am, local time
Place: Hotel du Pont
I 1m and Market Streets
Wilmington, Delaware 19801
Purpose: 1. Elect directors;
2. Ratify the Audit Committee's appointment of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as
Newmont‘s independent auditors for 2012:
3. To approve, on an advisory basis, the compensation of the Named Executive
Officers: and
4. Transact such other business that may properly come before the meeting.
Record Date: February 24, 2012

Under the Securities and Exchange Commission rules, we have elected to use the Internet for delivery of
Annual Meeting materials to our stockholders. enabling us to provide them with the information they need, while
lowering the costs of delivery and reducing the environmental impact associated with our Annual Meeting.

All stockholders are cordially invited to attend the Annual Meeting in person. It is important that your
shares be represented at the Annual Meeting whether or not you are personally able to attend. If you are unable to
attend, please promptly vote your shares by telephone or Internet or by signing, dating and returning the enclosed
proxy card at your earliest convenience. Voting by the Internet or telephone is fast, convenient, and enables your
vote to be immediately conﬁrmed and tabulated, which helps Newmont reduce postage and proxy tabulation
costs. Your vote is important so that your shares will be represented and voted at the Annual Meeting even
if you cannot attend.

By Order of the Board of Directors
Stephen P. Gottesfeld
Senior Vice President, General Counsel and
Secretary
March 7, 2012
IMPORTANT NOTICE REGARDING THE AVAILABILITY OF PROXY MATERIALS
FOR THE ANNUAL MEETING OF STOCKHOLDERS TO BE HELD ON APRIL 24, 2012
Our Notice of Meeting, Proxy Statement and Annual Report are available at
http:/Ibnymellon.mobu|ar.netlbnymellonlNEM


NEWMON'IZ
2012 Proxy Statement
Table of Contents
M
Generallnfornua|ion..   l
NoticeoflntemelAvailabililyofProxyMaterials“NV”...     l
StockholdersEntitledloVole..      l
VotingYourShares..‘...      1
QuorumTabulalionandBrokerNoanotesandAbstenlions.    2
VotesRequiredloApprovetheProposals..VH...HH....     3
RevocationofProxyorVolingInstructionForm...,,,,....    3
SolicilalionCosts....        4
NotestoParticipantsinNewmonlEmployeeReliremenlSavingsPlans...   V  4
stockholderymposalstonhe2013Annua]Meetingm”...     4
VotingResulls            4
PropowlNo.liElectionofDireclors.“    ..  ,     5
VolingForDiredors     5
MajolinVoIeS|andardforlheElecIionofDimlons.     5
DiredorSkillsandQuaJiﬁcalions.H.‘,,..H,.H,H,.,.H,,...,,.H,.‘,‘,.‘.,,‘,.,..‘,,...‘,.H,.‘H,.‘ 5
BoardRecommendzﬂonU‘,,....,,‘,,..,.,‘..,,.,..‘.‘,,....,,‘.,..,.,‘..,,.,..‘,‘,,....,,..,..,..‘. 5
Nominees        5
DirectorNominationProcessandReviewofDireclorNominee;      [2
Independenceomireuors        H 12
StockOwnenshipofDireclorsandExecutiveOfﬁcem.‘.,,.,      l3
StockOwnershipofCertainBeneﬁcialOwnens.mmumnum,....,H.,..Hum”,..HH,...,,H.,..,,.H [4
DirectorsCompensation...    H H ‘  ‘ V H, H H ,, ‘  ‘ , H,  15
CommitteesoftheBoardofDireclonsandAuendance.H,.'.....,,....,V.H..“HUM.,...V.,,...HV.H..H... l7
CorporateGovemance....       [8
ReporloflheCompensaﬂonCommiueeonExecutiveCompensaﬂon   .  V    .  21
CompensationDiscussionandAnalysls.          22
Execu|iveSummary....        22
PhllomphyandObjecuves      27
ComponenlsofTotalCompensation     23
ZOllCompensallon            33
LookingAheadIoZOlZ...        .   47
OtherPollciesandConsIderaIions.,       50
ExecutiveCompensalmnTables............................    55
Section16(a)BeneﬁcialOwnershipReponingCompliance         70
PropogalNo.2711mm,Appoimmemomudim;,.,....,.,......,....,,......,,...,,.....,.,,...,,,..,...,... 7|
ReponoftheAudilCommiuee           72
Proposal No 3—To Approve. on an Advisory Basis. |he Compensaﬂon of ma Named Execuﬂve Ofﬁcers . . . v v . . . . .. V V . . . 73
OlherMauens       74
x


/A-
PROXY STATEMENT
General Information
Notice of Internet Availability of Proxy Materials.

On or about March 13. 2012, we will furnish a Notice of Internet Availability of Proxy Materials (“Notice”)
to most of our stockholders containing instructions on how to access the proxy materials and to vote online. In
addition. instructions on how to request a printed copy of these materials may be found on the Notice. For more
information on voting your stock, please see “Voting Your Shares" below. If you received a Notice by mail, you
will not receive a paper copy of the proxy materials unless you request such materials by following the
instructions contained on the Notice. Your vote is important no matter the extent of your holdings.
Stockholders Entitled to Vote.

The holders of record of the following securities at the close of business on February 24, 2012, (the “Record
Date”) are entitled to vote at Newmont Mining Corporation’s (“Newmont" or the “Company”) 2012 Annual
Meeting of Stockholders to be held on Tuesday, April 24, 2012 (the “Annual Meeting"):

' common stock of Newmont, par value $1.60 per share. of which there were 490,193.745 shares

outstanding as of the record date: and

- exchangeable shares of Newmont Mining Corporation of Canada Limited. a Canadian federal corporation
(“Newmont Canada"), of which there were 4,9IS,685 shares as of the record date entitled to vote pursuant
to the terms of the Newmont Special Voting Stock described below,

Voting Your Shares.

Newmont Common Stock. Each share of common stock that you own entitles you to one vote. Your
Notice or proxy card shows the number of shares of common stock that you own. You may elect to vote in one of
three methods:

- By Mail - If you have received or requested a paper copy of the proxy materials, please date and sign the

proxy card and return it promptly in the accompanying envelope.

- By Internet - If you received a Notice of Intemet Availability of Proxy Materials, you can access our
proxy materials and vote online. Instructions to vote online are provided in the Notice.

- In Person - You may attend the Annual Meeting and vote in person. We will give you a ballot when you
arrive. If your stock is held in the name of your broker, bank or another nominee (a “Nominee"), then you
must present a proxy from that Nominee in order to verify that the Nominee has not already voted your
shares on your behalf.

‘ If you hold Newmont Common Stock at your Broker- If your shares were held in an account at a
brokerage firm, bank. dealer, or other similar organization. then you are the beneficial owner of shares
held in “street name" and the Notice or proxy materials, as applicable, are being forwarded to you by that
organization. Your Voting Instruction Form from Broadridge or your Notice provides information on how
to vote your shares. The organization holding your account is considered the shareholder of record for
purposes of voting at the Annual Meeting.

|


If you are a beneﬁcial owner of shares held in street name and do not provide the organization that holds
your shares with speciﬁc voting instructions, the organization that holds your shares may generally vote on
“routine” matters such as ratiﬁcation of auditors but cannot vote on “non-routine" matters, which now
include matters such as votes for the election of directors and the Say-on-Pay proposal. Thus, if the
organization that holds your shares does not receive instructions from you on how to vote your shares on a
non-routine matter, that organization will inform the inspector of election that it does not have the authority
to vote on this matter with respect to your shares. This is generally referred to as a “broker non-vote."

Newmont Exchangeable Shares. Each Newmont exchangeable share that you own has economic
rights (such as the right to receive dividends and other distributions) that are, as nearly as practicable, equivalent
to rights of shares of Newmont common stock. Holders of exchangeable shares have a right through a Voting and
Exchange Trust Agreement (the “Voting Agreement”) to vote at stockholders’ meetings of Newmont. The
exchangeable shares, however, are not shares issued by Newmont and, therefore, a holder of exchangeable shares
is not a registered stockholder of Newmont, but is a registered stockholder of Newmont Canada. The
exchangeable shares are exchangeable at the option of the holders into the Company‘s common stock on a
one-for-one basis. There are two ways to vote your exchangeable shares:

- By Mail - You may vote by signing and returning the enclosed Voting Instruction Form. This form

permits you to instruct Computershare Trust Company of Canada, as trustee under the Voting Agreement
(the “Trustee"), to vote at the Annual Meeting. The Trustee holds one share of special voting stock of
Newmont (the “Newmont Special Voting Stock") that is entitled to vote on all matters on which the
shares of the Company's common stock vote. The Newmont Special Voting Stock has a number of votes
in respect to the Annual Meeting equal to the lesser of (a) the number of exchangeable shares outstanding
on the record date (other than the Company’s exchangeable shares held by Newmont or its afﬁliates), or
(b) 10% of the total number of votes corresponding to the common stock then outstanding Based upon
the foregoing, the Trustee will be entitled to cast up to 4,915,635 votes at the Annual Meeting The
Trustee must receive your voting instructions by 5:00 pm. in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, on April 23,
2012. This will give the Trustee time to tabulate the voting instructions and vote on your behalf. The
Trustee will exercise each vote attached to the Newmont Special Voting Stock only on the basis of
instructions received from the relevant holders of exchangeable shares. In the absence of instructions
from a holder as to voting, the Trustee will not have any voting rights with respect to such exchangeable
shares.

- In Person - You may attend the Annual Meeting and vote in person. As a holder of exchangeable shares,
you may attend the Annual Meeting in person to vote directly the number of votes to which you are
entitled under the Voting Agreement. Please refer to the Notice to Exchangeable Shareholders and Voting
Instruction Form for additional instructions on voting at the meeting.

Quorum, Tabulation and Broker Non-Votes and Abstentions.

Quorum. The holders of a majority of the outstanding shares of capital stock of the Company entitled to
vote at the Annual Meeting must be present in person or represented by proxy in order to constitute a quorum for
all matters to come before the meeting. For purposes of determining the presence of a quorum, “shares of capital
stock of the Company" include all shares of common stock and the maximum number of shares of common stock
that the Trustee of the Newmont exchangeable shares is entitled to vote at the Annual Meeting.

Tabulaﬁng Votes and Voting Results. Votes at the Annual Meeting will be tabulated by two
inspectors of election who will be appointed by the Chairman of the meeting and who will not be candidates for
election to the Board of Directors. The inspectors of election will treat shares of capital stock represented by a
properly signed and returned proxy as present at the Annual Meeting for purposes of determining a quorum,
without regard to whether the proxy is marked as casting a vote or abstaining.

Broker Nan-Votes and Abstentions. Abstentions and “broker non-votes" as to particular matters are
counted for purposes of determining whether a quorum is present at the Annual Meeting. Abstentions are counted
in tabulations of the votes cast on proposals presented to stockholders, whereas broker non-votes are not counted
for purposes of determining whether a proposal has been approved. Abstentions have the same effect as votes

2


against proposals presented to stockholders. A “broker non-vote" occurs when a nominee holding shares for a
beneficial owner votes on one proposal, but does not vote on another proposal because the nominee does not
have discretionary voting power and has not received instructions to do so from the beneficial owner.

Votes Required to Approve the Proposals.

Proposal Vole Required

Election of Directors Majority of votes cast for the Nominees.

Ratification of independent auditors for 2012 Majority of stock present in person or by proxy

and entitled to vote on the Ratification.

To approve, on an advisory basis, the compensation Non-binding advisory vote 7 majority of stock

of the Named Executive Ofﬁcers present in person or by proxy and entitled to
vote.

Election of Directors. Brokers, banks and other financial institutions can no longer vote your stock on
your behalf for the election of directors if you have not provided instructions on your voting instruction form, by
telephone or Internet. For your vote to be counted, you must submit your voting instructions to your broker or
custodian.

Ratify PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as the Company’s Independent Auditors for 2012. The
afﬁrmative vote of a majority of the shares present and entitled to vote, in person or by proxy. at the Annual
Meeting is required to ratify the Audit Committee's appointment of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as the
Company's independent auditors for 2012.

Advisory Say-On-Pay Vote. Because the vote on Compensation of the Named Executive Ofﬁcers is
advisory in nature, it will not: (1) affect any compensation already paid or awarded to any Named Executive
Ofﬁcer, (2) be binding on or overrule any decisions by the Board of Directors. (3) create or imply any additional
ﬁduciary duty on the part of the Board of Directors, and (4) restrict or limit the ability of stockholders to make
proposals for inclusion in proxy materials related to executive compensation.

Other Items. If any other items are presented at the Annual Meeting, they must receive an afﬁrmative vote
of a majority of the shares present and entitled to vote, in person or by proxy, in order to be approved.
Revocation of Proxy or Voting Instruction Form.

Revocation of Newmont Common Stock Proxy. A stockholder who executes a proxy may revoke it
by delivering to the Secretary of the Company, at any time before the proxies are voted. a written notice of
revocation bearing a later date than the proxy. or by attending the Annual Meeting and voting in person (although
attendance at the Annual Meeting will not in and of itself constitute a revocation of a proxy). A stockholder also
may substitute another person in place of those persons presently named as proxies. Written notice revoking or
revising a proxy should be sent to the attention of the Secretary, Newmont Mining Corporation, at 6363 South
Fiddler's Green Circle, Greenwood Village. Colorado 80111 USA.

Revocation of Newmont Exchangeable Shares Voting Instruction Form. A registered holder of
Newmont exchangeable shares who has submitted a Voting Instruction Form may revoke the Voting
Instruction Form by completing and signing a Voting Instruction Form bearing a later date and depositing it with
the Trustee. No notice of revocation or later-dated Voting Instruction Form, however, will be effective unless
received by the Trustee prior to 5:00 pm. Toronto time. on April 23, 2012.

A non-registered holder of Newmont exchangeable shares may revoke a Voting Instruction Form at any
time by written notice to the intermediary, except that an intermediary is not required to act on a revocation of a
Voting Instruction Form that is not received by the intermediary at least ten days prior to the Annual Meeting.

3


Solicitation Costs.

The cost of preparing and mailing the Notice, requests for proxy materials, and the cost of solicitation of
proxies on behalf of the Board of Directors will be borne by the Company. The proxy materials will be mailed to
the holders of the Company's common stock, and Newmont exchangeable shares, on March 13, 2012, In
addition, solicitation of proxies and Voting Instruction Forms may be made by certain ofﬁcers and employees of
the Company by mail, telephone or in person. The Company has retained Georgeson Inc, to aid in the solicitation
of brokers, banks, intermediaries and other institutional holders in the United States and Canada for a fee of
$15,000, All costs of the solicitation will be borne by the Company. The Company also will reimburse brokerage
ﬁrms and others for their expenses in forwarding proxy materials to beneﬁcial owners of common stock and
exchangeable shares.

Notes to Participants in Newmont Employee Retirement Savings Plans.

Participants in the Retirement Savings Plan of Newmont and Retirement Savings Plan for
Hourly-Rated Employees of Newmont. If you are a participant in the Retirement Savings Plait of Newmont
or Retirement Savings Plait for Hourly-Rated Employees of Newmont (401(k) Plans) and hold the Company’s
common stock under either of the 401(k) Plans, you will be furnished a Notice containing instructions on how to
access the proxy materials and to vote online. In addition, instructions on how to request a printed copy of these
materials may be found on the Notice. The 401(k) Plans are administered by Vanguard, as trustee. The trustee, as
the stockholder of record of the Company's common stock held in the plans, will vote the shares held for you in
accordance with the directions you provide. If you do not vote your shares by 11:59 pm. Eastern time on
April 19, 2012, the Trustee will vote your common shares in the 401(k) Plans in the same proportion as it votes
shares as to which directions have been received.

Stockholder Proposals for the 2013 Annual Meeting.

For a stockholder proposal, including a proposal for the election of a director, to be included in the proxy
statement and form of proxy for the 2013 Annual Meeting, the proposal must have been received by us at our
principal executive ofﬁces no later than November 7, 2012. Proposals should be sent to the attention of the
Secretary of the Company at 6363 South Fiddler's Green Circle, Greenwood Village, Colorado 80111 USA. We
are not required to include in our proxy statement and form of proxy a stockholder proposal that was received
after that date or that otherwise fails to meet the requirements for stockholder proposals established by SEC
regulations.

In addition, under our By-Laws, stockholders must give advance notice of nominations for directors or other
business to be addressed at the 2013 Annual Meeting no later than the close of business on February 23, 2013.
The advance notice must be delivered to the attention of the Secretary of the Company at 6363 South Fiddler's
Green Circle, Greenwood Village, Colorado 80111 USA,

Voting Results.

The results of the voting at the 2012 Annual Meeting of Stockholders will be reported on Form 3-K and

ﬁled with the Securities and Exchange Commission within four business days after the end of the meeting.
4


Proposal No. 1 — Election of Directors
Voting for Directors.

If you hold your Newmont stock through a broker, bank or other ﬁnancial institution, your Newmont stock
will no longer be voted on your behalf on the election of directors unless you complete and return the Voting
Instruction Form or follow the instructions provided to you to vote your stock via telephone or the Internet. If
you do not instruct your broker, bank or other ﬁnancial institution how to vote, your votes will be counted as
“broker non-votes" and your shares will not be represented in the election of directors vote at the Annual
Meeting.

Maiority Vote Standard for the Election of Directors.

Our By-Laws were amended to require that in an uncontested election each director will be elected by a vote
of the majority of the votes cast, which means the number of votes cast “for” a director’s election exceeds 50%
of the number of votes cast with respect to that director’s election. Votes cast shall include votes to withhold
authority, but shall exclude abstentions. Votes will not be deemed cast if no authority or direction is given.

If a nominee for director does not receive the vote of at least a majority of votes cast at the Annual Meeting,
it is the policy of the Board of Directors that the director must tender his or her resignation to the Board. In such
a case, the Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee will make a recommendation to the Board whether
to accept or reject the tendered resignation, or whether other action should be taken, taking into account all of the
facts and circumstances. The director who has tendered his or her resignation will not take part in the
deliberations. For additional information, our Corporate Governance Guidelines are available on our website at
www.newmont.com/our-investors/our-governance.

Director Skills and Qualifications.

In addition to meeting the minimum qualifications set out by the Board of Directors under “Director
Nomination Process and Review of Director Nominees," each nominee also brings a strong and unique
background and set of skills to the Board, giving the Board, as a whole, competence and experience in a wide
variety of areas, including board service, corporate governance, compensation, executive management, private
equity, ﬁnance, mining, operations, manufacturing, marketing, government, law, inlemational business and
health, safety, environmental and social responsibility. The unique background, skills and qualifications that led
the Board of Directors and the Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee to the conclusion that each of
the nominees should serve as a director for Newmont are set forth in the “Nominees” section below.

Board of Directors Recommendation.

THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS RECOMMENDS THAT THE STOCKHOLDERS VOTE “FOR”
ALL OF THE FOLLOWING NOMINEES AND, UNLESS A STOCKHOLDER GIVES
INSTRUCTIONS ON THE PROXY CARD TO THE CONTRARY, THE PROXIES NAMED THEREON
INTEND SO TO VOTE.

Nominees.

Each of the 11 persons named below is a nominee for election as a director at the Annual Meeting for a term
of one year or until his/her successor is elected and qualiﬁed. Unless authority is withheld, the proxies will be
voted for the election of such nominees. All such nominees are currently serving as directors of the Company.
All such nominees were elected to the Board of Directors at the last Annual Meeting except for Bruce R. Brook
and Jane Nelson, who were elected to the Board of Directors on October 25, 201 1. If any such nominees cannot
be a candidate for election at the Annual Meeting, then the proxies will be voted either for a substitute nominee
designated by the Board of Directors or for the election of only the remaining nominees.

Glen A. Barton, a director of Newmont since 2001, is not eligible to stand for re-election due to the age
retirement provision in our Corporate Governance Guidelines. Newmont and the Board of

S


Directors express their deepest appreciation to Mr. Barton for his outstanding and dedicated sen/ice and
leadership to Newmont, for his many contributions to the deliberations of the Board and as a valued member of
the committees of the Board. No person is being nominated at the Annual Meeting to ﬁll the vacancy created by
his departure. Instead, the directors expect to reduce the size of the Board of Directors from twelve to eleven
members, effective when Mr. Barton ceases to be a director.

The following table sets forth information as to each nominee for election, including his or her age (as of the
Record Date), and background, including his or her principal occupation during the past ﬁve years, current
directorships, and skills and qualiﬁcations, of each nominee:

BRUCE R. BROOK, 56, currently serves as a Director for Boart Longyear Limited, Programmed Group
(as Chairman) and CSL Limited.

Director Qualiﬁcations:

- Financial Expertise 7 Prior service as the Chairman of the Audit Committee of Lihir Gold Limited and
as Chief Financial Ofﬁcer of WMC Resources Limited, Deputy CFO of ANZ Banking Group Limited,
Group Chief Accountant of Pacific Dunlop Limited, and General Manager, Group Accounting positions
at CRA Limited and Pasminco Limited. Current Chairman of the Audit Committee of Boart Longyear
Limited and member of the Audit Committee of CSL Limited. Currently serves as a member of the
Financial Reporting Council, an agency of the Australian Commonwealth, which oversees the work of the
Accounting Standards Board and the Auditing Standards Board, and advises the Australian Government
on matters relating to corporate regulation.

- International Experience 7 Extensive international experience as a director of multiple international
companies, including Boart Longyear Limited, Programmed Group and CSL Limited.

- Operalional and lnduslry Expertise — Experience as a Director of Lihir Gold Limited, Energy
Developments Limited and Consolidated Minerals Limited. Currently serves as a Director of Deep
Exploration Technologies Co-operative Research Centre, a collaborative research program researching
safer, more advanced and more cost effective geological exploration and drilling methods.

Board Experience:
Sen/ice on the Company’s Board of Directors since 201 l, as well as on the boards of several companies,
including Boart Longyear Limited since February 2007, and CSL Limited since August 2011, and as
Chairman of Programmed Group since Julie 2010. Former Director and Chairman of the Audit
Committees of Lihir Gold Limited, Consolidated Minerals Limited, Energy Developments Limited and
Snowy Hydro Limited.

VINCENT A. CALARCO, 69, Non-Executive Chairman of Newmont Mining Corporation from 2008 to
present. Former Chairman of Crompton Corporation (now known as Chemtura Corporation), a specialty
chemical company, having served in that position from 1996 to 2004, President and Chief Executive Officer
thereof from 1985 to 2004.

Director Qualiﬁcations:

- CEO/Executive Management Skills — Experience as Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer of
Crompton Corporation and Non-Executive Chairman of Newmont.

- Financial Expertise 7 Experience serving on the Company’s Audit Committee and as the Chairman of
the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors of Consolidated Edison of New York. Extensive ﬁnancial
oversight experience in senior management roles.

- International Experience — Extensive senior executive experience working with multinational operations
at Crompton Corporation, which has global manufacturing facilities on ﬁve continents and conducts

6


business in over 120 countries, as well as experience establishing inter-industry relationships and
negotiating product safety regulations as Chairman of several domestic and international chemical
industry trade associations.

- Operational and Industry Expertise 7 Extensive experience in the chemical industry, a process industry
with similar operating characteristics and issues, and prior sen/ice on the Board of Directors of a copper
mining company, Asarco Corporation.

- Compensation Expertise 7 Current service as Chairman of the Compensation Committee of Citadel
Plastics and participation in compensation, beneﬁts and related decisions in senior executive roles.

Board Experience:
Service on the Company's Board of Directors since 2000, as well as on the boards of several other
companies, including as a current director of Consolidated Edison, Inc. and CPG International Inc., and
prior service as a director at Asarco Corporation.

JOSEPH A. CARRABBA. 59, Chairman, President and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer of Cliffs Natural
Resources Inc., formerly Cleveland-Cliffs Inc, since May 2007. Served as the company‘s President and Chief
Executive Officer from 2006 to 2007 and as President and Chief Operating Officer from 2005 to 2006.
Previously served as President and Chief Operating Ofﬁcer of Diavik Diamond Mines, Inc. from 2003 to 2005.
Director Qualiﬁcations:

‘ CEO/Executive Management Skills 7 Experience as Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer of

Cliffs Natural Resources Inc. and other executive management positions noted above.

‘ Financial Expertise 7 Extensive financial management experience in senior executive roles.

- Operational and Industry Expertise — Operational experience in the mining industry, including as former
President and Chief Operating Officer of Cliffs Natural Resources Inc., former President and Chief
Operating Officer of Diavik Diamond Mines, Inc. and former General Manager of Weipa Bauxite
Operation of Comalco Aluminum. Awarded a Bachelor's Degree in Geology from Capital University.

- International Experience 7 Extensive senior executive experience working with multinational milling
operations, including with Cliffs Natural Resources Inc., which has operations in North America,
Australia, Latin America and Asia.

- Health, Safety, Environmental and Social Responsibility Experience 7 Experience sewing on the
Company's Operations and Safety Committee and the Environmental and Social Responsibility
Committee.

Board Experience:
Sen/ice on the Company’s Board of Directors since 2007, as well as on the boards of several other
companies, including as a current director of Cliffs Natural Resources Inc. and KeyCorp.

NOREEN DOYLE, 62, Retired First Vice President of the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (“EBRD”), having sen/ed in that position from 2001 to 2005, and in other executive positions with
the EBRD since 1992.

Director Qualiﬁcations:

- Financial Expertise — Extensive experience in banking and ﬁnance at Bankers Trust Company and at the
EBRD, including experience as head of risk management and head of banking at EBRD. Experience
sewing on the Company’s Audit Committee, including as Chair, and the Audit Committees of the Board
of Directors of QinetiQ Group plc and Rexam PLC.

7


- International Experience — Extensive senior executive experience working with businesses, global and
local, and governments throughout eastem Europe and the former Soviet Union.

a Health, Safety, Environmental and Social Responsibility Experience 7 Experience at EBRD included
specific focus on environmental specifications of projects and attention to the social dimensions of
investment. Experience serving on the Company‘s Environmental and Social Responsibility Committee.

Board Experience:
Service on the Company's Board of Directors since 2005, as well as on the boards of several other
companies including as a current director of Credit Suisse Group. QineIiQ plc and Rexam PLC.
Member of advisory panels for Macquarie European Infrastructure Fund and Macquarie Renaissance
Infrastructure Fund.

VERONICA M. HAGEN, 66, Chief Executive Officer of Polymer Group, Inc. since April 2007. President
and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer of Sappi Fine Paper North America from 2004 to 2007. Executive positions with
Alcoa. Inc. since 1998, including Vice President and Chief Customer Ofﬁcer from 2003 to 2004 and Vice
President, Alcoa North American Extrusions from 2001 to 2003.

Director Qualiﬁcations:

‘ CEO/Executive Management Skills 7 Experience as Chief Executive Officer of Polymer Group. Inc., and

former President and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer of Sappi Fine Paper North America.

- Industry and Operational Expertise — Extensive mining industry experience, including in executive
positions with Alcoa, Inc., an international aluminum producer, for over 10 years, including as former
Vice President and Chief Customer Ofﬁcer and former Vice President, Alcoa North American Extrusions.

‘ International Experience 7 Extensive senior executive experience including Chief Executive Officer of
Polymer Group Inc., a company operating manufacturing facilities in seven countries.

- Health, Safety, Environmental and Social Responsibility Experience — Experience serving on the
Company's Operations and Safety Committee and prior experience on the Environmental and Social
Responsibility Committee.

- Compensalian Expertise 7 Experience serving as a member of the Company's Compensation
Committee. Participation in compensation, beneﬁts and related decisions in senior executive roles.

Board Experience:
Service on the Company's Board of Directors since 2005, as well as on the boards of several other
companies, including as a current director of Southern Company. Former director of Jacuzzi Brands, Inc.

MICHAEL S. HAMSON. 71. Chairman, Hamson Consultants Pty le, a consulting company, since 1987:
Joint Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of McIntosh Hamson Hoare Govett Limited ( now Merrill Lynch
Australia) from 1972 to 1986 and Director and Deputy Chairman of Normandy Mining Limited from 1987 to
2002.

Director Qualiﬁcations:

- CEO/Executive Management Skills 7 Experience as Chairman, Hamson Consultants Pty Ltd and former
Joint Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of McIntosh Hamson Hoare Govett Limited.

- Financial Expertise — Experience serving on the Company's Audit Committee, the Audit Committee of
the Board of Directors of Genesis Emerging Markets Fund Ltd., membership in the Charter Accountants
Institute and financial management experience in senior executive roles.

8


- legal Expertise — Extensive experience as practicing lawyer in multiple jurisdictions.

- Industry and Operational Expertise 7 Experience as Director and Deputy Chairman of Normandy
Mining Limited from 1987 to 2002,

- International Experience — Extensive senior executive experience working in global banking activities
with McIntosh Hamson Hoare Govett Limited.

Board Experience:
Service on the Company's Board of Directors since 2002, as well as on the boards of several other
companies, including as a current director of Genesis Emerging Markets Fund Ltd.

JANE NELSON, 51, Founding Director of the Corporate Social Responsibility Initiative at Han/ard
Kennedy School, a nonresident senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, and a senior associate of the
Programme for Sustainability Leadership at Cambridge University. She was a Director at the International
Business Leaders Forum from 1993 to 2009, where she now sen/es as a senior advisor.

Director Qualiﬁcations:

- International Experience 7 Former director and current senior advisor at the International Business
Leaders Forum, previously worked in the ofﬁoe of the United Nations Secretary-General, and for the
Business Council for Sustainable Development in Africa, for FUNDES in Latin America, and as a Vice
President at Citibank working in Asia, Europe and the Middle East.

- Health, Safety, Environmental and Social Responsibility Expertise — Director of Harvard Kennedy
School's Corporate Social Responsibility Initiative. One of the ﬁve track leaders for the Clinton Global
Initiative, leading the track on Developing Human Capital in 2009. Sen/ed on advisory committees to
over 40 global corporations, non-governmental organizations and govemment bodies since 1992,

- Academic Experience — Director, Corporate Social Responsibility Initiative and adjunct lecturer in
Public Policy, Harvard Kennedy School. Faculty, Corporate Social Responsibility executive education
program, Han/ard Business School. Nonresident senior fellow at the Brookings Institution and a senior
associate at Cambridge University's Programme for Sustainability Leadership.

- Industry Expertise 7 Service on ExxonMobil’s External Citizenship Advisory Panel; Independent
Advisory Panel, International Council on Mining and Metals Resource Endowment initiative: former
external adviser to World Bank Group on social impacts in mining, oil and gas sector.

Board Experience:
Currently serves on the Boards of Directors of Newmont Milling Corporation, FSG, the World
Environment Center, and Chevron's Niger Delta Partnership Initiative Foundation. Prior sen/ice on the
Board of Directors of SITA (now SUEZ Environnement).

RICHARD T. O’BRIEN, 57, President and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer of Newmont since July 2007.
President and Chief Financial Officer of Newmont from April 2007 to July 2007: Executive Vice President and
Chief Financial Officer during 2006 and 2007 and Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Ofﬁcer from 2005
to 2006‘ Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Ofﬁcer and Senior Vice President and Chief Financial
Ofﬁcer of AOL Resources from 2001 to 2005.

Director Qualiﬁcations:
- CEO/Executive Management Skills — President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company and other
senior executive positions noted above.
9


- Financial Expertise — Extensive ﬁnancial management experience in executive roles, including as
President and Chief Financial Ofﬁcer of the Company and other executive management positions noted
above. Experience serving on the Audit Committees of Inergy, LP. and Vulcan Materials Company.
Awarded a Bachelor of Arts degree in economics from the University of Chicago.

- Industry and Operational Experience — Over 20 years of broad ﬁnancial and operational experience in
the energy, power and natural resources businesses.

‘ International Experience 7 Extensive senior executive experience working with the Company‘s
multinational mining operations,

- Compensation Expertise 7 Participation in compensation benefits and related decisions in senior
executive roles.

- Legal Expertise — Awarded a Doctor of Jurisprudence degree from Lewis and Clark College,
Northwestern School of Law.

Board Experience:
Service on the Company's Board of Directors since 2007. as well as on the boards of several other
companies. including as a current director of Inergy Holdings. LP. and Vulcan Materials Company.

JOHN B. PRESCOTT. 71, Chairman of QR National Limited (“QR”) (formerly known as QR Limited

and Queensland Rail since 2006). Member of the Australian Government‘s Remuneration Tribunal since 2010.
Retired Chairman of ASC Pty Ltd from 2000 to 2009. Retired director and executive of The Broken Hill
Proprietary Company Limited (now BHP Billiton Ltd (“BHP")). and Managing Director and Chief Executive
Ofﬁcer thereof from 1991 to 1998.

Director Qualiﬁcations:

- CEO/Executive Management Skills — Experience as Chairman of QR, and other executive management
positions noted above.

- Financial Expertise — Extensive ﬁnancial management experience in executive roles and through
attendance on the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors of QR.

- Industry and Operational Experience — Experience in the mining industry as a senior executive with
BHP, a natural resource company, and as a former director of Normandy Milling Limited, a mining
company.

‘ International Experience 7 Extensive senior executive experience working with multinational mining
operations and Management Consultants and as Trustee of the Conference Board,

- Compensation Expertise 7 Experience serving on the Company’s Compensation Committee and
participation in compensation, beneﬁts and related decisions in senior executive roles. Former managing
Director of BHP, Member of Remuneration and Succession Committee of QR, Member of the Australian
Government’s Remuneration Tribunal since March 2010. Former member of ASC Pty Ltd's
Remuneration Committee,

- Health, Safety, Environmental and Social Responsibility Experience — Experience serving on the
Company's Operations and Safety Committee, including as Chairman, and on the Environmental and
Social Responsibility Committee. Similar roles in BHP and QR.

Board Experience:

Service on the Company's Board of Directors since 2002, as well as on the boards of several other

companies, including as Chairman of QR National and QR and prior sen/ice as a director at ASC Pty Ltd,

BHP and Normandy Mining Limited.

ll)


DONALD C. ROTH, 68, Managing Partner of EMP Global LLC, an international private equity ﬁrm,
since 1992. Member of Advisory Committee to the National Treasury Management Agency, Republic of Ireland,
since 1990. Vice President and Treasurer of the World Bank from 1938 to 1992.

Director Qualiﬁcations:

- Financial Expertise — Extensive financial management experience in various roles, including as former
Vice President and Treasurer of the World Bank, as Chairman of the Audit Committee of Ireland's
National Pension Reserve Fund, and other executive management positions noted above.

‘ International Experience 7 Extensive experience in international investment banking and capital markets.

- Compensation Expertise 7 Experience serving as a member of the Company‘s Compensation
Committee, including as Chairman. Participation in compensation, beneﬁts and related decisions in senior
executive roles.

Board Experience:
Sen/ice on the Company’s Board of Directors since 2004, as well as on the boards of several other
companies, including as a current director of ISEQ Exchange Traded Fund Public Limited Company
(Ireland).

SIMON R. THOMPSON, 52, Executive for the Anglo American group from 1995 to 2007; Executive
Director of Anglo American plc from 2005 to 2007: Non-Executive Director of AngloGold Ashanti Ltd (South
Africa) from 2004 to 2008; and Non-Executive Director of United Company Rusal (Russia) from 2007 to 2009.
Non-Executive Chairman of Tullow Oil plc (United Kingdom), and Non-Executive Director of Sandvik AB
(Sweden) and AMEC plc (United Kingdom).

Director Qualiﬁcations:

- Financial Expertise — Over 15 years experience in merchant and investment banking and ﬁnancial
management experience in executive roles. Sen/ice on the Audit Committee of the Boards of Directors of
AMEC plc and Sandvik AB.

‘ International Experience 7 Extensive experience in international investment banking. as well as
multinational mining experience with Anglo American, which operates in Africa. Europe, South and
North America, Australia and Asia. Additional international experience with Tullow Oil plc, an
international oil and gas exploration and production company operating in Africa, the United Kingdom.
the Netherlands and South Asia.

- Industry and Operational Experience — Over 15 years experience in the milling industry, including as
former Chief Executive of the base metals mining division of Anglo America, Executive Chairman of the
industrial minerals division and the Exploration Division of Anglo American, and other positions noted
above. Awarded a Masters Degree in Geology from Oxford University.

- Health, Safety, Environmental and Social Responsibility Expertise 7 Experience acting as Chairman of the
Health, Safety and Environment committee of United Company Rusal and Chairman of the Compliance and
Ethics committee of AMEC plc. Serves on the Company's Environmental, Social Responsibility, Operations
and Safety Committee and was formerly Chairman of the Environmental and Social Responsibility
Committee. Member of Remuneration Committee of AMEC plc and Tullow Oil plc.

Board Experience:
Sen/ice on the Company’s Board of Directors since 2008, as well as on the boards of several other
companies, including as the current Non-Executive Chairman of Tullow Oil plc (United Kingdom) and
a Non-Executive Director of AMEC plc (United Kingdom) and Sandvik AB (Sweden)
I |


Director Nomination Process and Review of Director Nominees.

We have established a process for identifying and nominating director candidates that has resulted in the
election of a highly-qualiﬁed and dedicated Board of Directors. The following is an outline of the process for
nomination of candidates for election to the Board: ( a) the Chief Executive Officer, the Corporate Governance
and Nominating Committee or other members of the Board of Directors identify the need to add new Board
members, with careful consideration of the mix of qualiﬁcations, skills and experience represented on the Board
of Directors: (b) the Chairman of the Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee coordinates the search
for qualiﬁed candidates with input from management and other Board members: (c) the Corporate Governance
and Nominating Committee engages a candidate search ﬁrm to assist in identifying potential nominees, if it
deems such engagement necessary and appropriate: ((1) selected members of management and the Board of
Directors interview prospective candidates: and (e) the Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee
recommends a nominee and seeks full Board endorsement of the selected candidate, based on its judgment as to
which candidate will best serve the interests of Newmont‘s stockholders.

The Board of Directors has determined that directors should possess the following minimum qualiﬁcations:
(a) the highest personal and professional ethics, integrity and values: (b) commitment to representing the long-
term interest of the stockholders: (c) broad experience at the policy-making level in business, government,
education, technology or public interest; and (d) sufﬁcient time to effectively fulfill duties as a Board member.
The Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee considers any candidates submitted by stockholders on
the same basis as any other candidate. Any stockholder proposing a nomination should submit such candidate‘s
name, along with curriculum vitae or other summary of qualifications, experience and skills to the Secretary,
Newmont Mining Corporation, 6363 South Fiddler‘s Green Circle, Greenwood Village, Colorado 80111 USA.

Newmont considers diversity, age and skills in deciding on nominees. The Corporate Governance and
Nominating Committee considers a broad range of diversity, not limited to merely race, gender or national
origin, but considering all relevant background and experience. We consider this through discussions at the
Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee meetings. In evaluating a director candidate, the Corporate
Governance and Nominating Committee considers factors that are in the best interests of the Company and its
stockholders.

Independence of Directors.

The Board affirmatively determines the independence of each director and each nominee for election as
director. For each individual deemed to be independent, the Board has determined ( a) that there is no relationship
with the Company, or (b) the relationship is immaterial. The Board has considered the independence standards of
the New York Stock Exchange and adopted more stringent categorical independence standards described below.

The Board has determined that the relationships that fall within the standards described in its independence
standards are categorically immaterial, As such, provided that no law, rule or regulation precludes a
determination of independence, the following relationships are not considered to be material relationships with
the Company for purposes of assessing independence: service as an officer, director, employee or trustee or
greater than ﬁve percent beneﬁcial ownership in (i) a supplier of goods or services to the Company if the annual
sales to the Company are less than $1 million or two percent of the gross revenues or sales of the supplier,
whichever is greater; (ii) a lender to the Company if the total amount of the Company's indebtedness is less than
one percent of the total consolidated assets of the lender; (iii) a charitable organization if the total amount of the
Company’s total annual charitable contributions to the organization is less than $1 million or two percent of that
organization’s total annual gross receipts (excluding any amounts received through the Company's employee
matching program for charitable contributions), whichever is greater: or (iv) any relationship arising out of a
transaction, or series of transactions, in which the amount involved is less than $60,000.

In making its independence determinations, the Board considered the circumstances described below.

Mr. Brook is a director of Boart Longyear Limited, which provides drilling sen/ices to the Company, and
Programmed Group, which provides certain stafﬁng to the Company. These relationships both meet the
categorical independence standards in (i) above.

12


Mr. Hamson is a director of Genesis Emerging Markets Ltd. The committee administering the investment of
Company funds for its pension plan selected one of the Genesis Emerging Market funds as one investment in its
portfolio. This relationship meets categorical independence standard (i) above.

Mr. Thompson is a director of Sandvik AB, an international engineering group that provides certain
products to the Company including certain mining equipment for rock excavation. Mr. Thompson also is a
director of AMEC plC. an international engineering and project management company, which provides certain
consulting services to the Company. These relationships both meet the categorical independence standard
(i) above.

Based on the foregoing analysis, the Board determined that the following directors are independent:

Bruce R. Brook Veronica M. Hagen John B. Prescott
Vincent A. Calarco Michael S. Hamson Donald C. Roth
Joseph A. Carrabba Jane Nelson Simon R. Thompson
Noreen Doyle

In addition. based on these standards, the Board has affirmatively determined that Richard T. O'Brien is not
independent because he is President and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer of the Company.
Stock Ownership of Directors and Executive Officers.

As of February 24, 2012, the directors and executive officers of the Company as a group beneficially
owned, in the aggregate, 1,978,339 shares of the Company's outstanding capital stock, constituting, in the
aggregate, less than 1% of the Company's outstanding capital stock.

No director or executive officer beneﬁcially owned (a) more than 1% of the outstanding shares of the
Company's common stock or the exchangeable shares, or (b) shares voting power in excess of 1% of the voting
power of the outstanding capital stock of the Company. Each director and executive ofﬁcer has sole voting power
and dispositive power with respect to all shares beneficially owned by them, except as set forth below.

The following table sets forth the beneficial ownership of common stock as of February 24, 2012, held by
(a) each current director and nominee: (b) the Chief Executive Officer, the Chief Financial Officer and each of
the other highly compensated executive officers (the “Named Executive Ofﬁcers"): and (c) all current directors
and executive ofﬁcers as a group. The address for each of the named individuals below is clo Newmont Milling
Corporation, 6363 South Fiddler’s Green Circle, Greenwood Village, Colorado 801 1 1 USA.

Restricted Stock

Restricted Stock Beneficial
Name of Common Units and Director 401(k) Option Ownership
w M M M ﬂ &
Non-Employee Directors
GlenA.Barton‘61............................. 11,707 9,213 — — 20,920
BruceR.Brook.............................. 1,811 — — — 1,811
VincentA.CaIarco  4,686 14,258 — — 18,944
JosephA.Carrabba........................... — 11,764 — — 11,764
NoreenDoyle.................. . — 14,079 — — 14,079
VemnicaM.Hagen,.,........................ — 14,079 — — 14,079
MichaelS.Hamson<7l  9,408 12,214 — — 21,622
JaneNelson.,.,............................. — 1,811 — — 1,811
JohnB,Prescou'5>............................ 10,220 10,059 7 7 20,279
DonaldC.Roth.............................. 1,081 14,258 7 7 15,339
SimonR.Thompson.....................».... 7 12,194 7 7 12,194
Named Executive Offwers
Richard T. O‘Brien ................... . . . , . . .. 188,354 100,000 1,623 309,509 599,486
RussellBall................................. 55,961 7 1,856 122,036 179,853

1.?


Restricted
Stock and
Director Beneﬁcial

Name or Common Stock 401(k) Option Ownership

Beneﬁcial Owner smkm Unitsl‘m Fiona, Shares‘s‘ Total

RandyEngel................................... 50,108 7 3,437 82,818 136,363

BrianHill,.,................................... 61,314 7 532 61,334 123,180

GuyLansdown,.,.,,.,.,..,.,.,,.,.,..,........ 62,339 7 1,084 62,061 125,484

All directors and executive ofﬁcers as a group,

including those named above (26persons) , . , . , , . , . 477,712 229,917 23,281 1,102,747 1,978,339

In Represents shares of the Company‘s common stock held, or which the officer has the right to acquire within 60 days after February 24,
2012, pursuant to Performance Leveraged Stock Unlts 1“PSUs") and Financial Performance Stock (“FPS”), PSUs altd FPS are awalds
granted by the Company and payable subject to performance vesting requirements as set forth more fully below in the CD&A, in shares
of the Company's common stock, Shares urtderlying PSUs vesting within ()0 days aiter February 24‘ 2012, for which the performance
measurements have been met, are included in this column as follows. Richard T O‘Brien, 41,422: Russell Ball, 12,820: Randy Engel,
12,366: Brian Hill, 13,727: Guy Lansdown, 13,727, and all executive offers as a group, 119,871 Shares underlying FFSs vesting within
()0 days after February 24‘ 2012, for which the pelforlnance measurements have been meta are iltcluded ill this column as follows:
Richard T O'Briena 41,163: Russell Balls [4923: Randy EngeL 13,758: Brian Hills [7224; Guy Lansdowna 16531 and all executive
offers as a group, 126,013

(3’ For 2011‘ director stock units ("DSUs") were awarded to all non—employee directors under the 2005 Stock Incentive Plan, except
Messrs Barton, Brook, Hamson altd Plescott elected to receive shares of the Company's cornmort stock The DSUs represent the right to
receive shares of common stock and are immediately fully vested and nonrforfeitable. The holders of DSUs do not have the right to vote
the underlying shares: however, the DSUs accrue dividend equivalents, which are paid at the time the common shares are issued Upon
retirement from the Board of Directors, the holder of DS Us is entitled to receive one share of common stock for each director stock ultit,
Director stock units are included in this column as follows. Glen A. Barton, 9,213: Vincent A Calarco, 14,258: Joseph A. Carrabba,
11,764: Noreen Doyle, 14,079: Veronica M. Hagen, 14,079: Michael S Hamson, 12,214: Iane Nelson, 1,81 1: John B Prescott, 10,059:
Donald C. Roth, 14,258: and Simon R Thompson [2194,

1*“ Restricted Stock Awards ("RSAs") altd Restricted Stock Units ("RSUs") of the Company's common stock are awarded under the
Company‘s 2005 Stock Incentive Plan RSAs can be voted, but are subject to forfeiture risk and other restrictions RSAs are included in
this column as follows‘ Richard T O‘Brien, 100,000 The RSUs do not have voting rights, and are subject to forfeiture risk and other
restrictions The RSUs accrue dividend equivalents, which are paid at the time the units vest altd common stock is issued Shares
underlying RSUs vesting within 60 days after February 24, 2012, are included in this column as follows all executive officers as a
group, 250,372. this column does not include RSUs that vest more than 60 days after February 24, 2012

«1 Includes equivalent shares of the Company's common stock held by the trustee in the Company's 401(k) Plans for each participant as oi the
February 29‘ 2012, plan statement date Each participant in such plan instructs the trustee as to how the participant's shares should be voted,

on Shares of the Company‘s common stock that the executive officers have the right to acquire through stock option exercises within
60 days after February 24, 2012

461 Mr. Barton~ ownership includes 6,581 shares of common stock held by the Glen Barton Revocable Trust. Mr. Barton retains Voting and
investment power of these shares

‘7’ Mr Hamson's ownershlp lncludes 2,421 shales of common stock held III trust for Mr Halnson’s Superannuation Fund, altd 4.943 shares
of common stock held in trust for Mr Hamson‘s spouse in her Superannuation Fund. Mr I-lamson shares voting and investment power
with his spouse

at Mr Prescott's ownership includes 10.220 shales of comlnon stock held ill trust for Mr Prescott's Superannuatlon Fund Mr, Prescott's
spouse is also a director of the trust. Mr Prescott shares voting and investment power with his spouse

Stock Ownership of Cenain Beneficial Owners.

The following table sets forth information with respect to each person known by the Company to be the
beneficial owner of more than 5% of any class of the Company's voting securities. The share information contained
herein is based on investor ﬁlings with the SEC pursuant to Section 13(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.

Amount and
Title of Nature of Percentage

Name and Address of Beneficial Owner Class Beneficial Ownership of Class
BlackRock,Illc...................................... CommonStock "1 8.98%

40 East 52nd Avenue

New York, NY 10022
Capital World Investors, a Division of Capital Research
andManagementCompany.....,...................... commoHchk (2) 7.5%

333 South Hope Street

Los Angeles, CA 90071

tlt As of December 30, 201 L BlackRock, Inc, and its subsidiaries had sole power to vote and dispose of 43324548 shares of Newlnont
commott stock,

121 As of December 30, 201 1, Capital World Investors, a Division of Capital Research and Management Company (“CRMC“1 beneﬁcially owned
37,161695 shares of common stock, Capital World Investors is deemed to be d1e beneﬁcial owner of such shares as a result ofCRMC acting as
investment adviser to various investment companies registered under Section 8 oi the Investment Company Act of 1940 Capital World
Investors reported that it had sole power to vote and dispose of all such shares. It disclaimed beneficial ownership of all reported shares

14


Directors Compensation.
Effective January 1, 2012, the annual compensation for non-employee directors for their service on the
Board of Directors is as follows:
Annual Retainer: $100,000 for each Director
$25,000 for the Chairman of the Audit Committee
$5,000 for each Audit Committee Member
$20,000 for the Chairman of the Compensation Committee
$10,000 for the Chairman of each standing committee, other than the
Chairman of the Audit Committee and the Chairman of the
Compensation Committee
$240,000 for the Non-Executive Chairman of the Board
Attendance Fees: $2,000 for each Committee Meeting
No attendance fees for Board meetings, except $2,000 for every
meeting in excess of 15 per year.
Stock Award: $130,000 of common stock or director stock units each year under the
2005 Stock Incentive Plan. The fair market value is determined on the
third business day following election by the Board or re-election at the
Company‘s Annual Meeting.
During 201 1, the annual compensation for non-employee directors for their sen/ice on the Board of
Directors was the same as set forth above, except the Stock Award or Director Stock Unit was $120,000.
The following table summarizes the total compensation paid or earned by the Company‘s non-employee
directors during 2011:
2011 Directors Compensation
Fees Earned or All Other
Paid in Cash Stock Awards‘” Compensation Total
W L A L (—31
GlenA.Barton................................ $124,000 $120,000 —0— $244,000
BruceR.Brook................................ $27,000 $120,000 —0— $147,000
Vincent A.Ca|arco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. $375,000 $120,000 —0— $495,000
JosephA.Can’abba  $118,000 $120,000 —0- $233,000
NoreenDoyle................................. $148,000 $120,000 —0— $263,000
VeronicaM.Hagen  $122,000 $120,000 —0— $242,000
MichaelS.Hamson  $115,000 $120,000 —0— $235,000
JaneNelson.................................. $29,000 $120,000 —0— $149,000
JohnB.Prescott............................... $118,000 $120,000 —0— $233,000
DonaldC.Roth................................ $144,000 $120,000 —0— $264,000
SimonR.Thompson............................ $122,000 $120,000 —0— $242,000
m Mr. O‘Brien‘s compensation is shown in the Summary Compensation Table
15


(It The amounts reported in this column represent all cash paid in 2011 for the alrnual retainer fee. Chairmanshlps of the Board, and of the
committees, as well as fees paid for attendance at Committee meetings. Details are as follows
Annual Committee
Retainer Fees Chairmanship: Meeting Fees Total

W A “_t L “_t

GlenA.Barton  $100,000 $ 0 $24,000 $124,000

BruceR.Brook........................ $25,000 $ 0 $2,000 $27,000

Vincent A. Calarco ... . . . . . . t . . . . . . . . . 1. $105,000 $250,000 $20,000 $375,000

JosephA.Carrabba  $100,000 $ 0 $18,000 $118.000

NoreenDoyle  $105,000 $ 25,000 $18,000 $143,000

VeronicaM,l-[agen  $100,000 $ 0 $22,000 3122.000

MichaelS.Hamson  $105,000 $ 0 $10,000 $115,000

JaneNelson“.11...................... $25,000 $ 0 $4,000 $29,000

JohnBtPrescotttu..................... $100,000 $10,000 $ 8,000 $118,000

DonaldC.Roth  $100.000 $ 20,000 $24,000 $144000

Simon R. Thompson  $100,000 $ 10,000 $12,000 $122,000

0‘ For 20”, all nonremployee directors elected to receive $120,000 in the form of director stock units (“DSUs"l. except Messrs. Barton,
Brook, Hamson and Prescott who elected to receive their awards in the form of the Company's common stock. The amounts set forth lrext to
each award represent the aggregate grantdate fair value orsuclt award cotnputed itt accordattce with Fittancial Accounting Standards Board
Codification Topic 718 (“ASC 718"} The number of shares of common stock was calculated based on the fair value of the Company‘s
common stock on the third business day following reelection at the Company‘s Annual Meeting for Messrs. Barton, l-lamson and Prescott
and on the third day following election to the Board for Mr Brook. by taking the average or the high and low sales prices for a share or
cotntnon stock on the New York Stock Exchange for such date, as reported by Bloomberg Professional, the independent commercial
reporting service selected by the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors There are no other assumptions made in the valuation
of the stock awards

Retirement. The Company has no current retirement plan for non-employee directors.

Outstanding Awards. The following table shows outstanding equity compensation for all non-employee
directors of the Company as of December 31, 201 1:

Stock Awnrds‘“
Aggregate Market Value
Director of Outstanding
Stock Units Director Stock

Outstanding Units
m L A
 9,213 $552,872
 - -
VincenlA.Calarco....................................................... 14,258 $855,623
 11764 $705,958
NoreenDoyle........................................................... 14,079 $844,881
VeronicaM,Hagen....,.........t......t..t..v...t..t..v...t.....v...... 14079 $844,881
MichaelS.Hamson...................................................... 12214 $732,962
 1,811 $108,678
JohnB.Prescott......................................................... 10059 $603,641
DonaldC.Rolh.......,.........,.........,.............................. 14,258 $855,623
SimonR.Thompson...................................................... 12,194 $731.762

“‘ In 2011. Messrs Barton, Brook, Harrison alrd Prescott elected to receive their director equity awards In the form of common stock rather than
in the form of DSUs, which amount is included in the Common Stock column of the Stock Ownership of Directors and Executive Officers
Table set forth above See footnote 2 to such table.

Share Ownership Guidelines. All directors are encouraged to have a significant long-term financial
interest in the Company. To encourage alignment of the interests of the directors and the stockholders, each director
is expected to own, or acquire within three years of becoming a director. shares of the Company‘s common stock
having a market value of five times the annual cash retainer payable under the Company‘s director compensation
policy. All directors meet the share ownership guidelines or fall within the three year exception period.

Compensation Consultant. The Board of Directors has engaged Frederic W. Cook & Co. (“Cook & Co.")
during 2011 to assist in the evaluation of independent director compensation. For a description of executive
compensation consulting services provided by Cook & Co. to the Compensation Committee of the Board of
Directors. see page 29 of the Compensation. Discussion and Analysis.

16


Committees of the Board of Directors and Attendance.

Attendance at Meetings. During 2011, the Board of Directors held eight meetings. Each incumbent
director attended 75% or more of all meetings of the Board of Directors and committees of the Board of
Directors on which he or she served. II is the policy and practice of the Company that nominees for election at
the Annual Meeting of Stockholders attend the meeting. All of the Board members at the time of the 2011
Annual Meeting of Stockholders held on April 19, 201 1, attended the meeting.

Board Committees. The Board of Directors has, in addition to other committees, Audit, Compensation,
Corporate Governance and Nominating, and Environmental, Social Responsibility, Operations and Safety
Committees. All members of these four committees are independent, as deﬁned in the listing standards of the
New York Stock Exchange and the Company’s Corporate Governance Guidelines. Each Committee functions
under a written charter adopted by the Board which are available on our website at
htt 7://www.newmont.com/our-investors/our-governance. The current members of these Committees and the
number of meetings held in 2011 are shown in the following table:

Committees of the Board of Directors.
Audit Meetings
Commith Members“) Funtliolls ot‘ the Commith in 2011
Noreen Doyle, Chair‘z’ - assists the Board in its oversight of the integrity of the Company’s 6
Bruce R- Bmkm financial statements.
Vincent A Calarw - assists the Board in its oversight of the Company's compliance with
M'Chul 5‘ Hamw" legal and regulatory requirements and corporate policies and controls.
- authority to retain and terminate the Company's independent
auditors.
- approve auditing sen/ices and related fees and pre-approve any non-
audit sen/ices.
- responsible for confirming the independence and objectivity of the
independent auditors.
- please refer to “Report of the Audit Committee" on page 72.
Compensation Meetings
W W m
Donald C. Roth. Chairman - determines the components and compensation of the Company’s key 8
Glen A- 33110“ employees, including its executive ofﬁcers.
JOSEPh A- Carmbe - reviews plans for management development and senior executive
Veronica M. Hagen succession.
- administers (determines) awards of stock based compensation,
including stock options, restricted stock and restricted stock units,
which are subject to ratiﬁcation by the full Board of Directors.
- please refer to “Report of the Compensation Committee on Executive
Compensation" and the “Compensation, Discussion and Analysis"
beginning on pages 21 and 22, respectively.
Corporate Governance
and Nominating Meetings
W W m
Vincent A. Calarco, Chairman - proposes slates of directors to be nominated for election or re- 5
Glen A. Barton electiom
Nome" Doyle‘" - proposes slates of officers to be elected.
Dom“ C‘ Roth - conducts annual Board and committee evaluations.
- conducts evaluations of the performance of the Chief Executive
Officer.
- responsible for recommending amount of director compensation.
- advises Board of corporate governance issues.
1 7


Environmental,
Social Responsibility,
Operations and Satay Meetings
Commith Members-V Functions of the Committee in 2011
Johll B. Prescott, Chairman ‘ assists the Board ill its oversight of operations and safety issues. 5W
Joseph A. Canabba ~ assists the Board ill its oversight of sustainable development,
Veronica M- Hagen ellvirollmelltal affairs, commullity relations alld communications
Jane Nelsonm mun
5mm“ R' Thompsm‘ ‘ assists the Board ill furtherance of its commitments to adoption of

best practices ill mining operations, promotion of a healthy and safe

work environment, and environmentally sound and socially

responsible resource development.

- administers the Company's policies, processes, standards and

procedures designed to accomplish the Company‘s goals and

objectives relating to these issues.

4H The Board of Directors has determined that each of the members oithe Audit Committee is an Audit Committee Financial Expert, as a
result oi their knowledge, abilitieS, education and experience.

<2! Noreen Doyle serves on audit committees for two other public companies and two lion-public companies, The Board lras determined tlrat
such service does not impair her ability to effectively serve on the Company's Audit Committee,

at Bruce Brook was appointed to tire Audit Committee following his election to tire Board on Octoberzs, 201 l.

w Noreen Doyle was appointed a member oi the Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee on October 25, 201 l.

“‘ Qt October 25. 20l l. the Board of Directols resolved to combine the responsibilities and functions of each of dte Environment-ll altd Social
Responsibility Committee and the Operations atrd Safety Committee to iorrn dte Environmental. Social Responsibility. Operations and Saiety
Committee (tire “ESROS Committee“) The ESROS Comminee will be comprised oi at least tltree directors appointed by the Board In appointing
members oi the ESROS Committee, the Board will consider breadth oi industry or relevant country experience and knowledge regarding operations
and saiety issues The autlrority, structure, operations. purpose, responsibilities altd speciﬁc duties of the ESROS Committee are dewibed under its
writterrclrarter adopted by dte Board which is available on our website at lrttpv/www,rrewrtrorrt,com/our-irrvestots/our-govemarrce

to The Environmental and Social Responsibility Committee and the Operations and Safety Committee were combined to form the ESROS
Committee on October 25, 20] 1. Prior to that date, each of the Operations and Safety Committee and the Environmental and Social
Responsibility Committee held three meetings, The combined ESROS Committee held two meetings in 20] l

m Jane Nelson was appointed to the ESROS Committee following her election to the Board on October 25. 20“

Corporate Governance.

Corporate Governance Guidelines and charters. The Company has adopted Corporate Governance
Guidelines that outline important policies and plactices regarding the governance of the Company. In addition, each of the
oomm'ttees has adopted a charter outlining responsibilities and opelations, The Corporate Governance Guidelines and the
charters are available on our website at hmd/www,newmont.oom/our-investors/our—govemanoe.

Board Leadership and Independent Chairman. The Board of Directors selects the Chairman of the
Board in the manller and upon the criteria that it deems best for the Company at the time of selection. The Board
of Directors does not have a prescribed policy on whether the roles of the Chairman alld Chief Executive Officer
should be separate or combined. At all times, the Board of Directors has either a Non-Executive Chairman or
lead director of the Board, which Chairman or lead director will meet the Company’s independence criteria alld
will be elected annually by the independent members of the Board of Directors.

Before 2008, the positions of Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer were held by a single
person, Due to the potential efﬁciencies of having the Chief Executive Officer also serve in the role of Chairman
of the Board and the long tenure of the Chief Executive Officer, the Board of Directors determined that the
interests of the Company alld its stockholders were best served by the leadership and direction provided by a
sillgle person as Chairman alld Chief Executive Ofﬁcer. Ill 2007, the Board of Directors considered a stockholder
proposal included in the 2007 Proxy Statement regarding the separation of such roles. The Board agreed to
separate the roles as of January 1, 2008, ill response to the stockholder vote and the Board’s determination
regarding what was in the best interest of the Company at such time. The Board will continue to evaluate whether
this leadership structure is ill the best interests of the stockholders on a regular basis.

1 X


In January 2008, the independent members of the Board of Directors elected Vincent A. Calarco as
independent Non-Executive Chairman of the Board. Mr. Calarco has been re-elected each year since 2008 as
Non-Executive Chairman. He presides at independent directors sessions scheduled at each regular Board
meeting. The Non-Executive Chairman serves as liaison between the Chief Executive Ofﬁcer and the other
independent directors, approves meeting agendas and schedules and notifies other members of the Board of
Directors regarding any signiﬁcant concerns of stockholders or interested parties of which he or she becomes
aware. The Non-Executive Chairman presides at stockholders meetings and provides advice and counsel to the
Chief Executive Ofﬁcer.

Board Oversight of Risk Management. The Board of Directors is engaged in company-wide risk
management oversight. Directors are entitled to rely on management and the advice of the Company’s outside
advisors and auditors, but must at all times have a reasonable basis for such reliance. The Board of Directors
relies upon the Chief Executive Ofﬁcer and Chief Financial Ofﬁcer to supervise the day-to—day risk management,
each of whom provides reports directly to the Board of Directors and certain Board Committees, as appropriate
The Compain has a global Enterprise Risk Management team, led by the Company‘s Vice President and
Treasurer. The Enterprise Risk Management team‘s objectives include conducting the compensation risk
assessment and reporting the process and findings to the Audit Committee and the Compensation Committee
regularly, and to the full Board of Directors on at least an annual basis.

The Board of Directors also delegates certain oversight responsibilities to its Board Committees. For a
description of the functions of the various Board Committees, see “Board Committees“ above. For example,
while the primary responsibility for financial and other reporting, internal controls, compliance with laws and
regulations, and ethics rests with the management of the Company, the Audit Committee provides risk oversight
with respect to the Company‘s ﬁnancial statements, the Company‘s compliance with legal and regulatory
requirements and corporate policies and controls, the independent auditor's selection, retention, qualifications,
objectivity and independence, and the performance of the Company‘s internal audit function. Additionally, the
Compensation Committee provides risk oversight with respect to the Company's compensation program. For a
discussion of the Compensation Committee and Enterprise Risk Management team‘s assessments of
compensation-related risks, see “Compensation Discussion and Analysis — Risk Assessment." The
Environmental, Social Responsibility, Operations and Safety Committee provides oversight and direction with
regard to environmental, social responsibility, community relations, safety and operating risks.

Communications with Stockholders or Interested Parties. Any stockholder or interested party
who desires to contact the Company's Chairman, the non-management directors as a group or the other members
of the Board of Directors may do so by writing to the Secretary, Newmont Mining Corporation, 6363 South
Fiddler's Green Circle, Greenwood Village, Colorado 80111 USA. Any such communication should state the
number of shares owned, if applicable. The Secretary will forward to the Chairman any such communication
addressed to him, the non-management directors as a group or to the Board of Directors generally, and will
forward such communication to other Board members, as appropriate, provided that such communication
addresses a legitimate business issue. Any communication relating to accounting, auditing or fraud will be
forwarded immediately to the Chairman of the Audit Committee.

Majority Voting Policy. At the 2010 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, the stockholders approved a proposal
submitted by United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America to initiate the appropriate process to amend
the Company's govemance documents to provide that director nominees be elected by the afﬁnnative vote of the
majority of votes cast at an Annual Meeting in a non-contested election. As a result, the Board of Directors
amended the Company‘s By-Laws to require that in an uncontested election each director will be elected by a vote
of the majority of the votes cast, which means the number of votes cast “for” a director‘s election exceeds 50% of
the number of votes cast with respect to that director‘s election. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event of a
“contested election“ of the directors (as defined in the Company's By-Laws), directors shall be elected by the vote
of a plurality of the votes cast at any meeting for the election of directors at which a quorum is present.

If a nominee for director does not receive the vote of at least a majority of votes cast at an Annual Meeting,
it is the policy of the Board of Directors that the director must tender his or her resignation to the Board. In such
a case, the Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee will make a recommendation to the Board,

19


whether to accept or reject the tendered resignation, Laking into account all of the facts and circumstances. The director who has
tendered his or her resignation will not take part in the deliberations. For additional information, our Corporate Govemanoe
Guidelines describing this policy are available on our website at www.newmoittoom/our-investors/our-govemanoe.

Retirement Age. The Company’s retirement policy for non-employee directors provides that, except at
the request of the Board of Directors, no non-employee director may stand for re-election to the Board after
reaching age 72.

Code of Business Ethics and Conduct. Newmont has adopted a Code of Business Ethics and Conduct (the
“Code") applicable to all of its directors, ofﬁcers and employees, including the Chief Executive Officer, the Chief
Financial Ofﬁcer, the Chief Accounting Ofﬁcer and other persons perfonning ﬁnancial reporting functions. The Code
is available on our website at htt )z/lwww.newmonticom/our-investors/our-governance. The Code is designed to deter
wrongdoing and promote: (a) honest and ethical conduct: (b) full, fair, accurate, timely and understandable disclosures;
to) compliance with laws, rules and regulations: (d) prompt internal reporting of Code violations; and (e) accountability
for adherence to the Code. The Company will disclose any amendmean to, or waivers from, certain provisions of the
Code that apply to the Company's directors or executive ofﬁcers within four days of such event on Form 8-K.

Related Person Transactions. The Board has adopted written policies and procedures for approving
related person transactions. Any transaction with a related person, other than transactions available to all
employees generally or involving aggregate amounts of less than $120,000, must be approved or ratiﬁed by the
Audit Committee, the Compensation Committee for compensation matters, or disinterested members of the
Board. The policies apply to all executive officers, directors and their family members and entities in which any
of these individuals has a substantial ownership interest or control.

2t)


Report of the Compensation Committee on Executive
Compensation

The Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors (the “Compensation Committee") is composed
entirely of directors who are not ofﬁcers or employees of the Company or any of its subsidiaries, and are
independent, as deﬁned in the listing standards of the New York Stock Exchange and the Company 's Corporate
Governance Guidelines. The Compensation Committee has adopted a Charter that describes its responsibilities
in detail, and the Compensation Committee and Board review and assess the adequacy of the Charter on a
regular basis. The Compensation Committee has the responsibility of taking,7 the leadership role with respect to
the Board's responsibilities relating to compensation of the Company's key employees, including the Chief
Executive Officer, the Chief Financial Officer and the other executive oﬁ‘icers. Additional information about the
Compensation Committee's role in corporate governance can be found in the Compensation Committee‘s
Charter, available on Ihe Company‘s web site a! http://www,newmont.corn/our-investors/our-governance.

The Compensation Commillee has reviewed and discussed with management Ihe Company's Compensation
Discussion and Analysis section of this Proxy Statement Based on such review and discussions, Ihe
Compensation Committee has recommended Io Ihe Board of Directors Ihal Ihe Compensation Discussion and
Analysis section be included in this Proxy Slalemenl and Ihe Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for Ihe
year ended December 31, 201 1.

Submitted by the following members of the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors:

Donald C Roth, Chairman
Glen A. Barton
Joseph A. Carrabba
Veronica M. Hagen
2|


Compensation Discussion and Analysis

Our Compensation Discussion and Analysis (“CD&A”) describes Newmont’s executive compensation programs
and compensation decisions in 201 1 for our Named Executive Ofﬁcers (“Ofﬁcers”), who for 201 1 includes:

- Richard T, O'Brien, President and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer:

- Russell Ball, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Ofﬁcer:

- Randy Engel, Executive Vice President, Strategic Development:

- Brian A. Hill, Executive Vice President, Sustainability and External Affairs“): and

- Guy Lansdown, Executive Vice President, Discovery and Development.

The information is presented in the CD&A as follows:

- Executive Summﬂ: Provides the highlights of the Company‘s business performance, executive
compensation structure and the relationship between the two, and the key Compensation Committee
actions in 2011:

- Philosophy and Ob’ectives: An overview of the compensation philosophy and objectives of the executive
compensation program at Newmont:

- Components of Total ComEnsation: Provides details of the components within executive pay, how they
are structured and why they are used:

- 201 1 Comp_ensation: Provides details regarding current pay levels and incentive programs;

- Looking Ahead to 2012: Provides a summary of planned updates to the 2012 Execution Compensation
Program; and

- Other Policies and Considerations: Provides information on other programs, govenianoe, risk and related items.
Executive Summary.

Company Overview and Summary of 2011 Business Results. Newmont is one of the world’s
largest gold producers and is the only gold company included in the S&P 500 Index and Fortune 500, and has
been included in the Dow Jones Sustainability Index-World for ﬁve consecutive years. We are engaged in the
exploration for and acquisition of gold, copper and certain base metals properties. We have signiﬁcant operations
and/or assets in the United States, Australia, Peru, Indonesia, Ghana, Mexico, New Zealand and Canada.

The Company vision is to be the most valued and respected mining company through industry-leading
performance. In 201 l, we successfully executed on the key benchmarks that we set out at the beginning of the year,

Delivered strong operating and financial performance.

- Record cash ﬂow from continuing operations of $3.591 billion, an increase of 13% over 2010:

- Gold operating margin of $971 per ounce in 201 1, an increase of 32% over 2010 compared to an increase
of 28% in the average realized gold price for the same period:

- Record sales of $10.358 billion, an increase of 9% over 2010:

- Consolidated gold production of approximately 5.9 million ounces (5.2 million ounces attributable to
Newmont) at costs applicable to sales of $591 per ounce:

4H On December 5, 2011, Brian Hill was appointed Executive Vice President of Sustainability and External Affairs Mr Hill previously
served as the Executive Vice President, Operations to: the Company
22


- Consolidated copper production of approximately 352 million pounds (206 million pounds attributable to
Newmont) at costs applicable to sales of $1.26 per pound:

- Net income attributable to Newmont stockholders of $0.74 per share, Adjusted net income of $4.39 per

share‘ “: and

- Net increase of 5.3 million ounces of gold reserves. after depletion. to a record 98.8 million ounces at

December 31. 2011.
ll’ See our 201] Annual Report on Form [07K under the heading “Management‘s Discussion and Analysis of Consolidated Financial
Condition and Results of Operations. Non-GAAP Financial Measures. Adjusted Net Income" for a reconciliation of such measure

Additionally, we remain dedicated to key initiatives to further drive continuous

improvement and business efﬁciencies in our organization.

- Continuing to improve our safety performance:

- Continuing evolution to a process-driven culture;

- Maintaining our industry-leading environmental, social and community relations commitments:

- Remaining a leading member of the Dow Jones Sustainability World Index; and

- Investing in people.

Our executive compensation programs support the achievement of the results stated above. as further
described in our CD&A.

Compensation Structure Our executive compensation program 7 composed of salary. short and long-
term incentives i is intended to align the interests of our Officers with those of our stockholders. This program
accomplishes this by rewarding performance that is designed. over time, to result in an increase in the value of
our stockholder‘s investments in Newmont. We believe that the proportion of at-risk, performance-based
compensation should comprise a significant portion of executive pay and rise as an executive's level of
responsibility increases. Characteristics of our program that support this include:

- Short- and long-term incentives made up over 80% of 2011 target total compensation (as noted in the

charts below) with long-term and equity compensation representing a signiﬁcant portion of total pay;

- Overall. approximately two-thirds of targeted compensation for our Ofﬁcers is based on the long-term

financial and stock price performance of Newmont: and

- The incentive compensation actually received by Ofﬁcers varies based upon the Company’s short and

long-term performance and Newmont's stock price.
CEO Mix of Pay Other Oll'icer Mix of Pay
. m 3mm - as. 3m
- 3m .5... um... I show... We...“
. mg m .mm I is... .5... mm...

While incenting performance. the design of our program is intended to mitigate excessive risk taking by
executives. The mix and structure of compensation as described in this CD&A strike an appropriate balance to
promote sustained performance without motivating or rewarding excessive risk.

Managing Executive Compensation in the Commodities Industry. Our stock price is heavily
inﬂuenced by gold, copper and other commodity prices, which are in turn primarily driven by macroeconomic
factors that are outside of the Company's control. Since our stock price is significantly inﬂuenced by these

23


external factors, Newmont’s compensation program is designed to focus management’s efforts in areas where
they have the most inﬂuence on driving business performance, as well as to motivate and retain outstanding
leadership through various economic and commodity price cycles. We believe this approach aligns the incentive
structure with business performance elements that support the goal of providing long-term performance gains for
our stockholders. To achieve this, the Company utilizes a comprehensive performance-based compensation
structure, ensuring an appropriate balance of operational, financial and share price incentives based on:
- Annual and long-term performance;
- Internal and external performance comparisons;
- Absolute and relative performance measures; and
- Formulaic and discretionary programs.
This structure is illustrated in the following chart
Newmont‘s Executive Compensation Structure
I Base Salary
IShort- term Incentive
ILong- term Incentive
I Pelformance
Leveraged Stock
Units I Annual Incentive
l Frnnneml Compensation Plzn
"WWW I Simeglc Objectives
Stock
- xrnck Options
Long-term Incentives Short-term Incentives
Fromm: Pa melt! Basis: Pro am: PI ellt Basis:
Performance 0 Total Shareholder Return (‘TSR") Annual Incentive 0 Annual ﬁnancial and operational
Leveraged Stock versus Peers Compensation perfonnance
Units (333%) 0 Absolute shaie prrce performance Plan (50%)

VFinancial - Multi-year ﬁnancial and Strategic - Annual progress on key leadership
Perfonnance operational performance Objectives Inmauves ahgned With lmproved
Stock (33.3%) Bonus (50%) Comimy Performance and

,_,,,__7, ,— 7 sustainability 7 7
Stock Opuons o Newmont‘s Stock Price
(33.3%) V

24


Company Performance and Relationship to Officer Compensation for 2011. In 2011,
management delivered solid results on operational, ﬁnancial and relative stockholder returlt measures, altd these
results had direct linkages to our incentive compeltsatiolt plans. The measures used in iltcelttive compensation are
what we believe to be the key drivers of Newmont’s long-term success altd stock price performance, altd are
directly correlated to the pay received by the Company's Ofﬁcers. Components of Officer compensation
increased or decreased ill 201 1 based on the level of achievement of these goals as shown ill the chart below.

(See the “2011 Compensation" section of this Proxy Statement for additional information on the measures.
results and payments.)
—
trroerriive nut Melsuns Suppurmd (tgrtirtti bagel) Compensation Compensation

Assets/Balance Sheet Below target Adjusted to below tnrget‘ ll Flnamlnl Periormnnce

Strength Long-term lncentlves

, Performance-Leveraged

pears vs. Peers
m The overall periormance on the combined measures was NO 1% oi target: however, due to the oneetime impairment, the Committee
exercised its discretion to adjust the actual payout to 75% oi target tor the omcers Additionally, please see Note 5 to the Consolidated
Financial Statements in the 20” Annual Report on Form [07K under the heading “WriteeDown of Property, Plant and Mine
Development" for additional information regarding the impairment

Incentive Plan Measures, Overall Company Performance and Resulting Compensation. The
metrics listed below are general indicators of the Company‘s overall performance ill 2011 which results from the
performance on the incentive plan measures. Management believes the incentive plan measures are the key
drivers of the metrics below and support sustained, long-term performance. As noted previously, management
prefers to use a balance of operational and ﬁnancial measures, rather than only high-level financial measures, to
provide a more direct “line of sight" and to incent management’s performance on the key performance drivers,
Again, this balanced approach also helps to manage commodin price volatility, such as the gold price
experienced in 201 l, by incorporating measures that are not signiﬁcantly influenced by commodity prices.

% Change 2010-2011
40% - 7
35%
30%
25%
20%
if): 9% 6% 7% 7%
5%
0%
_5% -0.7%
Revenue Cash Flow Net Increase Total 2011 2010-2011 2011
from in Gold Assets TSR (l) TSR (2) Actual Pay vs.
Continuing Reserves Target (3)
Operations
1" Newmont‘s TSR for 20] l was 11.7% However, Newmont outperformed the PHLX Gold & Silver Sector index (XAU) which returned
20% and the median of its gold peer group, which returned -I 3 95% over the same period
25


42’ Newmont's longer term TSR. as calculated for performance versus the gold peer group. returned 37% for tire two-years 2010-2011,
Additionally, Newmont performed attire loom percentile (top) of Its peer group her this period Newlnont's TSR, excluding dividends.
was 34% over this same period

"l Reference the “Actual Compensation Earned in 20] l" chart provided after the “Longelerm Incentive" section of the CD&A

Summary of Key 2011 Compensation Committee Actions. The following highlights some of the
key actions by the Compensation Committee, as well as the changes in Officer compensation, in 201 1,

In 201 l, Newmont received a 95% vote ill favor of the “Advisory Vote on the Compensation of the Named
Executive Officers" (“Say on Pay"). (Additional illformatioll regardillg the “Say on Pay" vote is located ill the
“Additional Policies alld Considerations" sectioll of the CD&A.) This result indicates strong support for
Newmont’s Ofﬁcer compensation and the Committee continued to focus on developing our executive
compensation structure to increase its effectiveness alld further align with stockholder interests. Some of the
changes include:

- Revised the executive pay philosophy to the median (50‘h percentile) of the Company's peer group

(reduced from the 62.5 percentile: effective for 2012 target compensation):

- Revised the Company's peer group to improve industry representation, include companies more relevant
in size and ensure representation of key business units;

- Restructured executive severance to standardize severance terms ill the event of involuntary termination
not for cause, and to mitigate negotiation and employment contracts. The new plan also reduces the
maximum amount of severance permitted from the previous severance plan;

‘ Removed the “single-trigger“ vesting for equity incentives upon a change of control (changed to “double-
trigger" 7 change of control and termination):

- Adopted a change of control severance plan which removes the excise tax gross up provided ill the prior
plan The new plan is effective January 1, 2012, for employees hired illto, or current employees promoted
into, eligible positions (The prior plan remains ill place for employees who were eligible on, or prior to,
December 31, 2011‘);

- Reviewed the executive compensation incentive structure and measures for potential adjustments in 2012.
Based on the review, the 2012 long-term incentive structure will be revised to further improve pay for
performallce, reduce complexity alld eliminate duplicate metrics. The 2012 plans will focus on key
financial performance metrics aligned with stockholder value, including Total Shareholder Return alld
EBITDA: alld

‘ Revised the timing of the compensation review process to better accommodate the inclusion of a holistic
set of criteria for pay decisions, including corporate results, individual results, executive succession plans
and market information,

These policy changes build upon our strong governance model and other policies that are ill place,

including:

‘ Stock ownership requirements for Ofﬁcers to own signiﬁcant holdings of Newmont stock (5x salary for
CEO):

- Annual employee stock issuance “burn rate" (dilution) ullder 1%:

- Equity grant practices with at least 3 year combined performance and vesting periods for Ofﬁcer awards;

‘ A clawback policy to recover excess compensation from incentive payouts and stock gains if the ﬁnancial
results were misstated, whether intentionally or by administrative error:

- Stock trading policy prohibiting executives from buying Newmont stock on margin, or hedging Newmont
stock holdings:

‘ Change-of—control plans that provide cash payments only upon termination following a change-of—control
(“double-trigger"), including stock acceleration only upon a double-trigger beginning with 2012 grants:

26


- No employment contracts for Ofﬁcers:

- Prohibition against the repricing of stock options without stockholder approval;

- Compensation Committee operating model and annual work plan to support the governance activities of
the Compensation Committee:

- Compensation Committee charter, which is reviewed on a regular basis to ensure it is current with best
practices and maintains high governance standards:

- Use of an independent compensation consultant, Frederic W. Cook & Co., Inc. (“Cook & Co."), to advise
the Compensation Committee regarding executive and director compensation (the consultant does not
perform any other services to the Company);

- Executive session of the Committee without management present: and

- Executive succession planning review.

Summary of Changes in Compensation, Performance Results and Corresponding Compensation Plan
Payments for 2011 (further details are provided in the “2011 Compensation" section of this CD&A):

- Base Salary: The Company adjusted base salaries following a comprehensive review. The base salaries of
the Ofﬁcers were below the targeted competitive market position. Given this, and based on the
performance of the Ofﬁcers and overall Company results, the Compensation Committee approved salary
increases placing the Officers within their competitive range given their performance:

- Coﬂrate Performance Bonus: The aggregate performance for 2011 was 110.1% of target based on the
measures stated above; however, due to the impairment recognized in 2011, the Committee exercised its
discretion to reduce the award to 75% of target for all Ofﬁcers;

- Strategic Ob‘ectives Bonus: The awards ranged from 0% to 150% of the respective targets based on
individual quantitative and qualitative goals:

- Financial Performance Stock Bonus: The aggregate three-year performance was 118.3% of target, based
on the weighted average three-year performance of the ﬁnancial and operational measures noted above:
due to the impairment recognized in 2011, the Committee exercised its discretion to reduce the award to
100.7% of target for all Ofﬁcers;

- Performance-Leveraged Stock Units: Newmont's stock price increased 34% for the 2 year period of 2010
through 2011, resulting in a TSR performance that placed Newmont at the 100th percentile (top) of the
peer companies, which combined, funded the program at 184% of target: and

- Stock options: Awarded to Ofﬁcers based on performance, with compensation from the stock options
fully tied to growth in share price over the vesting period.

Philosophy and Objectives.

Compensation Philosophy. Newmont's executive compensation programs are designed to effectively
link the actions of our executives to business outcomes that drive value creation for stockholders. In designing
these programs, we are guided by the following principles:

- Maintaining a clear link between the achievement of business goals and compensation

payout. Our Compensation Committee believes that:
(1) Ofﬁcers should be evaluated and paid based on performance that leads to long-term success and
relative stock price improvement; and
(2) Ofﬁcer compensation programs can be an effective means of driving the behavior to accomplish our
objectives, but only if each executive clearly understands how achievement of predetermined
business goals influences his or her compensation.
27


- Selecting the right performance measures. Equally important is the selection of those
performance measures which need to be measurable and linked to both increased stockholder value and
Newmont's short- and long-tenn success.

- Sharing information and encouraging feedback. Focused and clear program design supports
transparency for our stockholders. It is important for stockholders to understand the basis for our
Officers' compensation, as this provides stockholders insight into our goals, direction and the manner in
which resources are being used to increase stockholder value. We welcome stockholder input and have
regularly responded to feedback from stockholders in this regard.

As a core component of Newmont’s values, we are committed to transparency and open disclosure. We
hope this information provides insight into the process that we follow in designing and implementing our
executive compensation programs.

Compensation Objectives. We believe that executive compensation should be directly linked to
continuous improvements in corporate performance and increases in stockholder value. Newmont's executive
compensation programs are designed to:

- Motivate executives to achieve business goals that drive value for our stockholders:

- Provide competitive compensation opportunities to attract and retain highly qualified executives:

- Emphasize long-tenn performance, which includes our high safety and social responsibility standards:

- Blend the mix of cash and equity compensation and ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial performance;

- Provide incentives to improve performance without taking excessive risks: and

- Encourage an ownership mentality and stewardship of long-term stockholder interests
Components of Total Compensation.

The components of target total direct compensation for our Officers are described in the Executive
Summary and stated below. We emphasize performance-based "at-risk" compensation. based on operational,
ﬁnancial and share price performance.

-

Developing Our Executive Compensation Program. Each year the Compensation Committee
conducts a detailed analysis of executive compensation designed to:

- Assess the competitiveness of the Company’s executive compensation levels against peer groups:

- Consider the desired target benchmark for total executive compensation levels: and

- Make necessary reﬁnements to the compensation components to further align executive compensation
with performance goals and ensure good governance practices.

The Compensation Committee meets on a regular basis with the Chief Executive Officer, representatives
from the Company’s Human Resources, Corporate Legal, and Finance Departments The role of management is
to provide the Compensation Committee with perspectives on the business context and individual performance to
assist the Compensation Committee in making its decisions The Company‘s Human Resources Department
supports the Compensation Committee by providing data and analyses on compensation levels and trends In
addition, external independent compensation experts consult with the Compensation Committee regarding
speciﬁc topics as further described in the following paragraph An executive session, without management
present, is generally held at the end of each Compensation Committee meeting The independent members of the

28


Board of Directors make all decisions regarding the Chief Executive Ofﬁcer’s compensation in executive
session, upon the recommendation of the Compensation Committee. The Committee Chairman provides regular
reports to the Board of Directors regarding actions and discussions at Compensation Committee meetings.

The Compensation Committee, which has the authority to retain special counsel and other experts, including
compensation consultants. has engaged Cook & Co. to assist the Compensation Committee with: (1) advice
regarding trends in executive compensation, (2) independent review of management proposals, and (3) an
independent review and recommendation on Chief Executive Officer compensation, as well as other items that
come before the Compensation Committee. Cook & Co. has reviewed the compensation philosophy, objectives,
strategy, benchmark analyses and recommendations regarding Ofﬁcer compensation. Cook & Co. is engaged
solely by the Compensation Committee and does not provide any services or advice directly to management.

When making compensation decisions for Officers, the Compensation Committee considers factors beyond
market data and the advice of consultants. The Compensation Committee considers the individual‘s performance,
tenure and experience, the overall performance of the Company, any retention concerns, the individual‘s
historical compensation and the compensation of the individual‘s peers within the Company and market. While
the Compensation Committee does have certain guidelines, goals, and tools that it uses to make its decisions, as
explained below, the compensation process is not an exact science but incorporates the reasoned business
judgment of the Compensation Committee. In making decisions for executives other than the Chief Executive
Ofﬁcer, the input and perspective of the Chief Executive Officer is considered by the Compensation Committee.
Compensation Components and Alignment to Compensation Philosophy.

The components of our executive compensation program contain six main elements as shown in the chart
above. We explain the philosophy and key features of each belowr

Determining the Proper Mix of Different Pay Elements. In determining how we allocate an
executive's total compensation package among various components, we emphasize compensation elements that
reward performance on measures that align closely with business success. underscoring the pay-for-performance
philosophy. A signiﬁcant portion of our executive compensation is performance-based or “at-risk." Our Chief
Executive Ofﬁcer and other Ofﬁcers have a higher percentage of at-risk compensation relative to other
employees, because our Officers have the greatest inﬂuence on Company performance. Stock-based long-term
incentives represent the largest component of pay, in order to encourage sustained long-term performance and
ensure alignment with stockholders' interests. In the graphs below, we show the emphasis on at-risk or
stockholder aligned compensation through performance-based short-term and long-tenn incentives compared to
base salary.

CEO Mix of Pay Other Ofﬁcer Mix of Pay
I an Saizr) I 5m 3m
. 3M m .mm - mm m... Mm
- mm...“ mm.» I rm .5... mum
29


Components of Compensation and Alignment to Goals. The Company recognizes that its share
price is heavily inﬂuenced by the price of gold, copper and other commodities, which are outside of the control
of the Company. Thus, as a way to balance the commodity fluctuation, the Company grants a mix of incentives
including stock optiolls, ﬁnancial performance stock bonuses (common stock and restricted stock units) alld
performance leveraged stock units (based on share return measures) to aligll the interests of management with the
lollg-term interests of stockholders. This balanced approach means that management needs to achieve speciﬁc
performance goals to earn the common stock alld restricted stock units even ill periods of positive gold/copper
price movement, alld that the equity package continues to motivate performance ill down-cycles as the common
stock alld restricted stock units retain value and have motivational impact even when gold/copper prices are
falling. At the same time, the use of stock price-based incentives ensures that the highest rewards will only occur
with an increasing stock price.

The components of the compensation structure are:

Time Hot-WWI 

Current Base Salary Compensation for the level of Fixed compensation is ltot subject to ﬁnancial

responsibility, experience, skills, performance risk:

d ta' d' d' 'd l

 "' 'V' "a Targeted to the 625 percentile (changed to 50'-
percettttle for 20l2, see footnote l below) of the peer
group to ensure the ability to compete itt a difficult
leadership talent environment;
Individual compensation can vary above or below the
market reference point based on such factors as
performance, skills, experience and scope ol' the role
relative to internal and external - ers.

Short-Term Annual Incentive Supports annual operating attd Annual cash award which ranges from (new of

(annual) Compensation Plan financial performance, based on target based on'
deﬁned performance metrics r Production:
‘ Cost of sales:
« Capl|al expenditures;
. Reserve additions: and
. Nonereserve mineralization additions
Strategic Objectives Rewards for the achievement of Annual cash award based on stated measures altd
Bonus group and individual strategic objectives approved in advance by the Compensation
objectives designed to support Committee.
current initiatives, longsterm
sustatttability attd Company
erformaltce
LongeTerm PerformanceeLeveraged Incentive to outperform peer group Awards are based on absolute stock price growth and
13-10 years) Stock Units share price performance to lnake relative stock price performance against the peer
Newmont the preferred gold stock, group, over a three-year period,
aligtts pay with stockholder
interests and longeterm stock price
performance
Financial Supports consistent performance oI Three-year tolltttg weighted average of the Corporate
Performance Stock longeterm operational and financial Performance Bonus metrics (201 l ' 50%: ZOIO' 30%:
measures that drive the success of 2009: 20%).
the Company
Stock Options Reward for growth in the Oltly deliver value in the event of increased share
Company's share price over the price following three-year vesting period;
l we
°““ ”“ Grant amount is based on individual rformance.

m During ml 1, the Compensation Committee revised the Company's pay philosophy for 20l2 to the 50m percentile of the peer group for
all components of compensation (base salary, short-term incentives and long-term incentives), Additional details are provided in the
“Competitive Considerations“ section.

30


Determination of Target Total Compensation. We consider a variety of factors when deterrninittg
target Offrcer compensation to ensure we have a comprehensive understanding of alignment to goals,
reasonableness of pay, itrternal equity, pay for performatrce, and ability to attract and retain executive talent. The
primary items considered when making executive compensation determinations are discussed below and include:

- Market information;

- Individual performance:

- Experience, skills and scope of responsibilities:

- Company performance:

- Succession planning;

- Value of the compensation relative to the corresponding objective: and

- Other key measures which assist in providing a comprehensive understanding of pay, such as pay mix,

intemal equity, Chief Executive Ofﬁcer compensation versus Total Shareholder Return, and performance
sensitivity analysis.
Competitive Considerations (Market Information).

Peer Group Determinaﬁon. We strive to compensate our Officers competitively relative to industry peers As
part of the Compensation Committee’s charter atrd to ensure the reasonableness and competitiveness of Newmont's
position in the industry, the Compensation Committee regularly evaluates Newmont's peer group with the aid of its
itrdependetrt consultant, Cook & Co., and with input from management. As noted above, peer groups are used in the
compensation benchmarking process as one input in helping to determine appropriate pay levels. When reviewing the
appropriateness of a peer group, the Compensation Committee’s analysis includes a review of information regarding each
potential peer company‘s industry, complexity of their business and organizational size, including revenue, net income,
toml assets, market capimlization and number of employees. This approach ensures a reasonable basis of comparison.

2011 Peer Group. The 2011 peer group was used to evaluate target executive compensation for 2011 and
consists of the following mining and extractive industry companies:

Agnico Eagle Mines Limited Goldcorp Inc. CONSOL Energy Inc.

Anglogold Ashanti Limited Kinross Gold Corporation EOG Resources, Inc.

Ban'ick Gold Corporation Teck Resources Limited Peabody Energy

Freeport-McMoran Copper and Apache Corporation Talisman Energy Inc.

Gold Inc. Chesapeake Energy Corporation Vulcan Materials Company

Gold Fields Limited

Newmont tends to be larger titan the companies in the 2011 peer group and has outperformed the peers on
several key measures as noted in the table below. Newmont's relative size and performance was considered by
the Compensation Committee when determining an appropriate compensation market reference point as
described in the following section.

Newmont Percentile Rank vs. 2011 Peer Group'“
Assets I 6T1
MmketCap st"
1
Net Income ‘ JU’Z
Revenue Jot/z.
erearTSR 75 c
/ / / / K / .
M 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% «1% 70% 80% 90% 100%
m Represents TSR performance Milt: time or review
31


2012 Peer Group. Newmont’s peer group was reviewed in September 2011 in advance of the Compensation
Committee’s pay analysis for 2012 target compensation. The intent of the review was to determine whether the peer
group was appropriate given the Company’s current business structure, growth strategy, size and competition. To
improve the relevance of the peer group, the review focused on increasing the weighting in mining (global
diversiﬁed companies, in particular), slightly reducing the emphasis of Oil & Gas companies and adding exposure
to Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) companies given Newmont's project development business
unit. A comprehensive analysis was conducted by the Compensation Committee with the assistance of the
Committee’s consultant and management. Based on the criteria, the peer group was revised as follows:

Added:
comet  inc.
Anico Eaie Mines Limiied

Canadian Natural Resources Limited Vulcan Materials Com an

Pumice  —
—

These changes increase the peer group by two companies, meet the objectives stated above and improve the
quality of the peer group by providing a more representative industry sample for Newmont‘s business. Newmont's
ranking within the peer group is also more consistent with benchmarking standards and generally ranks at or near
the median on key scope metrics:

Newmont Percentile Rank vs. 2012 Peer Group"I
Assets 411%
MdimCap 534
Net Income 7m
Revenue [ sucrc
Employees / 56 i
0% i0% 20% 30% 40% 50% 50% 70% 80‘? 90% won;
l“ Data based on the latest disclosed information at the time of the analysis.

The companies included in the comparator groups differ from those listed in the General Industry
Classiﬁcation Standard (“GlCS”), a grouping commonly used by advisory services, as management does not
believe the GICS comparator group appropriately represents the companies which constitute a directly relevant
industry and labor peer group.

Positioning of Pay Relative to Peers for 2011 and 2012. For 201 l compensation, the Compensation
Committee determined that it would be appropriate to continue the current compensation target of the 625
percentile of the 2011 peer group given that Newmont‘s relative size and performance was signiﬁcantly above
the 201 l peer group

For 2012 compensation, the Committee determined that the appropriate target pay philosophy is the 50"1
percentile and that actual compensation may be above or below the 50m percentile depending on the Company's
performance and other factors described in this section.

Material Differences Among Officers. The targets for salary and incentive compensation vary among
Newmont‘s Ofﬁcers in an effort to reﬂect differences in job responsibilities and industry pay levels This aims to
avoid setting amounts that may be above or below market pay levels as would be the case if a “one size ﬁts all"

32


approach were used. Specifically for the Chief Executive Ofﬁcer, the target percentage for each incentive
compensation component is greater than the other Officers due to his position as the top executive of the
Company, commensurate with the level of accountability and degree of impact that this executive can have on
overall business results.

Other Factors Used to Determine Compensation.

Effect of Individual Performance. The Compensation Committee takes into consideration subjective
elements. such as the Ofﬁcer’s skill set, individual achievements and role with Newmont during the relevant
ﬁscal year. Additionally. an assessment of each Officer's progress against their stated Strategic Objectives
(discussed later in this CD&A) is completed by the Compensation Committee based on input provided by the
Chief Executive Officer. The Compensation Committee ultimately makes the compensation decisions for all of
the Ofﬁcers, including the Chief Executive Ofﬁcer, based on the Committee members' own collective experience
and business judgment.

Effect of Compensation Previoust Received on Future Pay Decisions. We consider actual
compensation received in determining whether our compensation programs are meeting their
pay-for-performance and retention objectives. Adjustments to future awards may be considered based on results.
However. the Compensation Committee generally does not reduce compensation plan targets based on
compensation received in the past to avoid creating a disincentive for exceptional performance.

Other considerations in determining appropriate levels of compensation include:

Pay Mix To ensure pay “at-risk” is consistent with philosophy and
comparator group practices: a significant majority of pay
should be “at-risk.“

Internal Equity To understand whether internal pay differences are
reasonable between executive levels and consistent with
market practice.

The Compensation Committee also considers scope and
accountability of the role in determining reasonable
differences for internal com )ensation rates.

Total Compensation To understand the purpose and amount of each pay
component as well as the sum of all compensation
elements in order to gauge the reasonableness and the total
I tential ex l ‘ nse.

Chief Executive Officer and other Officer To ensure that pay is aligned with performance and set

compensation versus Total Shareholder Return appropriately given industry performance and pay rates.

(“Pa '-for-Performance Charts")

Performance Sensitivity Analysis To understand potential payments assuming various
company performance outcomes: understand how potential
performance extremes are reﬂected in pay: a component of
our com - nsation risk assessment.

2011 Compensation.

While the amount of compensation may differ among our Ofﬁcers. the compensation policies and factors
affecting the amounts. as considered by the Compensation Committee. are generally the same for each of our
Ofﬁcers, including our Chief Executive Ofﬁcer. In this section. we discuss the Compensation Committee‘s
considerations with respect to each element of compensation paid in 201 l.

33


Base Salary. The Compensation Committee considered the compensation levels of comparable positions
in the survey data to help determine a reasonable range, but also considered individual performance, tenure and
experience, the overall Company performance, any retention concerns, individual historical compensation and
input from other Board members. While the Compensation Committee has not adopted a policy with regard to
the intemal relationship of compensation among the Officers or other employees, this relationship is reviewed
and discussed when the Compensation Committee detennines total compensation for our Officers. The increases
in base salaries earned in 201 1 from those earned in 2010 were as follows:

M w W %

RichardT.O‘Brien.............................. $1,060,000 $1,150,000 85%

RussellBall................................... $565,000 $620,000 97%

RandyEngel................................... $545,000 $575,000 5.5%

BrianHill.s................................... $605,000 $675,000 11.6%

GuyLansdown.HM”....s..................... $605,000 $675,000 11.6%

The salary increases ranged from 5.5% to 11.6%. The results of the prior peer group comparisons (2009,
2010) found that base salaries, targeted annual cash compensation, long-term incentives and target total direct
compensation were below target. In light of this fact. the Compensation Committee decided to take a measured
approach to increase pay to a competitive level, gradually moving compensation back into this range over time as
performance, scope and other key criteria warranted. Rather than increase levels to the target in 2009, the
Committee chose to incrementally return pay to competitive rates while ensuring annual performance justified
the increases. For 2010 and 201 l. the Company continued to perform in the top quartile of its peers. supporting
the adjustments to reach the target position. The increases above reﬂect the final phase of the competitive
increases and adjustments will ease in 2012.

Short-Term Nan-Equity Incentive Compensation.

Short-Term Incentive Compensation Highlights:

- Comprised of two components:

- Corporate Performance Bonus (50% of the total short-term incentive opportunity); and
- Strategic Objectives Bonus (50% of the total short-term incentive opportunity).

Short-term cash incentives include a Corporate Performance Bonus and a Strategic Objectives Bonus. Each
is expressed as a percentage of base salary. The Corporate Performance Bonus and the Strategic Objectives
bonus have a target and a maximum level of 200% of target. The total of the target Corporate Performance Bonus
and Strategic Objectives Bonus is designed to achieve between the 50th and 75th percentile of the peer data for
total short-term compensation, as described above.

2011 Short-Term Cash Targets

Target Corporate Pertorrnanee Target Stnlegie

Bonus as a Percentage or Base Objectives Bonus as a Total as a Percentage or Base
E w W %
Richard T. O'Brien ........... 75% 75% 150%
RussellBall  450% 45.0% 90%
Randy Engel . . . . . . . s . . s . . . .. 45.0% 45.0% 90%
BrianHill................... 47.5% 47.5% 95%
Guy Lansdown .............. 47.5% 47.5% 95%

34


Corporate Performance Bonus.

Corporate Performance Bonus Highlights:

- Annual Company financial and operational measures;

- Payment based on overall Corporate performance;

- Payment ranges from 0-200% of target Corporate performance:

- Four of eight measures performed near target or above target levels:

- Low or no payment for the four measures that were below target levels: and

- Weighted performance resulted in an award of 1 10.1% of target payment: however, as described, the final

payment for Ofﬁcers was 75% of target.

The Corporate Performance Bonus provides an annual reward based on eight measures' designed to balance
short-term and long-term factors. business performance and successful investment in and development of
Company assets. The Compensation Committee reviews and approves the performance metrics and target levels
of performance annually. The amounts of 2011 Corporate Performance Bonuses earned by the Ofﬁcers are
shown in the Non-Equity Incentive Plan Compensation column of the Summary Compensation Table. The
metrics that the Compensation Committee established for 2011 are listed below.

35


——
Bonus Measure What Il Is Why Il Is Used

Equity Production Measures the ounces of gold and - Production of gold and copper
pounds of copper produced each is the basis of Newmont’s
year business; production is the

primary factor within the
Company’s control.

- The metric also provides
incentive to bring various
projects into production in a
timely manner.

Costs Applicable to Sales Measures the operating costs of - The cost metric balances the
producing an ounce of gold and production metric by
pound of copper encouraging efﬁcient, safe

production.

- The cost metric is designed to
promote implementation of
Company-wide cost control
measures.

Capital Expenditures Measures actual capital expense - As a capital intensive business,
for projects and operations, the capital expenditure metric
separately, against the planned focuses on efficient utilization
capital investments for the year, as of capital in developing and
speciﬁed by the Board. The target completing projects. Efﬁcient
includes assumptions for variables use of capital impacts the years
such as commodities prices, to payback and the overall
currency ﬂuctuation, and deferral long-term return of the project.
or acceleration of projects. At the
end of the year, the actual impact
of these variables is determined,
and the target is adjusted up or
down, accordingly.

Resen/es alid Non-Reserve Measures the proven and probable ~ The Reserves alid Non-

Mineralization mineral reserves available for Resen/e Mineralization metrics
future mining (Resen/es) as well promote the discovery of new
as the mineralization not yet deposits and the successful
proven to the level required for completion of the work needed
public disclosure (Non-Reserve to report these as proven and
Mineralization) probable. In a business that
depletes its resources every
year through production, the
ability to maintain reserve
levels is a substantial
challenge, but necessary for
sustainability.
(I) For Equity Production and Costs Applicable to Sales, both gold and copper are measured separately. In addition, Reserves and
NoIrReserve Mineralization are also measured separately, as well as Project and Sustaining Capital, resulting in a total of 8 measures
Calculau'on of Corporate Performance Bonuses. The 2011 targets were a mix of demanding
ﬁnancial, production, and reserve/non-reserve mineralization targets derived from the annual business planning
process. It is the Compensation Committee's perspective that the target should be challenging, yet achievable,
and the target is structured accordingly. Since 2005, the Company bonus plan has paid below target in three
years, which we consider as one measure of the level of difficulty of achieving a target award.
36


If the Company achieves its targeted performance for each of the metrics, the payout percentage for the
Corporate Performance Bonus is 100%. If the minimum amoutlts are not achieved for a particular metric ( the
“threshold"), tlo Corporate Performance Botlus is payable for that metric. For performance between the threshold
and maximum for ally metric, the amount is prorated to result in a payout percentage between 50% and 200%.
The slope of the bonus payout rallge increases upon reachitlg target performance in an effort to provide a strotlger
incentive and reward for outperforming the targets. Below target performance, upon reachitlg the threshold level,
the incremental payout for each increment of performance remains moderate, ensuring an appropriate incentive
and reward while not compensating beyond the reasonable amount for the given level of performance.

2011 Corporate Performance Bonus Metrics and Calculation

The structure of the Corporate Performance Bonus as well as the performance atld bonus results for 201 l are

provided ill the table below:
Per! M.I|'I.Il.l| T l M illl 2011 Perforlnlllce PIth
Gold 260% 4,914 5,172 5,353 5,135 107.1% 27.8%
Equity (02.000)
Production
C0131?ﬁr 6.5% 220 232 240 232 104.1% 6.8%
(million lb.)
Cost 260% S 631 S 579 S 591 38.4% 23.0%
. ($/ounce)
Applicable
10 55-165 C0131"?r 6.5% $ 1.34 $ 1.23 $ 1.26 86.4% 5.6%
(Sllb
Proje‘?‘ 5.0% $ 1,738 $ 1,655 $ 1,490 $ 1,690 79.1% 40%
Capital ($Million)
Expenditure. . .
Suslammg 5.0% 5 1,253 5 1,193 5 1,074 5 1,276 0.0% 0.0%
($Million)
(01000) 16.67% 10.20 11.58 157.4% 26.2%
(oz. 000) 3.33% 4.80 200.0% 16.7%
Material
m Calculated by multiplying “Weighting” x “Performance Percentage"
Total Result = 110.1%
Adjusted Bonus Payout (see statements below) = 75.0%

While the consolidated result for the Corporate Performance Bonus was 110.1%, due to the impairment
recorded in 2011 for Hope Bay‘ll, the Committee exercised its discretion atld all Officers received cash bonus
awards of 75% of their respective target amounts.

To calculate the Corporate Performance Bonus for each of the Officers, the relevant target percentage of
base salary was multiplied by 75%.

The targets and metrics for 2012 Corporate Performance Bonus had not been ﬁnalized as of the date of
ﬁling of this Proxy Statement.

1" See Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in the 2011 Annual Report on Form [0-K under the heading “Write-Down of
Ploperty, Plant atrd Mine Development" for additional information regarding the impairment.
37


Strategic Objectives Bonus.

Strategic Objectives Bonus; Highlights:

I Individualized strategic objectives established for each Ofﬁcer by the Compensation Committee;

I Objectives support long-term sustainability and performance;

I Payment ranges from 0-200% of target based on individual performance:

I Incorporates the leadership areas of strategy, people and organizational development, safety, operational

execution and efficiency, corporate sustainability and ﬁnancial strength;

I Objectives are pre-approved by the Compensation Committee;

I May be single or multi-year; and

I Payments based on results and reasoned business judgment of the Compensation Committee.

The purpose of the Strategic Objectives Bonus is to align personal performance with key individualized
strategic objectives that will support the long-term sustainability and performance of the Company. The strategic
objectives encompass the broad spectrum of responsibilities inherent in senior leadership roles and in many
cases, do not have immediate or tangible measures. The Strategic Objectives component of the executive
compensation program provides for a well-rounded assessment of executive performance, resulting in an
improved correlation of pay and performance. Specifically. the program serves to provide the ability to:

I Holistically consider performance against a broad set of strategic, operational, environmental, social,

safety and ﬁnancial business goals:

I Incentivize and reward efforts that are difﬁcult to quantify, but provide long-term stockholder value:

I Reward for timely adjustments to business dynamics not anticipated prior to the performance period:

I Consider the multitude of complex factors that can affect performance inside and outside of

management’s control for the purpose of assessing performance and providing appropriate compensation
(e.g., economic cycles, market volatility, and fluctuations in commodities prices):

I Take an extended long-term perspective ensuring directional alignment of current performance with the

vision of the organization's future;

I Control the potential risk of sub-optimized results due to a focus on set goals which may no longer be a

key priority: and

I Differentiate awards based on a broad perspective of an individual's contribution to the Company.

The Strategic Objectives Bonus is not formulaic given the difficulty in explicitly quantifying the aggregate
performance. Accordingly, payments under this program are awarded based on results subject to the qualified
business judgment of the Compensation Committee. The Compensation Committee can award payments out of a
total bonus opportunity assigned to each Officer based upon such Ofﬁcer's overall performance. The
Compensation Committee receives a year-end performance assessment and recommendation for each of the
Ofﬁcers (except for the Chief Executive Ofﬁcer) from the Chief Executive Officer. For the Chief Executive
Ofﬁcer, the Board of Directors determines the Strategic Objectives Bonus based on his performance against the
stated strategic objectives for the year, as well as other factors potentially not contemplated prior to the start of
the year. While the Strategic Objectives Bonus is based on pre-established individual goals, they do not
constitute performance measures that result in automatic payout levels. Instead, they provide a context for the
Board and Compensation Committee to evaluate each Officer's performance and contributions to the Company's
success when making the bonus payout determinations.

3X


While no single Strategic Objective is either material to an understanding of the Company's compensation
policies relating to the Strategic Objective Bonus program or dispositive in the Compensation Committee's
decisions regarding the speciﬁc payout levels, in determining the awards for 201 l, the Compensation Committee
considered the following key accomplishments of each Ofﬁcer:

‘ Richard O’Brien: led deﬁnition and execution of industry-leading strategy to link the Company’s dividend to
the gold price and investor relations efforts, resulting in outstanding Total Shareholder Return, as compared to
industry peers: created comprehensive operating and development plan for production growth through 2017
and beyond; deﬁned exploration and early project development opportunities targeted to replace reserves in the
long term; improved Company's Enterprise Risk Management framework, ensuring integration of processes
into routine Company operations: secured appropriate ﬁnancing or capacity to support the Company's growth
strategy; delivered on operating targets; identiﬁed and executed on metrics to measure progress on Community
Relationships Review efforts; created comprehensive executive-level succession plans, improving bench
strength throughout the Company for the Chief Executive Ofﬁcer and lower-level executives; deﬁned a human
capital strategy positioned to deliver on the Company’s growth strategy: and enhanced pay for performance in
the design of compensation packages
While Mr. O'Brien led the achievement of the items mentioned above, Mr. O‘Brien volunteered to forego
his Strategic Objectives bonus for 201 l in connection with the impairment recorded for Hope Bay.

- Russell Ball: executed strategic ﬁnancing plan, ensuring access to capital on favorable terms and
retention of the Company's investment grade ratings; led company-wide Enterprise Risk Management
efforts, including action plans and process audits: achieved or exceeded cost savings, efﬁciency and
scheduling targets in areas of Supply Chain Management, Information Technology and Shared Sen/ices
Organization; provided leadership for transformative redesign of the Company’s enterprise resource
planning systems; and enhanced the Company’s Internal Audit expertise through external recruitingl

- Randy Engel: refined the Company's strategic plan and growth strategy; developed innovative and
successful gold-linked dividend program: implemented intensive Investor Relations communications plan
and strategy: led successful completion and integration of an acquisition in North America: redesigned
planning system and improved economic and financial analysis for development projects: improved
bench strength in areas of Corporate Development and Planning.

- Brian Hill: delivered on targeted operating metrics; exceeded targeted amounts of cost reduction and
operational improvements from Business Excellence programs: revised operations technology programs
to increase standardization and effectiveness: implemented plans to optimize Boddington operations: and
enhanced relationships with global operational and project suppliers.

- Guy Lansdown: led exploration efforts that surpassed targets for additions of gold and copper resen/es
and non-resen/e mineralized materials; successfully advanced key development and exploration projects
in accordance with plans; developed and implemented Project Excellence program throughout
organization; and established and staffed an expert geotechnical and hydrological department.

While Mr, Lansdown led the achievement of the items mentioned above, the Strategic Objectives bonus
for 2011 was not paid primarily in connection with the impairment recorded for Hope Bay, a project
within Mr, Lansdown's organization.

39


The Compensation Committee considered each Officer's performance and key accomplishments listed
above in determining their bonus amounts. The Compensation Committee considered Mr. O'Brien’s
recommendations, each Officer’s performance and key accomplishments listed above and the overall
performance of the Company in determining their bonus amounts. In alignment with Mr. O'Brien’s
recommendations, the Committee adopted and approved the following amounts:

2011 Strategic
Objective Bonus
Awarded % orTarget

Name (3) t%t

RichardO'Brien....,.........,.........,.................. $ 0 0%

 $279,000 100%

RandyEngelv.m.tmv.v.HM.H......:........H........ $388,125 150%

 $352,688 110%

GuyLansdown............................................ s 0 0%

Long-Term Equity Incentive Compensation.

Long-term Equity Incentive Compensation Highlights:

- Includes three performance-based elements:

- Financial Performance Stock Bonus:
- Stock Options: and
- Performance Leveraged Stock Units.

Mix of Equity Incentive Components. Each component of the long-term equity incentive represents
one-third of the total equity opportunity. Three elements are used to balance long-term ﬁnancial, operational and
share price performance, as well as to balance incentives for company and peer group performance,

Equity Award Target Values. The Compensation Committee designed target values of equity incentives
for each Ofﬁcer based upon competitive market data attd the scope of the respective positions. These target
values are expressed as a percentage of base salary as follows:

2011 Target Long-Term Equity Incentives

Name % ofﬂase Salary

 500%

RussellBall  300%

 300%

BrianHill  350%

GuyLansdownH......,.,.........,.......,..,..,...,..,.,,......,.,.. 350%

Determination of Awards. Equity awards are granted by the Board of Directors, based upon the
recommendation of the Compensation Committee. In addition to the targets discussed above, the Compensation
Committee is responsible for determining who should receive awards, when the awards should be made, the
exercise price/purchase price per share and the number of shares to be granted for each award (in accordance
with “Newmont's policy with Respect to the Granting of Equity Compensation” as described below). The
Compensation Committee considers grants of long-term incentive awards to the Ofﬁcers each fiscal year, usually
at meetings scheduled shortly after the release of quarterly earnings, in which case, financial performance and
potentially other material items have already been disclosed publicly, prior to the granting of any awards.

40


Criteria Considered in Determining the Amount of Equity-Based Compensation Awards. The
Compensation Committee considers several factors when determining equity awards for our Ofﬁcers, including
performance, market practice, projected business needs, the projected impact on stockholder dilution, and the
associated compensation expense that will be included in our financial statements. Based on these considerations,
the Compensation Committee has managed stockholder dilution well within the norms of our peers and stated
guidelines from proxy advisory services and institutional investors. For 201 l, Newmont's net dilution (net annual
use of shares as a percentage of shares outstanding) was approximately 0.4%, well below the median of our peer
group.

Equity Awards Granted in 2011. In 2010, the Compensation Committee conducted an in-depth analysis
of the Company’s executive pay positioning with the assistance of its independent consultant, Cook & Co and
management As described in the section “Base Salary, " the data indicated a gap in long-term incentive
compensation versus our peer group. Based on these ﬁndings, long-term incentive targets were increased to
levels within a reasonable range of the intended position in an effort to bridge the gap to the targeted pay position
and further align executive pay to long-term Company and share price performance The increase in targets was
divided evenly amongst the three incentive plans: Financial Performance Stock, Stock Options and Performance-
Leveraged Stock Units for the 201 1 awards.

Awards granted in 2011 were determined in accordance with the terms of each long-term incentive plan as
approved by the Compensation Committee. In the case of stock options, the awards were also based upon each
Ofﬁcer's individual performance.

Newmont’s Policy with Respect to the Granting of Equity Compensation. Equity awards are
granted by the Board of Directors, based upon the recommendation of the Compensation Committee. The
Compensation Committee has the authority to grant equity to employees below the Ofﬁcer level: Board of
Director's approval is required for Officer grants.

Financial Performance Shares.

Financial Performance Share Highlights:

- Provides long-term focus on key operational and financial measures that drive Company success;

- Supports linearity in production, supporting stable and predictable long-term results:

- Performance basis is the weighted average of the Corporate Performance Bonus over three years;

- Performance is weighted 20% for 2009, 30% for 2010, 50% for 2011:

- Shares are set at the beginning of the performance period, so pay is “at-risk" to changes in share price

over the performance period; and

- Weighted payout for 2011 was “83% of the target award; however, as a result of the reduction in the

Corporate Performance Bonus mentioned previously, the payment as a percentage of target for Officers
was l00,7%,

The Financial Performance Stock Bonus is tied to overall Company performance:

- The target grant is set in number of shares, versus dollars, so that the actual payout is “at-risk" to changes

in share price over the performance period.

- Target shares are set by dividing the Ofﬁcer’s eligible wages by the average Newmont share price for the

month prior to the performance period.

- The number of shares granted at the end of the performance period is based upon the three year weighted

average of the Corporate Performance Bonus metrics and can range from 0% to 200% of target.
4|


For 2011, the payout for the Corporate Performance Bonus was reduced to 75% as described previously.
This also impacted the payout for the Financial Performance Stock Bonus as the performance value used in the
calculation of the Financial Performance Stock Bonus for 2011 would have been 110.1%, instead of 75%. This
had the effect of reducing the Financial Performance Stock Bonus payout from 118.3% of target to 100.7% as
shown in the chart below:

Corporate Weighted
Performance Bonus Performance Factor

E Weighting (A) Reull (B? (AXBV

 50% 75.0% 37.5%

 30% 124.3% 37.3%

 20% 129.6% 25.9%

TotalPayout‘"  100,7%

m Represents the sum or the “Weighted Performance Factor" for each year
42


2011 Financial Performance Stock Bonuses

On March 2, 2012, the Company granted Financial Performance Stock Bonuses for 201 1 performance in the

following amounts:

2010 Target as a Slack Prize Basis
Eligible Earnings Yemntageot used rorsming Targetsharestb) Number ol‘Shares

Name (A) Base Salary (in TargeIShares(C| =1AxBVC Paynul FactorlEl Gnlilerl thEy
Richard T. O’Brien . . $1,150,000 166.7% $60.88 31,483 100.7% 31,706
Russell Ball . . . . . . . . $ 620,000 100.0% $60.88 10,184 100.7% 10,256
Randy Engel . . , . . . . $ 575,000 100.0% $60.88 9,445 100.7% 9511
Brian Hill . . . . . . . . . . $ 675,000 116.7% $60.88 12,935 100.7% 13,027
Guy Lansdown. . . . . . $ 675,000 116.7% $60.88 12,935 100.7% 13,027

One third of the Financial Performance Stock Bonus was paid after the performance period in common
shares on the date of grant (March 2, 2012) and two-thirds of the Financial Performance Stock Bonus will be
paid in restricted stock units that vest in equal annual increments on the second and third anniversaries from the
date of grant (March 2, 2013, and 2014).

The Company accrues cash dividend equivalents on restricted stock units and pays them upon vesting when
common stock is issued.

Stock Option Awards.

Stock Option Highlighta:

I Directly align executive and stockholder interests;

I Performance-based. at-risk incentive as the executive does not receive any beneﬁt unless the stock price

rises after the date of grant:

I Flu'ther performance-based as the award size is also subject to the executive’s performance;

I Exercise price is equal to the fair market value on the date of grant;

I Awards are only granted at predetermined Compensation Committee meeting dates: and

I Awards vest over three years; sale of shares after exercise is subject to each executive meeting

Newmont’s stock ownership requirements.

The stock option vehicle rewards executives for growth in the value of Company stock over the long-term.
Stock options deliver value to an executive only if the share price is above the grant price after the date of
vesting. Therefore, stock price volatility will have a greater impact on total compensation results delivered from
stock options as compared to restricted stock units.

Each Ofﬁcer has a target percent of base salary to be awarded in options. The Compensation Committee has
discretion to grant above or below the target. with management‘s recommendation that individuals with high
personal performance should receive a grant above target. In April 2011, all of the Ofﬁcers received at least the
targeted amount of stock options. as well as additional options in recognition of high personal performance
during 2010. The Compensation Committee makes recommendations regarding the amount of option grants. and
such recommendations are ratiﬁed by the full Board. The 2011 option grants were based upon the Compensation
Committee‘s evaluation of each Officer's performance as measured against 2010 Strategic Objectives. In this

43


context, the Compensation Committee cotlsidered the following key accomplishments of each Ofﬁcer, itl each
case cotlcluditlg that the Officer had successfully achieved the stated Strategic Objectives:
- Richard O'Brien: led efforts to promote cultural changes with the objective of positioning the Company
to deliver high performance over the long-term, such as through enhancing the Company’s safety mindset
atld improving planning capabilities; enhanced governmental atld external relationship programs:
positioned the Company’s environmental and social respotlsibility programs as competitive strengths
through sound environmental performance and enhanced programs: fully established the foundation of
the ongoing Community Relationships Review Program: increased the Company's Human Resources
capabilities, including improved succession platlnitlg, management traitling and employee engagement:
delivered oil the Company’s business plans in a safe, environmentally and socially responsible matlner:
refined the Company’s overall strategic plans, including defining the appropriate mix between internal
projects/development opportunities and external merger/acquisition opportunities: managed the
Company‘s divestiture obligations and external relationships relating to the Company‘s interest in the
Batu Hijau mine in Indonesia; improved the Company's financial strength and ﬂexibility: and
implemented programs to achieve operational efficiency.
‘ Russell Ball: ensured access to capital and financial ﬂexibility; eliminated waste and maximized value of
assets through Business Excellence programs, such as Continuous Improvement and creation of a
Management Operating System; successfully strengthened Newmont's balance sheet: and successfully
completed the integrations for the supply chain, information technology: accounting and tax functions.
‘ Randy Engel: developed and led a planning initiative, making changes to allow increased understanding
of the direction of the business, promoting focused analysis of results and options around alternative plan
decisions: identiﬁed and analyzed several growth opportunities: enhanced Newmont‘s Investor Relations
function: and improved bench strength in the groups he oversees.
- Brian Hill: delivered on targeted operating metrics, in-line with expectations despite geotechnical events
and ore grade reconciliation issues; deployed the Business Excellence programs resulting in cost
reductions and operational improvements: established alld led the Company's Safety Task Force: alld
improved leadership bench strength.
- Guy Lansdown: built atld led exploration programs that delivered above targets; successfully advanced
key development atld exploration projects, including the Cotlga project itl Peru atld the Akyem project in
Ghana: reitlstituted innovation atld research atld development to advance Newmont's mining practices.
To detemnine the exact number of options to grant, the Company divides the percentage of base salary for
the grant by the Black Scholes value on the date of grant, which was $19.04 for 2011.

The stock option exercise price granted by Newmont (i.e. not all option assumed or granted itl relation to an
acquisition) is the average of the high and low sales share price oil the date of grant.

2011 Stock Option Awards
Black-Scholes per
2011 Target as a Modiﬁed Target Share used It)
Percentage at Target Dollar Valne Based on Determine Options Stock Options

“M‘— w m W w w
Richard T. O'Brien . . . . . . 166.7% $1,916,667 $1,999,200 $19.04 105,000
Russell Ball . . : . . : . : . . . . 100.0% $ 620,000 $ 694,960 $19.04 36,500
Randy Engel . . . . .. . . . . . 100.0% $ 575,000 $ 628320 $19.04 33,000
Brian Hill .......... 116.7% 8 787,500 $ 856800 $19.04 45,000
Guy Lansdown . . .. . . . . . 116.7% $ 787,500 $ $13,720 $19.04 43,000

The numbers atld grant date fair values of stock options granted to the Ofﬁcers itl 2011 are shown in the
201 1 Grants of Plan-Based Awards Table.

44


2011 Performance Leveraged Stock Units (PSUs).
PSU Compensation Highlights;

- Long-term pay-for-performance vehicle based on:

- Newmonl’s share price performance versus peers: and

- Absolute share price growth over the performance period.
- Performance Period is three years: and
- 20102011 performance of 34% price growth alld top performance versus peers resulted in a payout of

184% of target.

The Performance Leveraged Stock Units (“PSUs”) align Ofﬁcer compensation with long-term Company
and stock price performance. The number of PSUs earned is determined at the end of a three-year performance
period based upon the change in Newmont's stock price and the relative performance of Newmont's stock price
versus the peer group. Payment for the PSU program can range from 50% to 200% in total, as detailed below.

Determining PSU Awards. The calculation of the PSU awards is based on the Target Stock Bonus,
Market Payout Factor and the TSR Payout Factor:

PSU Award = Target Stock Bonus x (Market Payout Factor + TSR Payout Factor)

- Target Stock Bonus. The target stock bonus for each Officer is calculated by multiplying the Officer's
base salary by their target PSU award percentage This value is then divided by the average daily closing price
for the fourth quarter prior to the performance period (the “baseline”;

Target Stock Bonus = (base salary x target %) / baseline

- Market Payout Factor (“MPF”). The MPF is based on the absolute stock price challge versus the
baseline over the three year performance period, The baseline is compare/:1 to the average daily closing price of
the last quarter of the performance period to determine the overall stock price change,

The payment for the MPF can range from a minimum of 50% to a cap of 150% of target based on the
absolute stock price performance durillg the performance period. A minimum award of 50% of target is provided
for retention, succession and competitive pay purposes. The minimum award is also provided in recognition that
significant stock price declines may be related to changes in commodities prices which are outside of the
Company’s control. Conversely, Ofﬁcers can eanl up to 150% of target to incent performance. The award is
capped at 150% ill recognition that signiﬁcant stock price appreciation may be related to changes ill commodities
prices. This range of payment is believed to strike all appropriate balance between retention, incentive alld
mitigation of excessive risk. The performance range is displayed in the graph below‘“.

200%
175%
e Payment Range 9
E 150%
E 125%
K; 100%
g 75%
z 511%
25% a
0% 7 aﬁv— iviv
0% 25% 50% 75% 100% 125% 150% 175% 200%
Stock Prlce Performance versus Baseline
"1 Upon review or the program after its initial award cycles. for awards beginning in 2012, the minimum award condition will be removed
such mar the payout could track ro zero subject to stock price performance This is innlrer described in “Looking Ahead to 2012"
following lhis section
45


- TSR Payout Factor (“TPF”). The TPF is based on the relative Total Shareholder Return (“TSR”) of
Newmont over the three-year performance period versus the TSR of an index of gold milling peer companies.
The stock prices used in the TPF calculation are based on the same approach as noted for the MPF, however the
calculation also adjusts for dividends paid during the period.

The payment for the TPF can range from 0 to 50% of target based on Newmont’s relative share price
performance. Newmont’s stock price must reach at least threshold performance for Officers to receive any level
of payment. Threshold performance under the TPF is deﬁned as the median (50th percentile) TSR of the peer
group index. Upon exceeding the peer group median TSR, each percent increase above the median TSR
corresponds to a paymellt equal to 2% of target, up to a maximum of 50%. This 2% multiplier is used to illcent
over-achievement yet make the maximum award realizable without illcellting excessive risk taking. For example,
if Newmont‘s TSR percentile ranking reaches the 60th percentile (10% above the median). the resulting payment
would be 20% of target (10% above the median X 2% multiplier).

60%
Wt ‘ «7 Payment Range a
g “1% -
a? 50% -
E 20%
10%
0% vili~i l
45% 50% 55% 50% 55% 70% 75% 30%
TSR Percentile Performance

In sum. the maximum PSU payout of 200% of the target PSUs would be awarded if the Company's stock
price at the end of the performance period equals 150% of the baseline and if the Company's TSR reaches the
75th percentile of the peer group. If the Company‘s TSR is at or below the median of the peer group. there will
be no payout of PSUs for the TPF (TSR) metric.

Implementation of PSUs in 2010. In addition to the three-year PSU target set in 2010 which will result
in payouts in 2013. the Compensation Committee implemented initial one- and two-year periods (“feather-in
awardsz" award values were weighted at one-third and two-thirds of the three-year values) to provide a transition
into the new long-term program.

PSU Peer Group. The companies in the TSR peer group are listed below. and may be altered from time to
time due to mergers. acquisitions or at the discretion of the Compensation Committee:

Agnico Eagle Mines Limited Gold Fields Limited

Anglogold Ashanti Limited Harmony Gold Mining Company Limited
Barrick Gold Corporation Kinross Gold Corporation

Compaﬁl’a de Minas Buenavenlura S.A.A. Newcresl Mining Limited
Freeport-McMoran Copper & Gold Inc. Yamana Gold Inc.

Goldcorp Inc.

The TSR peer group varies from the total compensation peer group because the TSR peer group is comprised
of only companies with large gold milling operations, irrespective of comparable company size. The Compensation
Committee determined that a relative TSR peer group should focus on companies with gold operations, as those are
the Company‘s direct competitors for investors and are subject to similar market forces related to gold price
changes. The total compensation peer group includes companies without gold operations. but those entities are more
similar in revenue, net income. total assets, market capitalization and number of employees. The Compensation
Committee determined that the total compensation peer group is superior to the TSR peer group for evaluating total
compensation. because the entities in the total compensation peer group are the Company‘s competitors for
employees and their business operations are of a relatively comparable size to Newmont.

PSU results for 2011. As noted above. the 2011 results were based on the two year “feather in" award.
covering the period of 2010 through 2011. The Company experienced solid stock price growth and stock price
growth versus its peer group over this term. With respect to the PSU components. Newmont's stock price

4!)


increase (“MPF”) was 34% or 134% of the baseline. Newmont's relative TSR versus peers (“TPFU ended the
period at the 100th percentile. This stock price performance resulted in an overall PSU payout for 2011 of 184%.
The chart below shows the payments for each Ofﬁcer, based on the results of the PSU award for 201 1.
Average 2011 Target “Fe-Illu-

2010 Eligible Targu Closing Price in“S|ock Awaivumm 2010-2011 Price 2011 Relative PSU Awardlll‘1‘=
Name Drningt «xi % mi [or Q! 201mm = (M x wot-4213i Appreciation rm TSR Ranking (Ft 0 x (E e 4r.50iv2i
Richard O'Brien $l.oeo.0oo lss% 042 as 22.5l0 “4% 100% «.422
Rnsselanll s 565.000 90% 042 as 6.967 “4% 100% 12.820
Randy Engel s 545.000 90% 348.65 6,720 mac um 12,366
Brlan Hill 3 605.000 90% 042 as 7.450 “4% 100% 13.727
Giiy Lansdown s 605.000 90% was 7.450 “4% 100% 13.727
‘“ The amounts lis|ed above represem the |wo-yeai “fea|her-ln" award which equa|es |o |wo-thlrds of the full value
ai Relative TSR award is capped at 50%. therefore, the “2 multiplier" does not apply in this case,
Actual Compensation Earned in 2011.

The following table summarizes the Total Direct Compensation (base salary + annual bonus awards + long-
term incentives) as described in the sections above for 2011. The table provides a condensed summary of actual
Total Direct Compensation awarded to the Officers for their performance in 201 1.

stutegisoblestivesiaomu SMODMIVZ) Farm“: Md Tm,
Carper-t: —20n Fir-mil — Lever-zed Dim!
Ptrfnmunm Faun“)! Sir-tetra Pcﬂnrmlnpe Slack uni. min-dial eumpeunaim
mun-u Bonus r-mei Objedim swarm Pauli“)! Slack 43) mien versu- rirpti Newm-
Nun: Salary amt xiv-id Damn a 100.1“ “iterate-rind optima arms Campemihn it) NIITSR
kitnaidr O'Brlelt tl.l50.000 sedans t 0 meme unset timer» 3114.241 mono: l02% fl”“"““f“
antenna r 620.0110 t209.250 lm% man s 604,694 n: as, i 694.960 i new 32.162.77l “2% 337011“
RxndyEngel r 575,000 1194.063 isu% neatzs s 550.759 mm, x 622.320 t 729.099 33,075,376 “7% Mum“
Brian Hlll s 675.000 3140.469 “0% 3320.615 r 759.07: mm x mm x 509.30: $3,670,310 mm Modem
cuyLinsdown r 675,000 tzwm t 0 s 768.072 mm; x mm x 009m mums 97% steel price growth
at Value displayed is the estimated value determined by multiplying tlie closing share price as of March 2. 2012. by the number of shares
awarded as described in the CD&A
in Value displayed is the stock option granted April 201 l.
at Value displayed 13 the estimated value de|erlrtlned by multiplying the closing share price as of March 2. 2012. by the number or share:
awarded as described III the CD&A
w Target Direct Compensation is adjusted to recognize the PSU award represents [worthirds of the standard PSU value
Looking Ahead to 2012.

During 2011. the Compensation Committee reviewed the executive compensation incentive structure for
potential adjustments to 2012 programs. The review was conducted to understand where opportunities exist to
further align executive pay with Company performance, reduce complexity and promote good corporate
governance. Based on the review. the following revisions are planned for 2012. (Full details of the plans and
rationale for the revisions will be provided in the 2013 CD&A; complete plan details were not conﬁrmed at the
time this proxy statement was issued.)

2012 Corporate Performance Bonus. To improve the alignment of pay and performance for
Newmont’s capital projects, a key component of the Company's growth stratng, a new component to measure
the effective use of capital is beilig considered. The intent is to provide an improved measure of project success
and returns on signiﬁcant investments.

2012 Long-Term Incentive Structure. In reviewing the Company‘s long-term incentive (LTI)
structure, the Compensation Committee focused on evolving the program's effectiveness, financial efficiency,
simplicity and governance. This included removing duplicate measures between the short-term and long-term
plans and adding a forward-looking financial metric-based plan. With this, the Committee decided on the
following improvements:

- Reduced the number of plans from three down to two by discontinuing time-based stock options and
incorporating the target percentage for stock options into the Performance Leveraged Stock Units (the
“TSR” plan), and

47


- Adopted a new performance-based LTI platl, Strategic Stock Units (“SSUs”), which will be based on
Earnings Before Interest, Tax, Depreciation and Amortization, “EBITDA,” a financial measure that aligns
with Company performance and stockholder value. (This will replace the Financial Performance Share
bonus which contains the metrics ill the Corporate Performance Bonus, but measures over a longer
period.)

Speciﬁcally, the 2012 LTI structure is expected to include:

s Performance Leveraged Stock Unit (PSU) Awards, The PSU awards will increase to represent two-thirds
of the Officer’s target LTI value (increased from one-third). This increases the alignment with
stockholder interests given the plan is based on stock price improvement and relative total shareholder
returtl (TSR). Additionally, the minimum award cotldition will be removed such that the payout could
track to zero subject to stock price performance.

- Strategic Stock Unit (SSU) Awards. The SSU awards will be based otl Newmont‘s EBITDA performance
requiring threshold achievement for payment. The Company has selected EBITDA as it believes this is a
key financial measure that aligns with operational components utlder management's control.
Additionally, it is deemed to support the Company‘s growth strategy by ultimately strengthening the
balance sheet (cash position) to fund growth projects which aim to drive long-term Company
performance. Additional details of the SSU plan will be provided in the 2013 proxy statement.

With the revisions noted above. the following chart summarizes the structure and rationale for the planned

2012 executive compensation structure (percentages represent the tentative distribution for the CEO level):
Portfolio of Leadership Measures for 2012
Base Salary ,
- Adinsredlorpeﬂonnnnce. “wa‘h'pm‘mm
scope - lndividualand ELT Goals
. l- v‘ , .
Maneuale / S‘sgpilmigy
SlockanrkelPerformance _  P Sum“ - Safety
.  u Obpecllvex.
Value ofrbe mm on an absolute , r m
andtelatlve busts,hased on /, ‘ r V r
. [iﬁgl‘uﬁnsgmmw :  ' ' “N "‘v’ ,l on anng Eﬂmmnncc
- RelameTstertwmauce \~\ I" ' \\' Eg‘ffafl'mcww
V r ' " Growth Pwellne/Susulnablllty
- Reservesand Non»
Reserve Material
Flnallclal Enemy»:
- Fmaumlmeasure
- Measuretnsupponol
funding [or Sﬂamglc
gmwth plans
Post-Employment Compensation.

In order to alleviate concerns that may arise in the event of an employee’s separation from service with us
and enable employees to focus otl Company duties while employed by us, the Company has post-employment
compensation plans and policies ill place that include Company funded betleﬁts as well as employee
contribution-based benefits. Our post-employment compensation plans and policies provide for broad range of
post-employment beneﬁts to our employees. including Ofﬁcers, and create strong incentives for employees to
remain with the Company. The Company‘s decisions regarding post-employment compensation take into account
the industry sector and general business comparisons to ensure post-employment compensation is aligned with
the broader market.

Retirement. On a regular basis. usually every three years. the Company reviews its retirement beneﬁts.
The purpose of the review is to assess the level of replacement income that the Company‘s retirement plans
provide for a full career Newmont employee. The Company attempts to maintain a competitive suite of
retirement benefits that accomplishes income replacement post retirement. The level of income replacement

4%


varies dependiitg on the income level of the employee. Those employees at lower-income levels enjoy much
higher levels of income replacement with the Company retiremeitt beitefits package, compared to higher-income
level employees. The beneﬁts included iii the analysis are the peitsion plait, pension equalization plait, 401(k)
matching coittributioit and social securin beneﬁts. The Company retirement beneﬁts are importaitt hiring aitd
retention tools for all levels of employees withiit the Company.

The Company offers two tax-qualified retirement plans, the Pension Plan, which is a defined beneﬁt plan
and the Savings Plan, which is a defined contribution plan (401(k)). Both of these plans are available to a broad
range of Company employees, generally including all salaried US based employees. Because of the qualified
status of the Pension Plan and Savings Plan, the Internal Revenue Code limits the beneﬁts available to highly-
compensated employees. As a result, the Company provides a non-qualiﬁed defined beneﬁt plan (Pension
Equalization Plan) aitd a non-qualified savings plan (Savings Equalization Plait) for highly-compensated
employees who are subject to the Iitterital Revenue Code limitations iii the qualified plans. The two equalization
plans are iit place to give employees the full beneﬁt intended uitder the qualiﬁed plans by making them whole for
benefits otherwise lost as a result of Interital Revenue Code annual compensation limits.

See the Pension 201 1 Beneﬁts Table and 201 l Non-Qualified Deferred Compensation Table for a
description of benefits payable to the Officers under the Pension Plan, Pension Equalization Plan and the Savings
Equalization Plan.

Change of Control. The Company recognizes that the potential for a change of control can create
uncertainty for its employees that may interfere with ait executive‘s ability to efﬁciently perform his or her duties
or may result in a termination of an executive's employment with us duriitg a critical period. As a result, the
Company adopted the Executive Change of Control Plait of Newmont (“Change of Control Plan”) to retain
executives and their critical capabilities to enhance aitd protect the best interests of the Company aitd its
stockholders duriitg an actual or threatened change of control. When the Company adopted the original Change
of Control Plan iit 1998, the Compensation Committee at the time determined that the level of beneﬁts in the plan
were competitive within the mining industry. The levels of beneﬁts provided in the Change of Control Plan are
intended to motivate aitd retain key executives during an actual or threatened change of control.

In the event of a Change of Control, as defined iii the Plan, aitd a qualifying termination of employment, the
Ofﬁcers receive three times annual pay and other benefits. See the Potential Payments Upon Termination or
Change of Control section for potential amounts payable to the Officers uitder the Change of Control Plait. These
benefits, paid upon termination of employment following a change of control on what is sometimes referred to as
a “double-trigger" basis, provide iitceittive for executives to remain employed to complete the transaction aitd
provide compensation for any loss of employment thereafter.

The Company's 2005 Stock Incentive Plan generally provides for vesting of unvested restricted stock and
stock options upon a change of control of the Company. This provision does not apply to Performance Leveraged
Stock Units or Mr. O'Brien's October 31, 2008, grant of restricted stock units and stock options. The cash bonus
plan provides for payment of pro-rated target Corporate Performance Bonuses and Strategic Objectives Bonuses
upon a change of control. These single-trigger events upon a change of control of the Company provide
immediate compensation to executives in the forms of cash (Corporate Performance Bonus/Strategic Objectives
Bonus) and vesting of outstanding equity (Financial Performance Shares/options). In the case of cash bonuses,
the amounts represent a pro-rated target amount commensurate with the portion of the year that the Officer
worked prior to the change of control. In the case of equity, the outstanding equity represents equity that the
Ofﬁcer already earned, but was itot yet vested (Financial Performance Shares/options). These beneﬁts, paid on
what is sometimes referred to as a “single-trigger” basis, align compensation directly with stockholder interests at
the time of acquisition to complete the transaction oit favorable terms aitd recognize the decreased probability
that the executives will retain the ability to impact share price after the change of control.

Plans and policies related to change of control effective 2012.

- Treatment of equity in the event of a change of control for all awards beginning in 2012: For all awards
granted in 2012 and thereafter, in the event of a change of control, accelerated vesting of equity
compensation will only occur upon employee termination (“double-trigger").

4‘)


- 2012 Executive Change of Control Plait (the “2012 ECOC Plan"): The Company adopted a revised
change of control plan for any newly hired eligible employee or any employee promoted into an eligible
position on or after January 1, 2012. The prior plan remains in place for employees who were eligible on,
or prior to, December 31, 2011. The 2012 ECOC Plan contains the following material changes from the
prior 2005 Executive Change of Control Plan believed to be consistent with modern severance practices:

- Removal of the excise tax gross up:

- Reduction in the formula used for calculating severance:

- Removal of retirement plan contributions; and

- Reduction of the time period for continuation of health beneﬁts,

Severance. On October 26, 2011, the Company adopted The Executive Severance Plan of Newmont (the
“ESP") which replaced the Severance Plan of Newmont for employees in executives levels and includes Messrsr
O‘Brien, Ball, Engel, Hill and Lansdownr The ESP provides severance beneﬁts following involuntary
termination without cause. The ESP was adopted to mitigate negotiation of benefits upon termination, provide
additional protection to the Company and deﬁne and cap severance costsr Maximum beneﬁts under the ESP are
reduced from the prior Severance Plan of Newmont. Additionally, unvested stock options will be forfeited upon
termination (versus vesting pro-rata under prior terms)r Other forms of equity will vest pro-rata (versus full
vesting in some cases of previous awards). The pro-rata portion represents the amount deemed to be earned The
purpose of the Severance Plan is to provide income and beneﬁt replacement for a period following employment
termination, where termination is not for cause. The Severance Plan allows the terminated employee time and
resources to seek future employment.

See the Potential Payments Upon Termination or Change of Control section for potential amounts payable
to the Ofﬁcers under the Executive Severance Plan.

Officer’s Death Benefit. The Company maintains group life insurance for the beneﬁt of all salaried
employees of the Company. In addition, for highly-compensated executives, including the Ofﬁcers, the Company
provides a supplemental Ofﬁcer Death Beneﬁt Plan. The purpose of the Officer Death Beneﬁt Plan is to provide
benefits to Ofﬁcers of the Company beyond the maximum established in the Company's group life insurance, as
appropriate to their higher income levels.

See the Potential Payments Upon Tennination or Change of Control section for potential amounts payable
to the Ofﬁcers under the Ofﬁcer Death Benefit Plait.

Executive Agreements.

All of the Ofﬁcers are at-will employees of the Company, without employment agreements.
Other Policies and Considerations.

Results of the 2011 Advisory Vote on Executive Compensation (“Say on Pay”)

In 2011, Newmont conducted an advisory vote on the compensation of the Officers in accordance with the
recently enacted Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, commonly known as "Say on
Pay," As Newmont regularly engages stockholders to discuss a variety of aspects of our business and welcomes
stockholder input and feedback, the “Say on Pay" vote serves as an additional tool to guide the Board and the
Compensation Committee in ensuring alignment of the Company‘s executive compensation programs with
stockholder interests.

The result of our 201 1 Say on Pay vote indicates substantial support for the executive compensation of our
Ofﬁcers with 95% of the votes cast “For” the advisory vote on executive compensation The Compensation
Committee reviewed this result, and while believing this result indicates approval of Newmont‘s executive
compensation, during 2011, the Committee took actions to continue improving the alignment of executive
compensation with stockholder interests, as described in this CD&Ar Although the Committee did not make any
changes to our executive compensation program and policies speciﬁcally as a result of the 2011 “Say on Pay"

50


advisory vote, the Committee's decisions were informed in part by the broader discussions and best practices
resulting from the 2011 “Say on Pay" process. The Compensation Committee will continue working to ensure
that the design of the Company’s executive compensation programs is focused on long-term stockholder value
creation, emphasizes pay-for-performance and does not encourage the taking of short-term risks at the expense of
long-term results. The Compensation Committee will continue to use the “Say on Pay" vote as a guidepost for
stockholder sentiment and continue to respond to stockholder feedback.

Executive Compensation Risk Assessment.

We believe that Newmonl’s compensation program for the Chief Executive Officer and Ofﬁcers is
structured in a way that balances risk and reward, yeI mitigates the incentive for excessive risk taking. Through a
thoughtful balance of performance vehicles, such as performance-based equity denominated in restricted stock
units, there is a meaningful level of performance incentives without excessive leverage. Additionally, through
discussions with the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, as well as reviewing
planning projections, the Compensation Committee gains valuable insight regarding the reasonable range of
future performance expectations, which is considered in determining the funding structures of incentive plans.

Beyond prudent plan design and compensation policies, in 2009, the Compensation Committee conducted a
comprehensive risk assessment of the Company's executive compensation program. The Company has a global
Enterprise Risk Management (“ERM”) team, led by the Company's Vice President and Treasurer. One of the
ERM team‘s objectives is to conduct the compensation risk assessment and report on the process and findings to
the Compensation Committee and the Audit Committee, as well as the full Board of Directors. In 2009, the ERM
team reviewed the executive compensation program, assessed the design features in the Company's
compensation plans that may encourage excessive risk taking (meaning risks that are reasonably likely to have a
material adverse effect on the Company) by executives and assessed the design features in the compensation
program that moderate the potential for excessive risk-taking in the short and long-term.

In November 2009, the team reported to the Compensation Committee that the current analysis of the
Company’s compensation program did not uncover risk factors that are reasonably likely to have a material
adverse effect on the Company. The Compensation Committee agreed with the conclusions of the risk
assessment. This analysis was revalidaled in 2010 upon review of the ERM team, and there will be another
review in 2012 based upon the 2012 compensation design changes enumerated above.

Accelerated Vesfing of Stock Awards.

Change of Control. A change of control will have certain immediate effects on stock awards granted to
Ofﬁcers prior to 2012. Immediately prior to a change of control, among other things:

a Financial Performance Stock Bonuses: all restrictions applicable to outstanding Financial Performance

Stock Bonuses will lapse;

- Stock Options: all outstanding options will become fully exercisable and those options will remain
exercisable until at least the ﬁrst anniversary of any termination of the holder's employment or sen/ice
within one year after the change of control, subject to any earlier expiration date of those options: and

‘ PSUs: PSU performance will be measured using the change of control price of the Company stock. The
pro-rala percentage of the actual payout of PSUs correlating to the period of time that elapsed prior lo the
change of control shall be granted in common stock. For the remainder of the actual PSUs correlating to
the performance period that did not elapse prior to the change of control, the Company will issue
restricted stock units that will vest at the end of the performance period. In the event that the acquiring
company will not issue equity, the acquiring company may issue cash equivalent awards.

The restricted stock and stock option awards to Richard O‘Brien on October 31, 2008 do not vest upon a
change of control, but do vest upon any involuntary termination of employment, excluding termination for cause
as deﬁned in the Executive Change of Control Plan.

5|


Treatment of equity in the event of a change of control for all awards beginning 2012: For all
awards granted in 2012 and thereafter, in the event of a change of control, accelerated vesting of equity
compensation (primarily unvested restricted stock units and stock options) will only occur upon employee
termination.

Death/Long-Term Disability/Retireant/Severance.

- Financial Performance Stock Bonus: Termination of employment due to death, long-term disability or
retirement under the Pension Plan (entitling the executive to immediate pension beneﬁts) or severance
(following approval by the Executive Vice President of Human Resources and execution of a release)
triggers the immediate vesting of all Financial Performance Stock Bonuses granted to the executive.

- Stock Options: In the event of employment termination due to death, severance (after execution of
release) or long-term disability, a pro-rata portion of the executive's stock options (such pro-rata portion
is based on days of service from the date of grant until the date of termination of employment in relation
to the full vesting period) will immediately vest and all previously vested and accelerated vested options
will be exercisable for a period beyond termination. If an executive retires and is entitled to an immediate
pension under the Pension Plan. the executive's unvested stock options will vest and all previously vested
and accelerated vested options will remain exercisable beyond termination for a certain period. Despite
the extension of time to exercise options after termination in the event of death. long-term disability.
retirement or severance. no option remains exercisable beyond 10 years from the date of grant.

- PSUs: In the event of death or disability during the performance period, payout is pro-rated at target and
common stock is issued as soon as practicable. In the event of severance during the ﬁrst year of the
performance period, all PSUs are forfeited. In the event of severance after the ﬁrst year of the
performance period, payout is pro-rated at the lesser of target or actual performance and paid at the end of
the performance period. In the event of retirement under the Pension Plait (entitling the executive to
immediate pension benefits), the Company will issue a pro-rata award at the end of the performance
period based upon actual performance.

The restricted stock and option awards to Mr. O’Brien on October 31. 2008. vest on a pro-rated basis upon

the death or disability of Mr. O’Brien.

Granting Stock Options. The Company, at the direction of the Compensation Committee, has examined
its policies and procedures relating to the grant of stock options. The Company:

- does not have a program. plan or practice to time stock option grants to its executives in coordination

with the release of material nonpublic information:

- does not set the date of its stock option grants to newly-hired executives in coordination with the release
of material nonpublic information:

- does not plan to time. nor has it timed. the release of material nonpublic information for the purpose of
affecting the value of executive compensation; and

- does not have a program, plan or practice related to setting stock option prices based on the value of the
Company's stock on a date other than the stock option’s actual grant date.

The Company has a written policy governing the grant of stock options. The policy applies equally to grants

of stock options to executives and other employees. The policy provides, among other things, that:

- the Company will not time release of material nonpublic information for the purpose of affecting the
value of executive compensation;

- stock options will be granted only by the Board of Directors or the Compensation Committee designated
under the applicable stock plan, and authority to grant options will not be delegated to management;

- stock options will be priced at fair market value on the day of the grant (as defined in the Company's
stock plan); and

52


- stock options will generally be granted annually, at least three days after announcement of financial and
operations results for the ﬁrst quarter of the year. In deviating from this policy, the Compensation
Committee may consider all relevant facts and circumstances, including the desirability of granting
options for new employees or granting stock options at meetings held at other times of the year.

The Company's 2005 Stock Incentive Plan deﬁnes fair market value of the stock as the average of the high
and low sales price on the date of the grant. The Company selected, and the Compensation Committee approved
this formula to mitigate the effect of the volatility of the Company's stock price, often a direct result of
day-to-day changes in the gold price and not factors related to Company performance. The formula does not
increase the likelihood that recipients will be granted in-the-money stock options.

Stock Ownership Guidelines. The Company’s stock ownership guidelines require that all employees
designated as “executives” for purposes of this policy (approximately 85 individuals) own shares of the
Company's stock, the value of which is a multiple of base salary. For the Officers, the stock ownership
guidelines are as follows:

Stock Ownership Guidelines

Multiple of
Name Base Salary
RichardO‘Brien  S
RussellBall  2
RandyEngel  2
 2
GuyLansdown  2

Stock ownership guidelines were put in place to increase the alignment of interests between executives and
stockholders by encouraging executives to act as equity owners of the Company. The Compensation Committee
sets the ownership guidelines by considering the size of stock awards, Based upon the historic conservative levels
of stock awards to Company executives, the Compensation Committee sets the ownership guidelines at
corresponding levels, Unvested shares of restricted stock, restricted stock units and shares held in retirement
accounts are considered owned for purposes of the guidelines. The Compensation Committee reviews
compliance with the guidelines annually. Executives who are new to their positions have ﬁve years to comply
with the guidelines, All of the executives identiﬁed above are in compliance with the stock ownership guidelines.

Restrictions on Trading Stock. The Company has adopted a stock trading policy for its employees,
including the Officers. The policy prohibits certain employees from trading during specific periods at the end of
each quarter until after the Company's public disclosure of financial and operating results for that quarter, unless
they have received the approval of the Company's General Counsel. The Company may impose additional
restricted trading periods at any time if it believes trading by employees would not be appropriate because of
developments at the Company that are, or could be, material. In addition, the Company requires pre-clearance of
trades in Company securities for its Officers, and prohibits buying shares on margin or using shares as collateral
for loans.

Perquisites. The Company’s philosophy is to provide minimal perquisites to its executives. In 201 1, such
business related perquisites for the Ofﬁcers included a country club membership and incidental personal use of
administrative assistant services for Mr. O‘Brien.

Richard O'Brien uses the country club for substantial business purposes, including business entertainment,
meetings and dinners. In recognition of the fact that some portion of the membership is used for personal
purposes, the entire amount reimbursed is considered a perquisite, is fully taxable to Richard O'Brien, not
grossed up, and reported in the All Other Compensation column of the Summary Compensation Table.

Tax Deductibilify of Compensation. Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended, limits the amount of compensation in excess of $1,000,000 that the Company may deduct in any one
year with respect to its chief executive ofﬁcer and three other most highly compensated executive officers

5.?


(excluding the chief financial ofﬁcer) whose compensation must be included in this proxy statement because they
are the most highly compensated executive officers. There are exceptions to the $1,000,000 limitation for
performance-based compensation meeting certain requirements. The Company has not adopted a formal policy
requiring all compensation to meet the exception requirements under Section 162( m) and therefore not be subject
to the $1,000,000 deductibility limitation. The Company has decided not to implement a formal policy so that the
Company can maintain ﬂexibility in compensating executive ofﬁcers in a manner designed to promote various
corporate goals.

In 2011, Messrs. O’Brien, Engel, Hill and Lansdown amounts are greater than $1,000,000, and a portion of
their salaries, bonuses, stock awards, and other compensation items are not deductible by the Company. Stock
option awards pursuant to stockholder approved plans are performance-based and are fully deductible, regardless
of the $1,000,000 limit in Section 162(m). Corporate Performance Bonuses, Strategic Objectives Bonuses and
Financial Performance Stock Bonuses do not meet the perfonnance-based exception under Section 162(m) and
are therefore subject to the $1,000,000 deduction limit. To date, the Company has deemed the additional tax
benefits that it could receive from a Section 162(m) executive compensation plan as immaterial to the Company.
However, the Company continually assesses the materiality of additional Section 162(m) tax benefits that it
could receive from a Section 162(m) executive compensation plan as executive compensation evolves.

54


Executive Compensation Tables
2011 Summary Compensation Table

Change ilt

Yemion

Non-Equity Value and

Incenlive Nonroualiﬁed

Plln Deﬁned All Dlher
Stock Option Ctr-upen- Compensation Cantpen.

Name and Bani-P“ Awards‘z‘ Award3"‘ salion‘“ Earning“ ii‘iollm Total

Principal Position Vnr Sal-r1431 ($l is; IS) (31 ($l is; m

RichardT O‘Brien .. .. . 2011 31,150,000 3 0 34,673,36391 31,999,200 3646375 31,519,337 3 94,401 310,034,131

President and Chief 2010 3106500091 3 779,100 37,103,249 31,600,000 3933,135 3 905,919 3 64,673 312,506,131
ExecutrveOffrcer 2009 31.025.000 31.153.125 31.529919 31,552,490 3996.300 3 746.612 3 64,474 3 7,067.920
Russell Bali , .. .. . . 2011 3 620.000 3 279.000 314757944» 3 694960 3209.250 31.256.504 3 45,201 3 4,530.709
Executive Vice 2010 3 565,000 3 300,000 32,505,291 3 699,990 3293,475 3 325,560 3 37,261 3 5,231,577
President and Chief 2009 3 544,667 3 350,000 3 441,359 3 611,014 3300,002 3 679,431 3 29,996 3 2,956,469
Financial Officer
Randy Engei .. .. .. .. . 2011 3 575,000 3 333,125 31,394,751091 3 623,320 3194,062 31,136,910 3 46,253 3 4,413,421
Executive Vice President. 2010 3 545.000 3 300.000 32.340631 3 699,990 3237.910 3 795.036 3 35,243 3 5,003.915
Strategic Development 2009 3 436.917 3 310.000 3 333,657 3 539,206 3263.194 3 547.471 3 23,919 3 2,564.364
Brian l-iili , , , , , 2011 3 675.000 3 352.633 31.73454300 3 356,300 3240.469 3 162.126 3 39,512 3 4,061.133
Executive Vice President. 2010 3 605.000 3 325.000 32.766402 3 749,995 3319.606 3 103.963 3140979 3 5010.945
Operations 2009 3 625,660 3 400,000 3 407,627 3 557,214 3344,530 — 3 12,731 3 2,347,362
Guy Larrsdown , , , , 201i 3 675.000 3 0 31.734543021 3 313,720 3240.469 31.234.336 3 67,346 3 4,321.464
Executive Vice President, 2010 3 605,000 3 300,000 32,664,342 3 749,995 3319,606 3 376,471 3 39,127 3 5,554,541
Discovery&Development 2009 3 574,000 3 365,000 3 452,236 3 635,654 3316,159 3 665,057 3 32,935 3 3,041,091
in Amounts showrt represertt the Strategic Objective Bonuses paid irt cash, Please see the discussion of Strategic Objective Bortus in the
CD&A for an explanation as to the payout for 201 l

1:1 Amounts shown represent the aggregate grant date fair value computed in accordance with the Financial Accounting standards Board
(“FASE“l Accounting standards Codiﬁcation Topic 713 (“ASC 713"). For the ﬁnancial performance sleek bonus, the grant date fair
value is the number of shares granted multiplied by the fair market value on the date of grant The Company's 2005 Stock Incentive Plan
deﬁnes fair markei value of the sleek as the average of the high and low sales price on the date of the grant, which is the grant date fair
value for the financial performance stock bonus. The fair market values are 343.19 (February 20091, $49 64 (March 20101 and 354 715
lFebruary 201 I) III 2010, the Company added the Perlorrnance Leveraged S|ock Unit bonus program. includrng a 3-yeai feather—m of
the grants, as descrrbed in the CD&A, As a result, the stock awards for 2010 appear large due to the one-lime featherrng-m process for
the Performance Leveraged Stock Unit bonus program Pursuant to ASC 713. the aggregate grant date fair value of Performance
Leveraged stock Units is determined by a Monte Carlo calculation model, which determined a grant date fair value of the 2010 feaihei'ein
grant of 364 55 for the 2010 grant, 367.50 for the 20102011 grant and 370 25 for the 201072012 grant The Monte Carlo calculation
model grant date fair value of the 2011 Performance Leveraged Sleek Unit bonus grant is 376.03.

01 Amounts shown represent the aggregate grant date farr value computed in accordance widr the Asc 713, which rs the number of options
granted multrpired by die Black Scholes value, The Black Scholes values are 312,33 (May 2009), 320 01 tAprii 2010; and 319,041Aprrl 201 l)

w Amounts showrt represent Corporate Performance Bonuses paid irt cash

01 Amounts shown represent tire increase in the actuarial present value under the Company‘s qualiﬁed and nonequziliﬁed deﬁned beneﬁt pension
plans The change in pension value for the noiiquziliﬁed pension plan increased signiﬁcantly in 2011 due to the Pension Benefit Guaranty
Corporation (“PBGC”) rate change, decrease in interest rates (bout PBGC rates and FASE rates) as well as increase in pay The nonrquziliﬁed
pension plan tPension Equalization Plan “PEP‘j present values are based on both the FASB and PEP interest rates, The PEP interest rate is
based upon the PBGC rnterest rate At December 21. 2011, the PBGC lump sum rrtterest rate was 150%, at December 31,2010 die PBGC
lump sum interest rate was 2 25%. and at December 31,2009 the PBGC lump sum interest rate was 250% The PBGC rate change increased
tire present values of the PEP At December 31,2011 the FASB rate was 5 35%, at Deoember 31, 2010 the FASE rate was 5.75%, and at
December31, 2009 the FASB rate was 6.l%

to Amounts shown are described in the All Other Compensation Table below

01 Amount includes 35,000 for salary correction from 2009, when Mr. O‘Brien was underpaid 35 ,000 in salary due to administrative error

19 Figure includes target performance leveraged slock units of 32,391,651 calculated utilizing the Monte Carlo calculation model and
values discussed in footnote 2 to the Summary Compensation Table The maximum number of performance leveraged slock units are
shown irt the Grants of Plan Based Awards Table,

Wl Figure includes target performance leveraged stock units of3773,53i calculated utilizing the Monte Carlo calculation model and values
discussed irt footnote 2 to the Summary Compensation Table The maximum number of performance leveraged stock units are shown irt
the Grants of Plan Based Awards Table

um Figure includes target performance leveraged slock units of $717,434 calculated utilizing the Monte Carlo calculation model and values
discussed in footnote 2 to the Summary Compensation Table. The maximum numberof performance leveraged sleek units are shown in
the Grants of Plan Based Awards Table,

55


"‘l Figure includes target performance leveraged stock UIII|§ 013981649 calculated utilizing the Monte Carlo calculation model and values
discussed III footnote 2 to the Summary Compensation Table The maximum number or performance leveraged stock units are shown III
the Grams of Plan Based Awards Table

"it Figure includes target performance leveraged stock units «$982,649 calculated ulilizing the Monte Carlo calculation model and Values
discussed III footnote 2 to the Summary Compensation Table The maximum number or performance leveraged stock units are shown III
the Grants of Plan Based Awards Table,

Refer to the Compellsatioll Discussion alld Analysis section for a description of the compollellts of
compensation, along with a description of all material terms and conditions of each component. In 2011, salary
and bonus payments accounted for 11% of Mr. O’Brien’s total compellsatioll as reﬂected in the Summary
Compensation Table. Salary and bonus accounted for 20%, 22%, 25% alld 14% of Messrs. Ball’s, Engel's, Hill’s
and Lansdown’s total compensation, respectively, as reﬂected ill the Summary Compensation Table.

2011 All Other Compensation Table
Change in
Company Value at
Contributions Posl- Relocation
to Deﬁned Retirement Reimbulsement
Contribution Medical and Tax Gross-
Plons and Life Perquisilest" Ups

Name (3) Insurance 4h 43) Total 43)

Richard T. O'Brien . t . a t . . t . $12000 $69,445 $12,956” 7 $94,401

Russell Ball ........vt...v $12000 $33,201 7 7 $45,201

Randy Engel .. t . . . . . a t . . .. $12000 $34,253 7 7 $46,253

Brianl—lill  $12000 $27,512 7 7 $39,512

Guy Lansdown ......... $12000 $55,846 7 7 $67,846
tn The Company provides a limited number of perquisites to its executive officers. See the Compensation Discussion and Analysis section

for a description or perquisites

Ur Amount shown represents amounts paid for golf club membership ($1033) attd personal use or administrative assistant services
(55,923.

56


2011 Grants of Plan-Based Awards Table
All Dlher All Other
Stock Option Grant Date
Eslim-Ied Possible Payouts Awards Aw-rdsz Exercise Closing Fair Value
Under Numberol Number ol‘ or Else Price of
Non-Equity Incentive Plan Estimated Future Payouts Under Shares of Securities Price of on Stock and
Awards": Eu“! incentive Plan Awmism Stock or Underlying Dplioli Grant Clplioli
Grant Threshold Target Maximum Threshold Target Maximum UnitsW Options“! Awards“ Date Awardst‘"
Name Date ($1 ($1 ($1 (It (It (’1) m (It (St/Sh) (S/Sh) (3i
Richard T. 0‘ Bnen
20| I Corporate
Performance Bonus $431,750 $362,500 $1,725,000
20] |-20l3 PSU l5,7|X 3 l A36 62,372
FPS ZZBIZOH 4 L7” S2.282.2|7
20H PSU grani SUI/20H “7,663 8| ,|02,259
Options 4/25/20” ID5.000 $58 685 $5779 S|.999.200
Russell Ball ,, ,,
2m I Corporate
Performance Bonus “19.500 3279.000 S 558.000
201 1.2011 PsU 5.084 10.168 zone
FPS Z/lelﬂli |2,RM s 702,2l2
20H PSU gram fill/20H 6.085 S 14|.| l0
Options 4/25/20li 16.500 $58 685 $5779 S 694.960
Randy Engei
2m I Corporate
Performance Bonus “29.375 $258750 S 5|7.500
to: 1.2011 PsU 4.715 9.410 18.850
FPS Z/lelﬂli |2,379 5 677,3”
20H PSU gram fill/20H 5.870 S 129.058
Options 4/25/20li 13.000 $58 685 $5779 S 628.320
Brian Hill
2m I Corporate
Performance Bonus S|60.l|3 $320625 S 64|.250
201 1.2011 PsU 6.453 12.915 25am
FPS Z/lelﬂli |3,742 s 75l,894
20H PSU gram fill/20H 6.5l6 S 165.ﬂ|
Options 4/25/20li 45.000 $58 685 $5779 S 856.800
Guy Lansdown
20| I Corporate
Performance Bonus “60,3” $320,625 X MIJSD
20] |-20l3 PSU 6,453 iZ,‘?|6 25,332
FPS ZZBIZOH H.742 S 75|.B<JA
20H PSU grani SUI/20H 6,5l6 s 365,27l
Options 4/25/20li 43,000 358.685 57 79 5 818,720
to Amounls shown represent threshold, target and maximum amounts tor 20H Corporale Performance Bonuses. 'Ihe Compensation
Committee established the target ior corporate Inetrics on April 13. 2011, Payments of Corporate Performance Bonuses for 2011
performance are shown in the Non-Equity Incentive Plan Compensation column oi the Summary Compensation Table, Refer to the
Compensation Discussioli and Analysis for a description oi the crileria ior payment of Corporate Performance Bonuses
13* Amounls shown represent lhe lhreshold, larger and maximum number of shares of lhe Performance Leveraged Stock Unit Bonuses
potentially awardable for the targets set in 201 I, which will payout in 20I3 Beter to the Compensation Discussion and Analysis tor a
description of the terms or and criteria for making these awards, and the payouts for the 20] I pertormance year on March 2, 2012.
13' Refer lo the Compensation Discussion and Analysis sections on Financial Performance Stock Bonus and 201] Performance Leveraged
Stock Ullits for a description of the terms of and criteria for making these awards,
w Beier to the Colnpensation Discussion and Analysis tor a description of the terms oi alid criteria ior making these awards
0» Exercise or base price is determined by the average of the high and tow sales price or Common Stock on the New York Stock Exchange
on grant date, as reported by BIoomberg Protessional, the independent commercial reporting service selected by the Compensation
Commiliee.
11v Amounls shown represent Financial Performance Stock Bonuses awarded on February 28, 201 I, for 2010 performance. Performance
Leveraged Stock Unii Bonuses awarded on March I, 20ll, for 2010 performance (this was the ﬁrst grant of a iworyear featherrin
program tor the three year pertormance period on Pertormance Leveraged Stock Units) and stock option awards made on April 25, 20] I
For Financial Performance Stock Bonuses and Performance Leveraged Stock Unit Bonuses. fair value is calculated using the average of
the high and Iow stock price on the date oi grallt, $54 715 on February 23. 2011. for FPS and $56 0575 on March 1,201], for PSU, For
stock options, fair value is calculated using the Black Scholes value on the grant date of $19 04
57


2011 Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year-End Table
Option Awards Stock Awards
Equity
Equity Incentive
Marke| Incenlive m... Awards:
Value nl Plan Awards: erkel nr
Sham Number/)1 n oul Value
 Number“ Number «I or Uni|s Umrned nt’irnmned
Underlying Securinies Ska?” ““ 0' 5"?"ﬁ 5"”‘5' mm
‘~ ~ UIIIK of Slack UIIIK nr or Olher
Unexemsed Underlymg . . .
a I, ... u M Option swek That that othearghls Rugth um
[I mus neuron . . .
m op‘hmum Exams: Option 0.64.61. Have Have Not thalHave Have Not
— — Prlce Gnlll Explnunn No| Vesled Ves|ed No| Vesled Vesled
Name Exercisable Unexercisahle 43) base um 44) mm m..." (w
men-m T.0‘Brizn 20.000 s 4s 16 10/26/05 10/26/15
mm s 57.7/ 4/26/06 4/26//6
2m» x 42.06 4/30/07 4mm
112500 x 4449 4/22/02 4mm
300.000“ I 26.91 10/31/03 10/31/13
80356 4mm x was 5/4/29 s/u/o
26,651 53.30/40 155675 4/29/m 4/29/20
msmom 358,685 4/2s// I 4/25/2/
100,000” 56,001,000
16,691‘" 81,001,621
27,727“ 51,651,897
201mm: Psu 4s.o/x $1701.53!)
2010-201] Psu 61 523 24.052255
201 new Psu 62,372 22.772349
Russell 1:." 7.500 249.725 mm mm
\750 x 4642 4/21/04 4mm
6,251) x 45.74 mm mm
6,251) x 45.16 10/26/05 10/26/15
Isuoo x 577/ M26106 4/26/15
15,000 x 42.06 4/30/07 mm
mm x 4449 4/22/02 4mm
31.626 15.313“) I 39.95 5/4/09 5/5/19
// 6542 22.226 355,675 4mm 4/29/20
16.5va 358,685 4/2s// I 4/25/2/
7,227m 8 433,692
8,559" 5 513,446
2010201: Psu 11,932 2 336.059
2010-201] Psu 20900 “254.209
201 new Psu 20,336 ILZZDJGI
ma, Engel 2.250 m 725 12/2/03 12/2/11
1.75/2 2 45/4 mm» mm
1.750 x 45 16 mm lone/15
3.500 x 577/ 4/26/26 4/26/16
2mm x 4442 4/22/03 4/23/18
27.903 11995“) S 19 95 5/4/09 5/4/19
I 1.660 23.322“) I55 675 4/29/10 4/29/20
mom :5: 685 4/25// I 4/2522/
6,4610' 1 131.125
3,253m ‘1 495,263
20/42/2/2 Psu n.44n s 806.534
2010201] PSU 20.160 “209.302
20//.2n/4psu mam slums?
3.1... mu 20.000 x 4449 4/22/23 4/2m
2224/ /4.42/«/ s 3995 5/44» s/mo
u24m 24.9mm 355675 4/29//n 4/29/20
45.00212 :56 635 4/2:// I 4/2v2/
2.2mm x 4-2214;
9162'“ 5 549.312
20102012 PSU 14.913 I 395.229
2010-2111] Psu 22.272 “242.964
201172014 PSU 25.332 “550.173
Guy Linsdown 16.667 I 44 O9 4/2EKJ3 4/23/13
H.901 16.451“) 3 19 95 5/4/09 5/4/19
11.401 24.023462 $55675 4/29/10 4/29/20
41mm :52 685 4/25// I 4/2522/
16/6» 1 457,036
9,162“ 3 559,812
20102012 PSU 14,913 I 395.229
2010-201] Psu 22 213 “242.904
20117201] PSU 25,332 Il.550.|73
4/, Stock 661.6"; are gznemlly gmnled one um: per yzar Stuck 6.61.6"; wzm gmnled m “mes pzr yuu p.161 :6 2006
4» 6m 66mm; vesl a! me me of 33 10% peryear.un1e&< aeee/emea 64 explained ./. Ihe Compensauon 9/66/6414" and mum secuon
a» Assumes slock pr/ce 12/560111 (he elmng pm: on December 31, 201/
 stungdmeodobu 1| 24/2,
 1/26/1244“  May 4212/2
m Venn/g dates are Apr/1292012 and 21 U.
m VzmngdmesarzAle25,20Il,20|3and20M
a. Vzmngdme  mm I 24/2,
58


1» Vestmg dates are February 23. 2012 and 2013
Hm Maximum number of Periormance Letemged smet Units are shown for an outstanding targets for uhich perfommnce nnd grunt are .mr yer determined. which are
dzscnbed u. the Compensation Discussion and Analysis m maxlmlim numbei izptesenls nice the Kruger numbzrol‘ units
2011 Option Exercises and Stock Vested Table
Option Awards Stock Awards
Number of Shares Value Realized Number of Shares Value Realized
Acquired on Exercise on Exercise Acquired on Vesling on Vesling
Name (If) is? (If) is?
Richard T. O’Brien .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 40,000 $846,232 67,129 $3,777,718
RussellBall........................ 7 7 22,186 $1,247,854
RandyEngel....................... _ _ 20,352 $1,144,061
BrianHill  7 7 25022 $1,434,197
Guy Lansdown ...,.t. . . t . . . . .1 . . . H 32,500 $622,433 23,323 $1,311,540
2011 Pension Benefits Tablet!)
Number Presenl
orYeals Value or Payments
Credited Accumulated During Last
Service Beneﬁl Fiscal Year
Name Plan Name (:7) (3) “1
Richard T. O'Brien .. . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . Pension Plan 613 $ 234,841 —
Pension Equalization Plan 6.3 $3,578,518 7
RussellBall.,.........,................ PensionPlan 17.6 $539,600 7
Pension Equalization Plan 1716 $3,122,840 —
RandyEngel..,....,.,..,.,..,.,..,.,.. PensionPlan 13 $539,372 —
Pension Equalization Plan 13 $2,556,634 —
BrianHill...y.........'.........‘...... PensionPIan 2 $ 43,764 —
Pension Equalization Plan 2 $ 222,324 7
GuyLansdown  PensionPlan 183 $ 546,160 7
Pension Equalization Plan 18.3 $3,137,979 —
‘“ All calculations in the 201 l Pension Bencfns Table were calcula|ed using |alget Corporate Performance Bonus for 2011. and 50% of
maximum Strategic Objectives Bonus

The Company provides two tax-qualiﬁed retirement plans, a Pension Plan and a Savings Plan (401(k) plan),
In addition, the Company offers a non-qualiﬁed pension plan (the “Pension Equalization Plan"), and
non-qualiﬁed savings plan (the "Savings Equalization Plan") for highly compensated employees,

Pension Plan. Messrs, O’Brien, Ball, Engel, Hill and Lansdown are participants in the qualiﬁed Pension
Plan. The Pension Plan is available to a broad group of Company employees, which generally includes
U.S. domestic salaried employees of the Company. The plan provides for post-retirement payments determined
by a formula based upon age, years of service and pension-eligible earnings for employees hired before
January 1, 2007, called the ﬁnal average pay calculation For employees hired after January 1, 2007, the plan
provides for post-retirement payments determined by a formula based upon years of service‘

Final Average Pay Calculation. Age 62 is the normal retirement age under the Pension Plan for final
average pay calculation, meaning the age upon which the employee may terminate employment and collect
benefits, or a participant may retire at age 55 with 10 years of service and collect reduced benefits immediately‘
If a Pension Plan participant terminates employment prior to age 55, but has a vested benefit by having acquired
5 years of sen/ice with the Company, the participant will begin to collect a beneﬁt at age 62‘ If the participant
terminates employment prior to age 55, but has 10 or more years of service with the Company, the participant
may elect to collect a reduced beneﬁt at age 55‘ If a participant attains the age of 48, has 10 years of service, and

5‘)


is terminated from employment within 3 years of a change of control, the participant is entitled to commence
benefits. The Pension Plait utilizes the same definition of change of control as the Executive Change of Control
Plan. The formula based upon age and years of sen/ice for benefits provides a strong incentive for Company
employees to remain employed with the Company, even in times of high demand in the employment
marketplace.

According to the Pension Plan, at the normal retirement age of 62, the Company calculates the monthly
pension benefit amount through the following formula:

1.75% of the average monthly salary minus (-) 1.25% of the participant's primary social securin
benefit times (x) the participant's years of credited service

To determine the average monthly salary, the Company calculates the highest average from 5 consecutive
prior years of employment within the last 10 years of employment of regular pay, vacation pay, cash bonus and a
pro-rated severance or change of control payment, if applicable. Salary does not include stock based
compensation, foreign assignment premiums, signing bonuses, fringe benefits, payments from non-qualified
plans or indemnity benefit payments. In the event a vested participant dies prior to the commencement of benefit
payments, the participant’s legal spouse receives survivor benefits which are calculated based upon the pension
benefit that the participant would have received upon retirement the day prior to death with an additional
reduction factor appliedr If the participant does not have a legal spouse, there is no benefit paid.

In the event of early retirement, meaning after reaching the age of SS and at least 10 years of service, a
participant is eligible to collect a monthly pension beneﬁt upon retirement using the formula above with the
following reductions:

Early Retirement Reductions
Age at years or
Termination Service Reduction
55 At least 30 no reduction — payable upon termination
60 At least 10 lesser of 1/3 of 1% for each month of service less than 30 years of service (4% per
year) or 1/3 of 1% for each month by which the date of beneﬁt commencement
precedes age 62 (4% per year) payable upon termination
At least 55 At least 10 1/3 of 1% for each month by which the date of benefit commencement precedes age
62 (4% per year) payable upon termination
Under 55 At least 10 1/2 of 1% for each month by which the date of benefit commencement precedes age
62 (6% per year) payable following termination and attainment of age 55
At least 30 No reduction 7 payable at age 55
Change of Control Early Retirement
Years of
Age Service Reduction
48 at time of change of control At least 10 Lower reduction of 2% for each year by
which termination precedes age 62, or
applicable reduction above
60


Stable Value Calculation

For a participant in the stable value pension, beneﬁts are determined as follows:

Full Yeats ol

Services Completed Percentage of Salary up Percent of Salary

by the end of the to and including Social Over the Social

Plan Year Security Wage Base Security Wage Base

 13% 21%

 15% 23%

The stable value beneﬁt, as of a given date, is the sum of all of the amounts accrued for each year of sen/ice.
Salary iit the stable value peitsion is defined the same as iit the final average pay pension. Normal retiremeitt age
under the stable value peitsioit is 65 aitd the vesting period is 5 years. If a stable value participant has 5 years of
service and separates employment with Newmont prior to age 65, the participant is entitled to a reduced beneﬁt.
Under the stable value pension, participants may take their benefit iit lump sum or ait annuity.

Messrs. O'Brien, Ball, Engel and, Lansdown have vested beneﬁts under the Pension Plan by virtue of five
or more years of service. Mr. Hill participates in the stable value calculation of the Pension Plan of Newmont
based upon his date of hire and he does not have vested benefits under the Pension Plan, as he does not have five
years of service with the Company.

The Pension Plait contains a cap on eligible earitings as required by the Iittental Revenue Code as well as a
cap oit beneﬁts as required by section 415 of the Iitternal Revenue Code. This cap limits the pension benefits that
executive-grade employees of the Company cait receive under the Pension Plan.

Pension Equalization Plan. The Pension Equalization Plan provides for an actuarially determined
present value cash lump sum amount upon retirement at age 62, or upon termination after 5 years of service with
the Company. The Company determines the lump sum amount by calculating a full pension beneﬁt under the
Pension Plan, utilizing the definition of Salary from the Pension Equalization Plait, aitd subtracting the actual
benefit owed under the Pension Plan that is subject to the cap in beneﬁts. The deﬁnition of Salary under the
Pension Equalization Plait excludes bonus amounts in the form of restricted stock for executives hired or
promoted to executive status after January 1, 2004. In other words, if a Company executive attained executive
status before January 1, 2004, that executive will have restricted stock bonus amounts included as eligible
earnings in the Pension Equalization Plait until December 31, 2007. Any bonus amounts in the form of restricted
stock after December 31, 2007, will not be iitcluded for peitsion equalizatioit benefits calculation purposes. The
Compaity will calculate Salary for any executive eittitled to include restricted stock in the defiitition of salary as
of December 31, 2007. When such executive terminates employment with the Company, the executive shall
receive benefits under the Peitsioit Equalizatioit Plan calculated with the higher of the salary calculation as of
December 31, 2007, that iitcludes restricted stock, or the salary calculation at the time of termination that
excludes restricted stock.

If a participant dies while employed with the Company, or after retirement but before receipt of beneﬁts
under the Pension Equalization Plan, and the participant was entitled to benefits under the Pension Plan, the
participant's legal spouse receives survivor beneﬁts which are calculated based upon the full Pension
Equalization benefit minus the Pension Plan beneﬁt amount. If the Company terminates a participant for cause,
the panicipant forfeits all beitefits uitder the Pension Equalizatioit Plan.

Pension Calculation Assumptions. The qualiﬁed pension present value uses a discount rate at
December 31, 2011, of 5.35% and FASB mortality. The pension equalization value uses a pension equalization
plan lump sum rate of 1.50% as of December 31, 201 l, and mortality as defined in the Pension Equalization Plan
to determine the lump sum payable at an executive‘s earliest unreduced retirement age. The present value of the
qualified and pension equalization pensions are also discounted from the earliest unreduced retirement age to
current age using the FASB rate of 5.35%.

6|


2011 Nonqualified Deferred Compensation Table
Executive Regislnnt Aggregale Aggregale
Contributions Contributions Farnings Aggregale Balance at
in Last in Last in Last Withdrawals I Last Fiscal
Fiscal Year“1 Fiscal Year Fiscal Year Distribulions Year-End
Name (3) t3) (3) l3) (3)
RichardT.O’Brien  i 7 $(1,186) 7 $63,331
RussellBall,.......................... $12,400 7 $62,021) 7 $866,438
RandyEngel...,....,.,..,.,....,....,. — — — — —
BrianHill..........,.,.,....,..,.,.,.. — — — — —
GuyLansdown......................... $25,313 — $(31,037) — $724,427
(1) Amounts shoull m mended m the Salary column ol the Summary Compensallon Table

Amounts shown are part of the Company‘s Savillgs Equalizatioll Plan. The Compally mailltaills a Savings
Plan and a Savings Equalization Plan for eligible employees.

Savings Plan. The Savings Plan is the Company's defined contribution plan that is available to a broad
group of Company employees, which generally includes U.S. domestic salaried employees of the Company. The
Savings Plan provides that eligible employees may contribute before-tax or after-tax compensation to a plan
account for retirement savings. Under the Savings Plan, the Company will match 100% of the ﬁrst 6% of a
participant's contribution to the Savings Plan up to a limit of $12,000 annually. The Company contribution vests
as follows:

Savings Plan Vesting Schedule
Percentage orConlpauy

Years «(Service Contribution Vested

Lessthanlyear  0

lyear  20

 60

4ormoreyears  100

In the event of death, disability, retirement, change of control (same deﬁnition as Executive Change of
Control Plan explained ill the Potential Payments Upon Termination or Change of Control section below) or
termination of the Savings Plall, a participant is fully vested ill the Company contribution component of the
Savings Plan. Ill accordance with the Illternal Revenue Code, the Savings Plan limits the before-tax and after-tax
contributions that highly compensated participants may make to the Savings Plan.

Savings Equalization Plan. The Savings Equalization Plan allows eligible participants the opportunin
to defer up to 100% of compensation (minus before-tax contributions under the Savings Plan) beyond the
Internal Revenue Code limitations set forth in the Savings Plan on a pre-tax basis. The Savings Equalization Plan
is a non-qualified deferred compensation plan, To participate in the Savings Equalization Plan, an employee must
have a base salary over $175,000 and be eligible to participate in the Savings Plan of Newmont, The purpose of
the Savings Equalization Plan is to allow highly compensated employees a way to defer additional compensation
for post-employment savings purposes beyond the limits set forth ill the Savings Plan. A participant’s deferred
compensation is contributed at the direction of the participant to various hypothetical investment alternatives,
including a hypothetical investment ill shares of Company stock. Such investments are selected by a committee
of Company representatives, with the advice of professional investment managers. Company matching
contributions are credited to a participant's account ill phantom shares of Company stock. The Company
contribution in the Savings Equalization Plan is subject to a cap of $12,000 per year (in the aggregate with ally
Company contribution to the Savings Plan) for each participant. The Savings Equalization Plan contains a 4 year
vesting period for the Company contribution that is the same as for the Savings Plan.

62


Upon distribution of Savings Equalization Plan accounts, the participant receives a cash amount equal to the
value of the contributions if such contributions had been invested in the Savings Plait, as of the applicable
valuation date. A participant receives distribution of Savings Equalization amounts in lump-sum form, or at a
pre-selected distribution date in the future according to the provisions of the plan.

In the event a participant of the Savings Equalization Plan terminates employment with the Company due to
retirement death or disability, or change of control, the Company contribution will vest at 100% regardless of
years of service, and the participant receives a single lump sum cash payment for the value of the accounts and
Company match as soon as administratively possible following the applicable valuation date. In the event a
participant of the Savings Equalization Plan terminates employment with the Company for any reason other than
retirement, death, change of control or disability, the participant receives a single lump sum cash payment for the
value of the accounts and the applicable percentage of vested Company match based upon years of service as
provided above, as soon as administratively possible following the applicable valuation date. A participant in the
Savings Equalization Plan is subject to the risk of decline in his or her account if the hypothetical investments
chosen decline in value. In the event the Company terminates the employment of a participant of the Savings
Equalization Plait due to cause, the participant forfeits all Company contributions under the Savings Equalization
Plan.

In early 2010, the Company established a trust for participants account balances in the Savings Equalization
Plan and the Company funds the participant account balances in the trust. The assets held in this trust may be
subject to claims of the Company's creditors in the event the Company ﬁles for bankruptcy.

Potential Payments Upon Termination or Change of Control.

Terms of Plans: See the Compensation Discussion and Analysis section and the text following the tables
for a description of the material terms, conditions and assumptions for any of the Company’s beneﬁt plans.

Retirement Benefits: None of the currently employed Named Executive Ofﬁcers are eligible for
retirement as of December 31, 2011. However, Messrs. O‘Brien, Ball, Engel and Lansdown have vested beneﬁts
under the Pension Plan and Pension Equalization Plan. See the Pension Benefits Table for the present value of
vested beneﬁts under these plans.

Voluntary Termination: The Named Executive Officers would receive no payments or other beneﬁts
upon voluntary termination, except for vested beneﬁts under the Pension Plan and Pension Equalization Plan. See
the Pension Beneﬁts Table for the present value of vested beneﬁts under these plans.

Termination Not For Cause: On October 25, 2011, the Board of Directors and the Compensation
Committee of the Board adopted an Executive Severance Plait applicable to the Senior Director and above levels
of the Company. Under the new plan, any eligible employee who is subject to involuntary termination of
employment for any reason other than cause is entitled to severance beneﬁts. Cause is defined as engagement in
illegal conduct or gross negligence, or willful misconduct or any dishonest or fraudulent activity, breach of any
contract, agreement or representation with the Company, or violation of Newmont's Code of Business Ethics and
Conduct. Severance benefits consist of: 1) a fixed number of months of base salary: 2) target pro-rated bonus: 3)
medical benefits for the severance period, not to exceed 13 months: and 4) outplacement services for up to 12
months. The range of fixed number of months of base salary for the Named Executive Officers is 24 months of
salary for Mr. O'Brien and 15 months of salary + 1 month of salary for every year of sen/ice up to a maximum of
18 months of salary for Messrs. Ball, Engel, Lansdown and Hill. For equity grants made in 2012 and going
forward, in the case of separation of employment under the Executive Severance Plan, there shall be no
acceleration of unvested options and a pro-rata percent acceleration of restricted stock units (under the Financial
Performance Share and the Performance Share Unit programs).

Termination For Cause: No additional beneﬁts are payable in any case of termination for cause. The
Company’s plans generally deﬁne cause as: (a) willful and continued failure of participant to perform substantial
duties, follow Company policy or Company code of conduct, after written demand for substantial performance:
(b) illegal conduct, gross negligence or willful misconduct: or (c) dishonest or fraudulent conduct or breach of contract.

63


change of Control: The Company's 2005 Stock Incentive Plan provides for vesting of unvested
restricted stock, restricted stock units and stock options upon a change of control of the Company, unless
otherwise provided in an incentive plan or award agreement, such as Mr. O’Brien's October 2008 grant of stock
and options and the PSU program that the Company began in 2010. Beginning with equity grants in 2012,
acceleration of any equity grant requires a double-trigger of a change of control and a termination of
employment. The cash bonus plan provides for payment of pro-rated target Corporate Performance Bonus and
Strategic Objectives Bonus upon a change of control. The Pension Plan provides a retirement option at age 48
with 10 years of sen/ice and a lesser reduction factor in beneﬁts, compared to circumstances not involving a
change of control. Additionally, the Savings Plan and Savings Equalization Plan provide for immediate vesting
of the Company matching contributions which is capped at a cumulative total of $12,000 per year for both plans.

The Company’s Executive Change of Control Plan applies to executive grade level employees, including the
Named Executive Ofﬁcers, in the event of a change of control, which is generally deﬁned as:

l) The acquisition of beneficial ownership of 20% or more of either (a) the then outstanding shares of the
Company; or (b) the combined voting power of the then outstanding shares of the Company entitled to
vote generally in the election of directors (but not an acquisition by a Company entity or Company
benefit plan); or

2) The individuals constituting the Company's Board of Directors on January 1, 2008, cease to constitute
at least a majority of the Board, with certain exceptions allowing the Board the ability to vote in new
members by a majority: or

3) Consummation of a reorganization, merger, consolidation, sale or other disposition of all or
substantially all of the assets of the Company or an acquisition of assets of another corporation. The
acquisition of assets of another corporation does not constitute a change of control if certain
requirements are met to evidence that the Company is the acquiring company and will conduct the
business of the combined entity going forward.

Termination After Change of Control: All of the 2011 Named Executive Ofﬁcers are subject to the
2008 Executive Change of Control Plait which provides for enhanced beneﬁts in the case of termination within
three years following change of control of the Company, in most cases based on salary and bonus payments in
previous years. See the Compensation Discussion and Analysis for a description of the 2012 Executive Change
of Control Plan which applies to any individual hired or promoted into an eligible position on or after January 1,
2012.

Executives are eligible for benefits under the 2008 Executive Change of Control Plan if terminated within
three years of a change of control or if the executive terminates for good reason within three years of change of
control. The Change of Control Plan generally defines good reason as any of the following without the
executive’s prior consent: (a) reduction in salary, bonus, stock-based compensation from the level immediately
preceding the change of control; (b) requiring the executive to relocate his or her principal place of business more
than 35 miles from the previous principal place of business: (c) failure by the employer to comply with the
obligations under the Change of Control Plan: or (d) assigning the executive duties inconsistent with the
executive’s position immediately prior to such assignment or any action resulting in the diminution of the
executive’s position, authority, duties or responsibilities.

If an executive is eligible for termination beneﬁts under the Executive Change of Control Plait, the
executive is entitled to:

' pro-rated bonus determined by percentage of the year worked at target level:

' 2 times the “annual pay“ for most executives and 3 times for individuals speciﬁed by the Newmont
Board. Annual pay is defined as annual salary, annual cash bonus at the highest amount that the executive
received in the three years prior to the change of control, and the highest employer matching contribution
made to the Savings Plan on behalf of the executive in the three years prior to the change of control:

s a cash amount equal to the actuarial equivalent of three years of additional beneﬁts under the Pension
Plan, Pension Equalization Plan, Savings Equalization Plan and credit for three additional years under
these plans for purposes of actuarial calculations:

64


- for a three year period, health, dental, visiott, prescription, disability attd life insurance benefits for the

executive attd his or her family:

- outplacement services consistent with the Company's practices during the one-year period prior to the

change of control; and

- certaitt gross-up paymettts for excise taxes on the change of control payment.

Messrs. O’Brien, Ball, Engel, Hill and Lansdown participate itt the 2008 Executive Change of Control Plan
at three times annual pay level as of December 31, 2011. These individuals are designated for the enhanced
benefits because they all hold positions that would require continuity durittg a change of control or threatened
change of control. In addition, the positions that the designated individuals hold are at high risk for change of
personnel in the event of a change of control and the enhanced beneﬁt provides additional incentive for such
executives to stay with the Company despite any concerns regarding a change of control.

Death: Upon the death of one of the Named Executive Officers, payment is made to the estate based on the
terms of the Ofﬁcers Death Benefit Plan. The Officer‘s Death Beneﬁt Plan provides for a cash payment upon the
death of currently employed executive-level officers of the Company, as well as eligible retired executive-level
officers. The Ofﬁcer Death Beneﬁt Plan provides a lump sum cash beneﬁt paid by the Company upon death as
follows:

- 3 times final annual base salary for an executive officer who dies while an active employee;

- 1 times final annual base salary for an eligible executive ofﬁcer who dies after retiring at or after normal

retirement age of 62: and

- 30% to 90% of final annual base salary for an eligible executive ofﬁcer for retirement prior to normal

retirement age, depending on the number of years remaining to normal retirement age.

Messrs. O‘Brien, Ball, Engel, Hill and Lansdown are currently employed executive-level ofﬁcers of the
Company, and thus eligible for the Ofﬁcer Death Benefit Plan, in the event of death during employment.

Disability: The Company has a short-term disability plan that provides for up to five months of disability
absence with base pay depending upon the employee’s years of service with the Company. In the event of long-
term disability, the Company has an insurance plan that provides a maximum monthly benefit to executives and
officers of the Company of $13,000 per month, The maximum beneﬁt period for the long-term disability benefit
varies depending upon the age on date of disability.

Disability Coverage: The value of disability coverage is based on the incremental additional cost to the
Company for additional coverage. The Executive Change of Control Plan generally provides for 3 years of
disability coverage for the Named Executive Ofﬁcers.

2011 Performance Bonuses: All amounts shown for Bonuses include Corporate Performance Bonuses,
Performance Leveraged Stock Unit Bonuses and Financial Performance Stock Bonuses attd are calculated at
target level for 201 1 performance. The Strategic Objectives Bonuses are calculated at target.

Accelerated Vesting at Restricted Stock and Stock Options: The amounts shown assume vesting
as of December 30, 2011, of restricted stock, restricted stock units or stock options at the December 30, 2011,
closing price of $60.01, The amounts shown do not include any vested stock awards,

Performance Leverage Stock Unit Bonus: The amounts shown for the Performance Leveraged Stock
Unit Bonus in the event of a Change of Control assume target payout and a stock price of $60.01 the
December 30, 2011, closing price, because there is no change of control price to determine actual payout, as
contemplated by the PSU program.

Incremental Non-Qualified Pension: The amounts shown as Incremental Non-Qualiﬁed Pension are
based on 3 additional years of service credit following termination of employment in the case of change of
control, and an additional period of service based on years of sen/ice itt the case of termination ttot for cause. All
amounts payable are based upon the same assumptions attd plan provisions used itt the Summary Compensation
Table attd Pension Beneﬁts Table, except that for the Termination After Change of Control calculation does not
include a present value discount.

65


Health Care Benefits: The value of health care beneﬁts disclosed below is based on the incremental
additional cost to the Company for the length of coverage speciﬁed in the Severance Plan, the Executive Change
of Control Plan or Disability Plait, except that for Change of Control, the amount is determined without any
present value discount.

Life Insurance: Life insurance coverage and proceeds are provided under the terms of the Officers Death
Beneﬁt Plan,

280G Tax Gross-Up: Upon a change of control of the Company, the executive may be subject to certain
excise taxes pursuant to Section 280G of the Internal Revenue Code. The Company has agreed to reimburse the
executive for all excise taxes that are imposed on the executive under Section 2800 and any income taxes and
excise taxes that are payable by the executive as a result of any reimbursements for Section 280G taxes, if
payment to an individual beneﬁciary exceeds 110% of the safe harbor under Section 4999. If the payment to the
individual does not exceed 110% of the safe harbor under Section 4999, the change of control benefit will be
reduced to fall within the safe harbor, rather than providing an excise tax gross-up. Any 2806 tax gross-up
amounts reflected in the tables below assume that the executive is entitled to a full reimbursement by the
Company of any (a) excise taxes that are imposed on the executive as a result of the change of control, (b) any
income and excise taxes imposed on the executive as a result of the Company‘s reimbursement of the excise tax
amount. and (c) any additional income taxes and excise taxes that are imposed on the executive as a result of the
Company's reimbursement of the executive for any excise or income taxes. The calculation of the 2806 gross-up
amount in the tables below is based upon a 2806 excise tax rate of 20%, a 35% federal income tax rate, a 1.45%
Medicare tax rate and a 4.63% state income tax rate. For purposes of the Section 2806 calculation, it is assumed
that no amounts will be discounted as attributable to reasonable compensation and no value will be attributed to
the executive executing a non-competition agreement.

The following tables describe the estimated potential payments upon termination or change of control of the
Company for the Named Executive Ofﬁcers. The amounts shown assume that the termination or change of
control occurred on December 31, 2011. The actual amounts to be paid can only be determined at the time of
such executive's separation from the Company

66


Potential Payments on Termination
Termination
Alter
Termination Change or Change or
Not For Cause Control Control Deth Disability
7 7 ‘73) 7 ‘73)
Richard T. O‘Brien
BaseBenefit................,11.1 $2,300,000 — — — —
Bonus (Corporate and Strategic
Objectives) ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 .1 $ 1,725,000 $1,725,000 — $ 1,725,000 $ 1,725,000
Financial Performance Stock Bonus . . . — — — $ 1,889,175 $ 1,889,175
Performance Leveraged Stock Unit
Bonus. ..1.1 1.1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. $ 3,330,375 $3,330,375 $ 1,933,042 $ 3,330,375 $ 3,330,375
Change ofControl Payment . . . . . . . . . — — $ 9,934,275 — —
Accelerated Vesting of Restricted Stock
Units ........... . , . .1 . .1 $ 8,666,524 $2,665,524 $ 6,001,000 $ 6,466,677 $ 6,466,677
Accelerated Vesting of Stock
Options ..1.............1..1 $10,578,154 $1,176,202 $ 9,930,000 $10,578,154 $10,578,154
Incremental Non-Qualiﬁed Pension  $ 162,639 7 $ 4,278,072 7 7
Health Care Beneﬁts 1.. . . . . . . . . . . .. $ 16,003 — $ 34,045 — —
Life Insurance Coverage . . . . . , . , . . . . $ 29,567 — $ 43,991 — —
Life Insurance Proceeds . . . . . , . . . . . . — — — $ 3,450,000 —
Disability Coverage .... .1 . . . , . .1 . .1 7 7 g; 3,365 7 7
Outplacement Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . $ 25,000 7 $ 25,000 i i
2806 Tax Gross-Up .1. . . . . . . . .1 . .. 7 7 $10,202,223 i 7
Total N. .1 . . v . . v . v11 . . v . . v . ,1... $26,833,267 $8,897,101 $42,390,014 $27,439,381 $23,989,381
Russell Ball
BaseBenefit..................... $ 930,000 — — — —
Bonus (Corporate and Strategic
Objectives) ,,.,.,..,.,.,,1 v . . .1 $ 589,000 $ 589,000 7 $ 589,000 $ 589,000
Financial Performance Stock Bonus . . 1 i i 7 $ 611,142 $ 611,142
Performance Leveraged Stock Unit
Bonus . , . , . , , . , . , . . , . , . 1 , 1 . 1 1 .1 $ 1,039,433 $1,039,433 $ 615,883 $ 1,039,433 $ 1,039,433
Change ofControl Payment . . . . . . . . . — — $ 3,846,006 — —
Accelerated Vesting of Restricted Stock
Units  $ 947,133 $ 947,138 — $ 947,138 $ 947,138
Accelerated Vesting of Stock
Options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. $ 257,063 $ 466,672 — $ 466,672 $ 466,672
Incremental Non-Qualiﬁed Pension . . 1 $ 156,818 7 $ 3,846,391 7 7
Health Care Beneﬁts ,.. , 1 , . , , . , . . ,1 $ 31,979 — $ 68,009 — —
Life Insurance Coverage . 1 . . 1 , . . . . . 1 $ 3,642 — $ 3,768 — —
Life Insurance Proceeds .. . . . . . . . . .. 7 7 7 3; 1,350,000 7
Disability Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 7 7 g; 3,365 7 7
Outplacement Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . $ 25,000 7 $ 25,000 i i
280G Tax Gross-Up .1. . . . . 1.. .1 . .. — — $ 4,266,039 — —
Total ...71 .. ... .. .11 .. ..... .11 .. $ 3,930,073 $3,042,243 $12,679,512 $ 5,513,335 $ 3,653,335
67


Potential Payments on Termination, continued.
Termination
AI‘Ier
Terminalion Change or Change ol
Not For Cause Control Conlml Death Disabilin
A A 9—1 L A
Randy Engel
BaseBelIefiI,....,.r,.,r,..,.,..,r, 8862,500 — — — —
Bonus (Corporate and Strategic
Objectives) , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . r , . , 8 546,250 8 546,250 — 8 546,250 8 546,250
Financial Performance Stock Bonus . . , . . — — — 8 566,794 8 566,794
Performance Leveraged Stock Unit
Bollusr.r.rr.r.r................. 8 995,146 8 995,146 8 573,916 8 995,146 8 995,146
Change ofControl Payment . . . . . . . . , . . — — 8 3,524,730 — —
Accelerated Vesting of Restricted Stock
Units 8 882,987 8 882,987 7 8 882,987 8 882,987
Accelerated Vesting of Stock Options , i . 8 231,147 8 424,763 7 8 424,763 8 424,763
Incremental Non-Qualiﬁed Pension ‘ o , . , 8 309,766 7 8 3,882,081 7 7
Health Care Beneﬁts .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 35,074 — 8 74,591 — —
Life Insurance Coverage . , . . . . . . , . . , . . 8 3,307 — 8 9,111 — —
Life Insurance Proceeds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . — 7 _ $1,725,000 _
Disability Coverage .H . . , . . . r . . , r . , . . 7 7 8 3,366 7 7
Outplacement Services . . , r , , . . r , . . , r , 8 25,000 7 8 25,000 7 7
28OGTaxGross-Up  7 7 84,075,292 7 7
Total ...r..,,.,...r..,..,...,..,.. 83,891,677 82,349,146 812,173,037 85,140,940 83,415,940
Brian Hill
BaseBelIefiIv.........,.........,.. 81,012,500 — — _ _
Bonus (Corporate and Strategic
Objectives),,.,.,..,.,.,,.,.H.> , 8 641,250 8 641,250 7 8 641,250 8 641,250
Financial Performance Stock Bonus ‘ . . o , 7 7 7 8 776,289 8 776,289
Performance Leveraged Stock Unit
 81,153,572 81,153,572 8 740,583 81,153,572 81,153,572
Change ofControl Payment . . . . . . . . . . . — — 8 3,994,818 — —
Accelerated Vesting of Restricted Stock
Units  81,047,955 81,047,955 — 81,047,955 81,047,955
Accelerated Vesling of Stock Options , . . 8 243,481 8 457,233 — 8 457,233 8 457,233
Incremental Non-Qualiﬁed Pension ‘ o t o t 7 7 8 805,720 7 7
Health Care Beneﬁts ..,. t o . t o v . t o . t o . 8 12,024 7 8 25,577 7 7
Life Insurance Coverage 1 , . . , r . . , . i , . . 8 6,560 7 8 15,044 7 7
Life Insurance Proceeds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 7 7 32021000 7
Disability Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 7 1; 3365 7 7
Outplacement Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 25,000 7 8 25,000 7 7
280GTaXGross-Up  — — 81,087,630 — —
Total ...r..,......r..,......,..,.. 84,142,342 83,300,010 8 6,697,738 86,101,299 84,076,299
68


Potential Payments on Termination, continued.
Termination
Al‘ler
Termination Change or Change ol
Not For Cause Control Conlml Death Disabilin
A A L L A
Guy Lansdown
BaseBenefil7,.,...r,.,.,,...,..7., $1,012,500 — — — —
Bonus (Corporale and Strategic
Objeclives)77.7.7..7.7.77.7.7..... $ 641,250 $ 641,250 7 $ 641,250 $ 641,250
Financial Performance Stock Bonus . . , . . 7 7 7 $ 776,289 $ 776,289
Performance Leveraged Stock Unit
 $1,153,572 $1,153,572 $ 740,583 $1,153,572 $1,153,572
Change ofControl Payment 7 7 7 7 r 7 r r 7 . 7 7 7 $ 4,104,477 7 7
Accelerated Vesling of Restricted Stock
Units  $1,006,343 $1,006,848 — $1,006,343 $1,006,348
Accelerated Vesling of Stock Options 7 . . $ 270,033 $ 495,305 7 $ 495,305 $ 495,305
Incremental Non-Qualiﬁed Pension ‘ . 7 r . $ 690,654 — $ 4,400,116 — —
HealthareBeneﬁts  $ 38,978 — $ 82,912 — —
Life Insurance Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 6,124 7 5 14,001 7 7
Life Insurance Proceeds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ _ _ $2,025,000 _
Disability Coverage .1. , . , . 7.. , r 7 r . , . 7 7 7 $ 3,366 7 7
Outplacement Servioes . . , r . . . . r 7 r . , r . $ 25,000 7 $ 25,000 7 7
28OGTaXGross-Up  — — $4,703,263 — —
Total .. , . , . , . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . , . . , . . $4,844,959 $3,296,975 $14,073,718 $6,098,264 $4,073,264
69


Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance

Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 requires the Company's executive ofﬁcers and
directors and holders of greater than 10% of the Company's outstanding common stock to ﬁle initial reports of
their ownership of the Company's equity securities and reports of changes in ownership with the Securities and
Exchange Commission and the New York Stock Exchange. Based solely on a review of the copies of such
reports furnished to the Company and written representations from the Company’s executive ofﬁcers and
directors, the Company believes that all Section 16(a) ﬁling requirements were complied with in 201 1.

7i)


Proposal No. 2 — Ratify Appointment of Auditors
Proposal.

The Audit Committee has selected PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP (“PwC”) as the independent auditors for
Newmont and its subsidiaries for 2012, after evaluation of audit quality, fees. independence and other relevant
factors, PwC has served as Newmont’s independent auditors since 2002.

The Board is asking that stockholders ratify the appointment of PwC as independent auditors. If
stockholders fail to ratify the appointment of PwC, the Audit Committee may reconsider this appointment,
Representatives of PwC are expected to be present at the Anllual Meeting and will be allowed to make a
statement if they wish. Additionally, they will be available to respolld to appropriate questions from stockholders
during the meeting
Board Recommendation.

THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS RECOMMENDS THAT YOU VOTE “FOR” THE RATIFICATION
OF PwC AS NEWMONT‘S INDEPENDENT AUDITORS FOR 2012,

Independent Auditors Fees.

PwC billed the following fees in 2011 and 2010 for professional services rendered to Newmont:

2011 201ml

AuditFees  $5,486,418 $5,034,556

Audit-RelatedFees..,..,.,....,....,...,......,..,......,.,,. $356,386 5 96,923

Taxi-Tees  3 71,179 3 272,431

AllOtherFees‘ZJ............................................. 5 93,806 5 41,614

Totall‘l  $6,007,789 $5,445,529
m lncludes amounts billed In March and Aprll ml for servlces rendered during 20m
'1' Represents (mining and solmse licensing lees
w m above lees do not meme: lees paid in m ls, Newmem pannle lEzlmavznmm and Bnml) emoom ml 3261mm 201 l ml 2nlo, .espeelwely

The Audit Committee has established procedures for engagement of PwC to perform services other than
audit, review and attest services, In order to safeguard the independence of PwC, for each engagement to perform
such non-audit service, (a) management and PwC afﬁrm to the Audit Committee that the proposed non-audit
service is not prohibited by applicable laws, rules or regulations: (b) management describes the reasons for hiring
PwC to perform the services; and (c) PwC afﬁrms to the Audit Committee that it is qualified to perform the
services. The Audit Committee has delegated to its Chair its authority to pre-approve such services in limited
circumstances, and any such pre-approvals are reported to the Audit Committee at its next regular meeting, All
services provided by PwC in 2011 were permissible under applicable laws. rules and regulations and were
pre-approved by the Audit Committee in accordance with its procedures, The Audit Committee considered the
amount of non-audit services provided by PwC in assessing its independence.

7|


Report of the Audit Committee

The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is composed entirely of directors who are not ofﬁcers or
employees of the Company or any of its subsidiaries, and are independent, as deﬁned in the listing standards of
the New York Stock Exchange and the Company’s Corporate Governance Guidelines. The Committee has
adopted a Charter that describes its responsibilities in detail. The Charter is available on the Company's web site
at http://www.newmont.com/our-investors/our-govemance.

The primary responsibility for ﬁnancial and other reporting, internal controls, compliance with laws and
regulations, and ethics rests with the management of the Company. The Committee‘s primary purpose is to
oversee the integrity of the Company‘s financial statements, the Company‘s compliance with legal and
regulatory requirements and corporate policies and controls, the independent auditor’s selection, retention,
qualifications, objectivity and independence, and the performance of the Company’s internal audit function. The
Committee reviews the ﬁnancial information that will be provided to the stockholders and others, the systems of
intemal controls that management and the Board have established, and the audit process. Additional information
about the Committee‘s role in corporate governance can be found in the Committee's charter.

The Audit Committee has reviewed and discussed with management and PricewaterhouseCoopers (“PwC”),
the Company‘s independent auditors, the audited ﬁnancial statements of the Company for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2011. Management has affirmed to the Audit Committee that the ﬁnancial statements were
prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The Audit Committee
has also reviewed and discussed the Company‘s compliance with Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of
2002.

The Audit Committee has discussed with PwC the matters required to be discussed by Statement on
Auditing Standards No. 61 (Codiﬁcation of Statements on Auditing Standards, AU 380). The Audit Committee
has received the disclosure and letter required by the applicable requirements of the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board regarding the independent accountant's communications with the audit committee concerning
independence, and has discussed PwC’s independence with them.

Based on the review and discussions referred to above, the Audit Committee recommended to the Board of
Directors that the audited ﬁnancial statements be included in the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for
the year ended December 31, 201 l for filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.

Submitted by the following members of the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors:

Noreen Doyle, Chair
Bruce R. Brook
Vincent A. Calarco
Michael S. Hamson
72


Proposal No. 3 — To Approve, on an Advisory Basis,
the Compensation of the Named Executive Officers

In accordance with the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act ( the “Dodd-Frank
Act") enacted in 2010, an advisory vote on the frequency of stockholders votes on executive compensation was
conducted in connection with the 2011 Annual Meeting of Stockholders. The Board recommended, and our
stockholders agreed, that the advisory vote on executive compensation be held on an annual basis. Upon review
of the stockholder voting results concerning that proposal, the Company’s Board of Directors and Compensation
Committee determined that we will hold an annual advisory vote on executive compensation. Accordingly, we
are asking stockholders to approve on an advisory basis, the compensation of our Named Executive Officers as
described in the “Compensation Discussion and Analysis," the compensation tables and related narrative
discussion included in this Proxy Statement. This Proposal No. 3, commonly known as a “Say on Pay" proposal,
gives stockholders the opportunity to approve, reject or abstain from voting with respect to our ﬁscal 2011
executive compensation programs and policies and the compensation paid to the Named Executive Ofﬁcers. This
vote is not intended to address any speciﬁc item of compensation, but rather the overall compensation of our
Named Executive Ofﬁcers as described in this Proxy Statement.

This proposal allows our stockholders to express their opinions regarding the decisions of the Compensation
Committee on the prior year‘s annual compensation to the Named Executive Officers. Because your vote on this
proposal is advisory, it will not be binding on us, the Board or the Compensation Committee. However, your
advisory vote will serve as an additional tool to guide the Board and the Compensation Committee in continuing
to improve the alignment of the Company‘s executive compensation programs with the interests of the Company
and its stockholders, and is consistent with our commitment to high standards of corporate governance.
Proposed Resolution

RESOLVED. that the compensation paid to the Company‘s Named Executive Oﬂicers, as disclosed

pursuant to Item 402 of Regulation S-K of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. including the

“Compensation Discussion and Analysis,” compensation tables and related-narrative discussion in

this 2012 Proxy Statement, is hereby APPROVED.

Approval of this proposal requires the affirmative vote of the holders of a majority of the shares entitled to
vote on, and who vote for and against, the proposal.

Board of Directors Recommendation

THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS RECOMMENDS A VOTE “FOR” THE FOREGOING
RESOLUTION FOR THE REASONS OUTLINED BELOW.

Our executive compensation program is composed of salary. short-term incentives and long-term
incentives and is designed to:

- motivate executives to achieve business goals that drive value for our stockholders:

- provide competitive compensation opportunities to attract and retain highly qualiﬁed executives:

- offer performance-based compensation that emphasizes Newmont’s long-term performance, including

our high safety and social responsibility standards:

- provide a mix of cash and equity compensation based on ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial performance; and

- provide incentives to improve performance without taking excessive risks.

Our compensation program for our Named Executive Ofﬁcers includes the following elements:

- Lang-term equity compensation has mum-year performance-based vesting. Long-term equity
compensation is designed to align the interests of our executive officers with those of our stockholders by
rewarding management for long-term operational, financial and stock price performance — with
performance-leverage stock units, ﬁnancial performance stock bonus awards and stock option awards
vesting over multi-year periods:

7,?


- Total cash compensation is tied to performance. Cash awards for the corporate performance bonus
component are based upon defined performance metrics, including production, costs applicable to sales,
capital expenditures, and resen/es and non-reserve mineralization additions, in order to support annual
operating and financial performance, and cash awards for the strategic objective bonus component are
based upon measures and objectives approved in advance by the Compensation Committee, which are
designed to reward achievement of group and individual strategic objectives in support of both current
initiatives and long-term sustainability and performance of the Company: and

- Excluding base salary, all compensation component: are aI-risk, The Compensation Committee and
management believe that the proportion of at-risk, performance-based compensation should rise as an
employee’s level of responsibility increases, As such, for our executive officers, all compensation
components (excluding base salary) are at-risk, expressed as a percentage of base salary, and designed to
drive performance within the control of management, and/or align management with long-term
performance rather than simply rewarding shorter-term performance and payout periods. We believe that
the mix and structure of compensation strikes the appropriate balance to promote long-term returns
without motivating or rewarding excessive risk taking

For the reason outlined above, we believe that our executive compensation program is well-designed,
appropriately aligns executive pay with Company performance and inoentivizes desirable behavior. Accordingly,
we are asking you to endorse our executive compensation program by voting for the above resolution.

We encourage you to read the “Compensation Discussion and Analysis" for additional details about our
executive compensation programs, including information about the fiscal year 201 l compensation of our Named
Executive Officers.

Other Matters

The Board of Directors does not intend to bring other matters before the Company‘s Annual Meeting of
Stockholders, except items incident to the conduct of the meeting. However, on all matters properly brought
before the meeting by the Board of Directors or by others, the persons named as proxies in the accompanying
proxy, or their substitutes, will vote in accordance with their best judgment. Additional information about
Newmont, including its Annual Report on Form lO-K, is available through the Company's web site, at
www.newmont.com.

74


YOUR VOTE IS IMPORTANT. PLEASE VOTE TODAY.
We encourage you to take advantage of Internet or telephone voting.
Both are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
Internet and telephone voting is available through 11:59 PM Eastern Time the day prior to annual meeting day,
INTERNET
http://www.proxyvoting.conI/nenl
Use the Internet to vote your proxy Have your proxy cord in hand when you
access the web site
- ~ - 0R
Newmont MInIng Corporation
TELEPHONE
1-866-540-5760
Use any Iouchrlone telephone to vote your proxy Hove your proxy card in
hand when you call
If you vote your proxy by Internet or by telephone. you do NOT need to mail
back your proxy card.
To vote by n1a||.nmrk.sign and date your proxy cord and return it in the
enclosed poslage<paid envelope.
Your Internet or telephone vote authorizes the named proxies to vote your
shares In the same manner as if you marked, signed and returned your
proxy card.
WO# Fulﬁllment}!
19201 19211
V FOLD AND DETACI'I HERE V
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS' RECOMMENDS A VOTE “FOR” ITEMS 1,2 and 3.
| ELECTION OF DIRECTORS
FOR WITHHOLD ABSTAIN FOR WITHHOLD ABSTAIN
l,l BR Bmok El El I: Home Roth El E1 E1
The undersigned hereby authorizes the
L2 VAccalmo E! E! D I II SR Thompson E D D proxies. in their discretion, to vote on
L: IA Canabba I: I: I: FDR AGAINST ABSTAIN “"y °"‘°' Wm“ WM" my WWI)“
be brought before the meeting or any
M N, Doyle I: I: I: Item 2 Ratrry Appointment I: I: I: “dl°"""“°"‘ "mm
0' lqdevendem By execution of the Proxy. the
Auditors tor zolz undersigned hereby authorizes such
'5 V»M»Hal;en D D D proxies or their substitutes to vote in
, their discretion on such other business
to M s, Hanison El El I: Item 3 Advlsory kesolntion El E1 El a: my mely mm more we Annual
to Approve Named Mm"
Executive Officel 9‘
Compensanon» Proxies can only be given by Newmont
| 7 1- Nelson D D D Mining common stockholders of record
on the Reeord Date Please Sign your
18 KT o‘lar-ien El El El Ityou plnn tonttend the name below exactly as it appears on
meeting. pleose mork this El your stock certrtlcotetsl on the Record
box Date or on the label affixed hereto
I: When the shores ot Newmont Mining
' 9 J B mm“ D B Common stock are held of record by
10”“ tenants. both should sign. When
signing as ottorney. executor.
administrator. tmstee or guardian, please
give full title as such. It a corporation.
please Sign in trill corpomte name by
president or authorized otricer. It a
pannership, please sign in partnership
home by authorized person


The undersigned acknowledges receip‘
0! me Nouoe of Annual Meeung of
Slockholdcrs and me Proxy Sumnan
Hesse mark your \ZI
votes as Indicated
m Ihlsexnmple
NoTE- Please sign as name appems hereon Joim owners should eaen sign. wnen signing as anorney, exeemonadminasmmr,
Iruﬂee o. guardian Please give full mle as such.
Signature Name/1' ille Dale


YOUR VOTE IS IMPORTANT!
You can vote in one of three ways:
1. Mark, sign and date your proxy card and return it promptly in the enclosed envelope.
or
2, Call toll free 1-866-540-5760 on a touch tone telephone and follow the instructions on the reverse side. There is NO
CHARGE to you for this call.
or
3, Vote by Internet at our Internet Address: http://www. Iroxyvotingxom/nem
PLEASE VOTE

Choose MLinkSM for fast, easy and secure 24/7 online access to your

future proxy materials, investment plan statements, tax documents and

more. Simply log on to Investor ServiceDirect® at

www buyme on ggmbhgrggwueﬁeg 'txagcejs where step-by-step

instructions will 1mm it on throu Ih enrollment.
Important notice regarding the Internet availability of proxy materials for the Annual Meeting of shareholders, The
Proxy Statement and the 201 1 Annual Report to Shareholders are available at: http://www.proxyvoting.conI/nem

V FOLD AND DETACH HERE V
PROXY
NEWMONT MINING CORPORATION
PROXY FOR ANNUAL MEETING OF STOCKHOLDERS APRIL 24, 2012
THIS PROXY IS SOLICITED BY THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF NEWMONT MINING CORPORATION

The undersigned, a holder of record shares of common stock, par value $1.60 per share of Newmont Mining Corporation at the
close of business on February 24, 2012 (the “Record Date”), hereby appoints Russell Ball. Stephen P. Gottesfeld and Logan H.
Hennessey, and each or any of them, the proxy or proxies of the undersigned, with full power of substitution and revocation, to
represent the undersigned and to vote all shares of the common stock of Newmont Mining Corporation that the undersigned is entitled
to vote at the Annual Meeting of Stockholders of the Corporation to be held at 1 1:00 am. local time on Tuesday, April 24, 2012 at the
Hotel du Pont, 1 1th and Market Streets, Wilmington, Delaware USA, and any adjournmean thereof, upon the matters listed on the
reverse side hereof. The proxies appointed hereby may act by a majority of said proxies present at the meeting (or if only one is
present, by that one).

YOU ARE ENCOURAGED TO SPECIFY YOUR CHOICES BY MARKING THE APPROPRIATE BOX, SEE REVERSE
SIDE, BUT YOU NEED NOT MARK ANY BOX IF YOU WISH TO VOTE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE BOARD OF
DIRECTORS RECOMMENDATION. THE PROXIES CANNOT VOTE YOUR SHARES UNLESS YOU VOTE ONE OF THE
THREE WAYS DESCRIBED BELOW.

Address Change/Comments
ark the corres ndin box on the reverse side
— SHAREOWNER SERVICES
P 0 BOX 1550
SOUTH HACKENSACK, NJ 07606-9250
(Continued and to be signed on reverse side) W0” Fulﬁllmeml’
|920| 192| I


VOTING INSTRUCTION FORM
DIRECTION GIVEN BY REGISTERED HOLDERS OF
EXCHANGEABLE SHARES 0F NEWMONT MINING CORPORATION
OF CANADA LIMITED FOR THE APRIL 24, 2012 ANNUAL
MEETING OF STOCKHOLDERS 0F NEWMONT MINING CORPORATION
The undersigned having read the Notice of Annual Meeting (the "Annual Meeting") of stockholders of Newmont Mining
Corporation (the “Company”) to be held at the Hotel du Pont, 1 1m and Market Streets, Wilmington Delaware, USA, on Tuesday,
April 24, 2012, at 1 1:00 am. local time, the Proxy Statement, and the accompanying Notice to Exchangeable Shareholders receipt of
each of which is hereby acknowledged, does hereby instruct and direct Computershare Trust Company of Canada (the “Trustee”),
pursuant to the provisions of the Voting and Exchange Trust Agreement (the “Agreement") dated as of December 15, 201 1, among
the Company, Newmont Mining Corporation of Canada Limited and the Trustee, as follows:
PLEASE NOTE: IF NO DIRECTION IS MADE AND YOU SIGN BELOW, THE TRUSTEE IS HEREBY AUTHORIZED
AND DIRECTED TO VOTE “FOR” ITEMS 1. 2 AND 3 BELOW, AND. AS TO ANY OTHER MATTERS THAT MAY
PROPERLY COME BEFORE THE ANNUAL MEETING. TO VOTE IN ITS DISCRETION.
(Plse select one of A, B or C)
A. U Exercise or cause to be exercised, whether by proxy given by the Trustee to a representative of the Company or otherwise,
the undersigned‘s voting rights at the Annual Meeting, or any postponement or adjournment thereof, as follows:
(Please complete the following only if you have selected Alternative A)
1. Election of Directors.
ﬂ WITHHoLD ABSTAIN
1.1 BR. Brook El El El
1.2 V.A. Calarco U U U
1.3 J.A. Carrabba El El CI
1.4 N. Doyle El El CI
1.5 V.M, Hagen El El El
1.6 M.S. Hamson U U U
1.7 J. Nelson El El El
1.8 R.T. O‘Brien El El El
1.9 LB. Prescott El El Cl
1.10 D.C. Roth El El El
1.11 S.R. Thompson El El El
2. Ratify appointment of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as the Company’s independent auditors for 2012.
m AGAINST ABSTAIN
El El El
3. Advisory Resolution to Approve Named Executive Ofﬁcer Compensation.
m AGAINST ABSTAIN
El El El
1


4. To vote. in its discretion, on any other business which may properly be brought before the meeting or any adjournment
thereof.
FEE mm
El El
(If yau have selected Alternative A, please g0 directly In the signature page)

B. D Deliver a proxy card to the undersigned at the Annual Meeting with respect to all the undersigned’s voting rights held by the
undersigned on the record date for the Annual Meeting so that the undersigned may exercise personally the undersigned’s
voting rights at the Annual Meeting or any postponement or adjournment thereof.

(If yau have selected Alternative B, please g0 directly In the signature page)

C. El Deliveraproxy card to at the Annual Meeting with
respect to all the undersigned’s voting rights held by the undersigned on the record date for the Annual Meeting with all the
powers that the undersigned would possess if personally present and acting thereat including the power to exercise the
undersigned’s voting rights at the Annual Meeting or any postponement or adjournment thereof.

Executed on the _ day of , 2012.

Name:
Print Name:

NOTES:

(1) A shareholder has the right to appoint a person to represent him/her at the Annual Meeting in the proxy card delivered under
Alternative C by inserting in the space provided the name of the person the shareholder wishes to appoint. Such person need not
be a shareholder.

(2) To be valid, this Voting Instruction Form must be signed and deposited with Computershare Trust Company of Canada, 100
University Avenue, 9th Floor, Toronto, Ontario MSJ 2Y1 in the enclosed return envelope or by fax to (416) 263-9524 prior to
5:00 pm. Toronto time, on April 23. 2012 or, if the Annual Meeting is adjourned, 48 hours (excluding Saturdays and holidays)
before any adjourned Annual Meeting.

(3) If an individual, please sign exactly as your Exchangeable Shares are registered.

(4) If the shareholder is a corporation, this Voting Instruction Form must be executed by a duly authorized officer or attorney of the
shareholder and. if the corporation has a corporate seal, its corporate seal should be affixed.

(5) If Exchangeable Shares are registered in the name of an executor, administrator or trustee, please sign exactly as the
Exchangeable Shares are registered. If the Exchangeable Shares are registered in the name of the deceased or other shareholder.
the shareholder’s name must be printed in the space provided. This Voting Instruction Form must be signed by the legal
representative with his/her name printed below his/her signature and evidence of authority to sign on behalf of the shareholder
must be attached to this Voting Instruction Form.

(6) In many cases, Exchangeable Shares beneﬁcially owned by a holder (a “Non-Registered Holder") are registered in the name of a
securities dealer or broker or other intermediary. or a clearing agency. Non-Registered Holders should. in particular. review the
section entitled “Non-Registered Holders" in the accompanying Notice to Exchangeable Shareholders and carefully follow the
instructions of their intermediaries.

(7) Ifa share is held by two or more persons, each should sign this Voting Instruction Form.

(8) If this Voting Instruction Form is not dated in the space provided, it is deemed to bear the date on which it is mailed to the
shareholder.

2


NEWMONT MINING CORPORATION
Notice to Exchangeable Shareholders

Our records show that you hold Exchangeable Shares of Newmont Mining Corporation of Canada Limited (“Newmont Canada"), a

Canadian company. The Exchangeable Shares provide you with economic and voting rights that are, as nearly as practicable,

equivalent to those of holders of shares of common stock of Newmont Mining Corporation (the “Company"), the US. parent of

Newmont Canada, including the right to attend and vote at meetings of the common stockholders of the Company. The Company will

be holding an annual meeting (the “Annual Meeting”) of its common stockholders on April 24, 2012 to

- Elect directors:

‘ Ratify the Audit Committee‘s appointment of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as Newmont‘s independent auditors for 2012:

- Approve named executive ofﬁcer compensation; and

- Transact such other business that may properly come before the meeting.

At such Annual Meeting you will have voting rights, based on the number of Exchangeable Shares you hold. You are permitted to

instruct Computershare Trust Company of Canada, the Trustee under a Voting and Exchange Trust Agreement as to how the Trustee

is to vote your Exchangeable Shares at the Annual Meeting of the Company. If you do not give voting instructions, the Trustee will
not be entitled to exercise the voting rights attached to your Exchangeable Shares. Alternatively, you may instruct the Trustee to give
you or a person designated by you a proxy to exercise personally the voting rights attached to your Exchangeable Shares. To instruct
the Trustee as to how you wish to exercise your voting rights, you must complete, sign, date and return the enclosed Voting

Instruction Form to the Trustee by 5:00 pm, Toronto time, on April 23, 2012. The Trustee will not be obligated to act on any

instructions received after that time.

You have the right to revoke any instructions to the Trustee by giving written notice of revocation to the Trustee or by executing and

delivering to the Trustee a later-dated Voting Instruction Form. No notice of revocation or later-dated Voting Instruction Form,

however, will be effective unless received by the Trustee prior to 5:00 pm, Toronto time, on April 23, 2012.

Whether or not you plan to attend the Annual Meetingv Please sign, date and return the Voting Instruction Form in the envelope

provided in order to ensure that your Exchangeable Shares will be represented at the Annual Meeting.

Non-Regimred Holders

Only registered holders of Exchangeable Shares of Newmont Canada are permitted to instruct the Trustee as to how to vote their

Exchangeable Shares at the Annual Meeting or to attend and vote at the Annual Meeting in person or by proxy as described above.

You may be a beneﬁcial owner of Exchangeable Shares (a “Non-Registered Holder") if your Exchangeable Shares are registered

either:

(i) in the name of an intermediary (an "Intermediary”) with whom you deal in respect of the Exchangeable Shares, such as, among
others, banks, trust companies, securities dealers or brokers and trustees or administrators of self-administered RRSPs, RRIFSV
RESPs and similar plans; or

(ii) in the name of a clearing agency (such as The Canadian Depository for Securities Limited) of which the Intennediaiy is a
participant.

Newmont Canada has distributed copies of the Notice of Meeting, the Proxy Statement and this Notice to Exchangeable Shareholders

(collectively. the “meeting materials") to Intermediaries who are required to forward these meeting materials to Non-Registered

Holders unless a Non-Registered Holder has waived the right to receive them. If you are a Non-Registered Holder who has not

waived the right to receive meeting materials you will be given either:

(i) a voting instruction form, which has already been signed by the Intermediary (typically by a facsimile, stamped signature) which
specifies the number of Exchangeable Shares beneficially owned by you but which

3


is otherwise uncompleted. This voting instruction form need not be signed by you. In this case, if you wish to direct the voting
of the Exchangeable Shares held by you or attend and vote at the Annual Meeting (or have another person attend and vote on
your behalf) you should properly complete the voting instruction form and deposit it with Computershare Trust Company of
Canada, 100 University Avenue, 9th Floor, Toronto, Ontario M5] 2Y1 or by fax to (416) 263-9524 prior to 5:00 pm, Toronto
time, on April 23, 2012: or
(ii) a voting instruction form, which must be completed and signed by you in accordance with the directions on the voting
instruction form (which may in some cases permit the completion of the voting instruction form by telephone).
The purpose of these procedures is to permit yOU, as a Non-Registered Holder, to direct the voting of the Exchangeable Shares you
beneficially own or to attend and vote at the Annual Meeting, in person or by proxy. A Non-Registered Holder generally may revoke
a voting instruction form given to an Intermediary by providing written notice to the Intermediary in a reasonable time period prior to
the Annual Meeting. Non-Registered Holders should carefully follow the instructions of their Intermediaries and their service
companies and contact their Intermediaries promptly if they need assistance
Infvrmatian Relating t0 Newmvnt Mining Carparaﬁvn
Exchangeable Shares are exchangeable on a one-for—one basis for shares of common stock of the Company and you, as a holder of
Exchangeable Shares, are entitled to receive dividends from the Company payable at the same time as and equivalent to, on a per-
share basis, any dividends paid by the Company to holders of its shares of common stock. As a result of the economic equivalency
and voting rights between the Exchangeable Shares and shares of common stock of the Company you, as a holder of Exchangeable
Shares, will have a participating interest determined by reference to the Company and not Newmont Canadat Accordingly, it is
information related to the Company that is relevant to you and enclosed in this package is the Company’s Proxy Statement which we
urge you to read carefully.
4

