
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED 
ABN 54 072 350 817
ANNUAL REPORT  
For the year ended 30 June 2015
CONTENTS
CORPORATE INFORMATION 
DIRECTORS’ REPORT 
AUDITOR’S INDEPENDENCE DECLARATION 
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT 
STATEMENT OF PROFIT OR LOSS AND OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME 
STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION 
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS 
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY 
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
DIRECTORS’ DECLARATION 
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF MUI CORPORATION LIMITED 
ASX ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Page
3 
4 
10 
11 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
35 
36 
39
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
2                                                                           ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
CORPORATE INFORMATION
DIRECTORS 
Mr J Bell (Chairman) 
Mr P Silva 
Mr D Martino 
 
COMPANY SECRETARY 
Ms L Martino
REGISTERED OFFICE 
Level 5, 56 Pitt Street 
Sydney NSW 2000 
Ph: (02) 8823 3179 
 
PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS 
Level 5, 56 Pitt Street 
Sydney NSW 2000 
Ph: (02) 8823 3179 
 
AUDITORS 
William Buck  
Level 20, 181 William Street 
Melbourne VIC 3000 
Ph: (03) 9824 8555 
 
LAWYERS 
ClarkeKann Lawyers 
Level 4, 9 Castlereagh Street 
Sydney NSW 2000’ 
 
BANKERS 
Commonwealth Bank of Australia 
10 Bridge Street 
Sydney NSW 2000 
 
SHARE REGISTRY 
Computershare Registry Services Pty Limited  
Level 5 
115 Grenfell Street 
Adelaide SA 5000 
Ph: 1300 787 272 
 
INTERNET ADDRESS 
www.mui.net.au 
 
ASX CODE 
Shares: MUI 
 
COUNTRY OF INCORPORATION AND DOMICILE 
Australia
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
3	  	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
DIRECTORS’ REPORT  
 
Your directors submit the financial report of MUI Corporation Limited (“the Company”) for the year ended 30 June 2015.  In 
order to comply with the provisions of the Corporations Act, the directors report as follows:
Directors  
The names of the Company’s directors in office during the year and until the date of this report are as follows. Directors 
were in office for the entire period unless otherwise stated:
Mr John Bell 
Mr Philip Silva  
Mr Domenic Martino
The details of directors and company secretary who held office as at the date of this report are as follows.
Names, Qualifications and Experience
John Bell (Chairman, Non-Executive Director)  
Mr Bell graduated from the University of Aston with a B.Sc. (Hons) in Administrative Science, is a Fellow of the Chartered 
Institute of Management Accountants (UK), a Chartered Global Management Accountant and a Fellow of CPA Australia. 
Mr Bell brings extensive experience in strategic, financial and commercial management and governance to the Company.  
He has had experience as Chairman, CEO, COO, CFO, Director and Company Secretary of a number of ASX listed and 
venture capital backed companies and specialises in rebuilding value in organisations.  He also has extensive experience 
with multinational companies in the media and entertainment, cable manufacturing, engineering and industrial products 
industries and has worked in Europe, North and South America, Africa and Asia Pacific.  His industry experience covers a 
wide range including mining exploration, mining services, investment banking, entertainment, technology, medical devices 
and renewable energy. 
During the past three years Mr Bell held no other directorships in ASX listed companies.
Phil Silva (Non-Executive Director)  
Mr Silva is a partner of Creative Resources & Distribution and an associate with the Institute of Independent Business (IIB) 
specialising in management consulting across a range of companies and sectors locally and internationally. 
Mr Silva has developed deep knowledge in the IT, telecoms, contact centre and interactive media industries.  He has held 
a number of positions as a Managing Director, Director and Vice President for a number of local private and international 
public companies. 
His primary focus is generating profitable sales returns for his clients both locally and internationally. 
During the past three years Mr Silva held no other directorships in ASX listed companies.
Domenic Martino (Non-Executive Director)  
Mr Martino is a Chartered Accountant and an experienced director of ASX listed companies. Previously CEO of Deloitte 
Touch Tohmatsu in Australia, he has significant experience in the development of "micro-cap" companies. 
Mr  Martino  is  a  key  player  in  the  re-birth  of  a  broad  grouping  of  ASX  companies  including  Cokal  Limited,  Pan  Asia 
Corporation Limited, Clean Global Energy Limited (renamed Citation Resources Ltd) and NuEnergy Capital Limited. He 
has a strong reputation in China, with a lengthy track record of operating in Papua New Guinea (PNG) and Indonesia, 
where he has successfully closed key energy and resources deals with local players. He has a proven track record in 
capital raisings across a range of markets. 
Mr Martino was a recipient of the Centenary Medal 2003 for his service to Australian society through business and the 
arts. 
During the past three years Mr Martino held the following directorships in other ASX listed companies: 
Australasian  Resources  Ltd  (27  November  2003-Current),  Cokal  Ltd  (24  December  2010-Current),  South  Pacific 
Resources  Ltd  (3  August  2012-Current),  ORH  Limited  (6  May  2009-Current),  Pan  Asia  Corporation  Ltd  (24 December 
2010-Current), Synergy Plus Ltd (7 July 2006-Current) and Citation Resources Ltd (9 October 2009-13 December 2012).
Louisa Martino (Company Secretary) 
Ms Martino provides company secretarial and accounting services through Transaction Services Pty Ltd.  Prior to this she 
was the Chief Financial Officer of a private company during its stage of seeking investor financing.  
Ms Martino previously worked for a corporate finance company, assisting with company compliance (ASIC and ASX) and 
capital  raisings.  She  also  has  experience  working  for  a  government  organisation  in  its  Business  Development  division 
where  she  performed  reviews  of  business  opportunities  and  prepared  business  case  documents  seeking  Government 
funding.   
Ms Martino previously worked for a major accounting firm in Perth, London and Sydney where she provided corporate 
advisory  services,  predominantly  on  IPOs  and  mergers  and  acquisitions  and  also  performed  due  diligence  reviews. 
She has a Bachelor of Commerce from the University of Western Australia, is a member of Chartered Accountants 
Institute  of  Australasia  (FINSIA). 
Australia  and  New  Zealand  and  a  member  of
the  Financial  Services
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
4	  	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
DIRECTORS’ REPORT (continued)  
Interest in the Shares and Options of the Company  
As at the date of this report, directors had nil interests in the shares and options of the Company.  
 
Dividends  
No dividends have been paid or declared since the start of the period and the directors do not recommend the payment of a 
dividend in respect of the period.
Principal Activities  
The principal activity of the Company during the financial year was the licensing of copyright for feature films. There have 
been no other significant changes in the nature of those activities during the year.
Review of Operations  
On 14 March 2014, the Company entered in to a Put and Call Option Deed with AusAsia on the following terms: 
•
AusAsia Energy Pty Ltd (“AusAsia”) grants a call option to MUI to purchase the shares of its wholly owned subsidiary, 
JEMS  Exploration  Pty  Ltd  (“Shares”),  which  holds  the  Grey  Ranges  and  Laura  Basin  exploration  tenements  (“Call 
Option”) as follows:
  Queensland Exploration Permit for Coal EPC 2510 – Grey Ranges; 
  Queensland Exploration Permit for Coal EPC 2544 – Grey Ranges; 
  Queensland Exploration Permit for Coal EPC 2557 – Grey Ranges; and 
  Queensland Exploration Permit for Coal EPC 2755 – Laura Basin;
•  MUI grants to AusAsia a put option to require MUI to purchase the Shares, which can only be exercised if MUI does
not exercise the Call Option, on terms and conditions contained in the Share Purchase Agreement (“Put Option”); 
The expiry date of the Put and Call Options is 15 December 2014 (since extended to 15 December 2015); 
The conditions to be met prior to exercising the options are as follows:
• 
•
o  MUI obtaining all shareholder approvals necessary; 
o  Compliance with Chapters 1 and 2 of the ASX Listing Rules as a result of the application of Listing Rule 11; 
o 
o  MUI being satisfied with its due diligence investigations in respect of JEMS and the tenements.
JEMS remaining the holder of the tenements, and all such tenements remaining in good standing; and
Whilst the Company continued to review its film library assets, it also reviewed its options to develop the coal tenements 
held by JEMS (over which MUI holds a call option to purchase) and, given the sustained depressed market conditions for 
coal and their effect particularly on the junior coal sector, MUI has explored a number of alternatives to maximise the value 
of the call option. 
 
MUI has since agreed binding terms with AusAsia to relinquish MUI’s call option to purchase JEMS and for the repayment 
of MUI’s loan to AusAsia as follows:
1.  AusAsia will pay MUI:
a.  An initial cash payment of $1,200,000; and  
b.  $4,800,000 in cash by 15 December 2015.
2.  MUI will release its security upon receipt of the last of the above payments. 
3.  The Loan Facility Agreement with AusAsia extends to 15 December 2015; 
4.  Should  the  transaction  not  complete  by  15  December  2015  with  the  payment  of  $4,800,000  (assuming  the 
$1,200,000  has  been  paid),  AusAsia  will  relinquish  30%  of  the  shares  of  JEMS  to  a  third  party  nominated  by 
AusAsia  and  MUI  will  retain  its  option  to  acquire  70%  of  the  shares  of  JEMS.    In  this  event  the  security  as 
mentioned  above  will  continue  (except  to  the  extent  of  the  30%  of  shares  in  JEMS  is  transferred  to  the  party 
nominated by AusAsia).
To date the Company has received $160,000 of the above consideration as repayment of the AusAsia loan.  
 
AusAsia has not made any further payment of instalments and consequently the Directors believe that it is prudent for the 
Company to fully provide for the loan in the financial statements.  The Directors are currently working towards finalising 
discussions  concerning  an  achievable  payment  plan  with  AusAsia.    MUI  is  also  reviewing  its  options  in  respect  of  the 
security  and  guarantee  held  in  respect  of  the  loan.    In  addition,  the  Company  is  reviewing  a  number  of  proposals  for 
potential projects that may be undertaken by MUI.
Financial Position  
The  net  assets  of  the  Company  have  decreased  by  $3,908,328  from  30  June  2014  to  net  liabilities  of  $802,505  as  at 
30 June 2015.
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
5	  	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
DIRECTORS’ REPORT (continued)  
Operating Results for the Period  
The statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income shows a net loss attributable to members of $3,908,328 
(2014: loss $518,858).
Significant Changes in State of Affairs  
There were no significant changes in the state of affairs of the Company during the financial year.
Significant Events after the Reporting Date  
There are no significant events after balance date.
Likely Developments and Future Results  
With the completion of the transaction noted above with AusAsia, MUI will assess further opportunities for the Company.   
The  Company  continues  to  explore  opportunities  for  its  film  library,  with  discussions  taking  place  with  parties  who  can 
develop its potential for digital platforms, with a view to generating value from the asset.
Environmental Regulation and Performance  
The Company was not subject to any environmental regulations or licences during the financial year.
Indemnification and Insurance of Officers and Auditors  
During the year, the Company paid a premium in respect of a contract insuring the directors of the Company (as named 
above), the company secretary, Ms L Martino and any related body corporate against a liability incurred as such against a 
director or secretary to the extent permitted by the Corporations Act 2001.  The contract of insurance prohibits disclosure of 
the nature of the liability and the amount of the premium.  
The Company has not otherwise, during or since the end of the reporting period, except to the extent permitted by law, 
indemnified or agreed to indemnify an officer or auditor of the Company or of any related body corporate against a liability 
incurred as such an officer or auditor.
Proceedings on behalf of the Company  
No person has applied for leave of Court to bring proceedings on behalf of the Company or intervene in any proceedings to 
which the Company is a party for the purpose of taking responsibility on behalf of the Company for all or any part of those 
proceedings.  
The Company was not a party to any such proceedings during the year.
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
6	  	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
DIRECTORS’ REPORT (continued)  
 
 
REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited)  
This  report  outlines  the  remuneration  arrangements  in  place  for  the  directors  and  executives  of  the  Company.  The 
following persons acted as directors during or since the end of the financial year:  
Mr J Bell 
Mr P Silva 
Mr D Martino 
 
The previous remuneration report was passed at the Company’s 2014 Annual General Meeting held on 24 November 
2014. There were no comments provided by shareholders in respect of the previous remuneration report.
Director (non-executive)  
Director (non-executive)  
Director (non-executive)
Remuneration Philosophy  
The performance of the Company depends upon the quality of the directors and executives.  The philosophy of the 
Company in determining remuneration levels is to:  
•
set competitive remuneration packages to attract and retain high calibre employees; 
 
link executive rewards to shareholder value creation; and
establish appropriate, demanding performance hurdles for variable executive remuneration.
• 
 
• 
The Board of Directors of the Company is responsible for determining and reviewing compensation arrangements for the 
directors.  
The  Board  of  Directors  assesses  the  appropriateness  of  the  nature  and  amount  of  remuneration  of  directors  on  a 
periodic  basis  by  reference  to  relevant  employment  market  conditions  with  an  overall  objective  of  ensuring  maximum 
stakeholder benefit from the retention of a high quality Board and executive team.  A remuneration consultant has not 
been engaged by the Company to provide recommendations in respect of remuneration, given the size of the entity and its 
structure.
Non-executive Director Remuneration  
The Board seeks to set aggregate remuneration at a level that provides the Company with the ability to attract and 
retain directors of the highest calibre, whilst incurring a cost that is acceptable to shareholders.  
 
The ASX Listing Rules specify that the aggregate remuneration of non-executive directors shall be determined from 
time to time by a general meeting. The last determination was at the Annual General Meeting held on 8 December 
2009 when shareholders approved an aggregate remuneration of $300,000 per year.  
 
The  amount  of  aggregate  remuneration  sought  to  be  approved  by  shareholders  and  the  manner  in  which  it  is 
apportioned amongst directors is reviewed periodically.  The Board considers fees paid to non-executive directors of 
comparable companies when undertaking the annual review process.  
 
The remuneration of non-executive directors for the period ended 30 June 2015 is detailed in the ensuing pages.
Executive Remuneration 
Remuneration of the executive directors is based on fees approved by the Board of Directors and is set at levels to reflect 
market conditions and encourage the continued services of the director. 
 
The remuneration of the executive directors for the period ended 30 June 2015 is detailed in the ensuing pages.  
 
There were no employment contracts in place during the financial year.
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
7	  	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
DIRECTORS’ REPORT (continued)  
 
Remuneration of Directors  
Directors’ remuneration for the year ended 30 June:
J Bell  
 
P Silva  
 
D Martino – appointed 19 Dec 2013 
 
M Zeltzer – resigned 19 Dec 2013 
 
Total
2015 
2014 
2015 
2014 
2015 
2014 
2015 
2014 
2015 
2014
Salary & Fees
36,000 
48,000 
36,000 
36,000 
36,000 
18,000
-
36,000 
108,000 
138,000
Total 
36,000 
48,000 
36,000 
36,000 
36,000 
18,000
-
36,000 
108,000 
138,000
Directors’ interest in the Shares and Options of the Company  
Shares held in the Company  
Nil shares were held by directors in the Company during the 2015 financial year (2014: Nil). 
 
Options held in the Company (number)
Balance at
beginning of year
Options expired
Balance at 30
June 2015
-
-
- 
- 
- 
-
July 2014
40,000,000
40,000,000
30,000,000 
10,000,000
30,000,000 
10,000,000
J Bell 
P Silva 
D Martino 
Total 
 
 
Other transactions with directors 
Below are transactions carried out between the Company and related parties of directors. 
1)  Mr Martino is a director of AusAsia Energy Pty Ltd (“AusAsia”) and JEMS Exploration Pty Ltd.  As at 30 June 2015, 
AusAsia owed the Company $3,487,171.  The loan is interest free provided full repayment of the funds lent is made 
prior to the expiry date.  Default interest accrues at 12% p.a.; 
Mr  Martino  has  provided  a  personal  guarantee  to  unconditionally  and  irrevocably  guarantee  the  payment  of  loan 
amount and any accrued or capitalised interest. 
MUI  also  currently  holds  a  call  option  to  purchase  100%  of  the  shares  of  JEMS  Exploration  Pty  Ltd  (“JEMS”),  a 
company that owns four Exploration Permits for Coal in Queensland from AusAsia Energy Pty Ltd (“AusAsia”).
2)  Mr Martino’s son is the sole director of Transaction Services Pty Ltd, a company that provides MUI with company 
secretarial, accounting, office rental and secretarial services.  The amount payable to Transaction Services Pty Ltd for  
the financial year totalled $204,956.  As at 30 June 2015, $136,637 was owing to Transaction Services Pty Ltd; and
3)  Mr  Martino’s  son  is  the  sole  director  of  Minimum  Risk  Pty  Ltd,  a  company  that  provides  MUI  with  underwriting 
services.  The latest underwriting agreement was entered in to in September 2013 (prior to Minimum Risk Pty Ltd 
being a related party), entitling Minimum Risk Pty Ltd to an underwriting fee equal to 6% of the amount raised plus 
options.  In January 2014, $500,000 was raised under this underwriting agreement, creating an amount payable to 
Minimum Risk Pty Ltd of $30,000 plus 37,313,433 options (with an exercise price of $0.001 and expiry date 3 years 
from the date of issue).  These options are yet to be issued, but the associated expense of $13,433 has been accrued 
in the accounts.  As at 30 June 2015, a total of $62,816 was owing to Minimum Risk Pty Ltd for underwriting services.
THIS CONCLUDES THE REMUNERATION REPORT WHICH HAS BEEN AUDITED.
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
8	  	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
DIRECTORS’ REPORT (continued)  
Directors’ Meetings  
The number of meetings of directors held during the year and the number of meetings attended by each director were as 
follows:
Director 
Meetings 
Attended
Eligible 
Director 
Meetings
Held
Mr J Bell 
Mr P Silva 
Mr D Martino
4 
4 
4
4 
4 
4
Committee Membership  
As at the date of this report, the Company has no committees.
The  Board’s  view  is  that  the  Company  is  not  at  a  size  that  justifies  having  separate  committees.    However,  matters 
typically dealt with by various committees are dealt with by the Board.  
Corporate Governance  
In  recognising  the  need  for  the  highest  standards  of  corporate  behaviour  and  accountability,  the  directors  of  MUI 
Corporation  Ltd  support  the  principles  of  corporate  governance.  The  Company’s  corporate  governance  statement  is 
contained after this directors’ report.
Options 
At the date of this report, the unissued ordinary shares of MUI Corporation Limited under option are as follows:
Grant Date
2 December 2013
Date of Expiry	  
3 December 2016
Exercise Price
0.1 cents
Number under Option
50,000,000
In  addition  to  the  above  and  as  announced  on  30  September  2013,  the  Company  entered  into  an  underwriting 
agreement whereby 50 million options will be issued to the underwriter on completion of a share placement to take 
place for the issue of 670,000,000 shares to eligible persons at an issue price of 0.1 cents per share raising $670,000 
(before the costs of the issue). The terms of these options will be an expiry date 3 years from issue and an exercise 
price of 0.1 cents.  On 31 January 2014, the underwriter completed the placement of 500,000,000 shares, entitling the 
underwriter to an underwriter fee of $30,000 plus 37,313,433 options.
Option holders do not have any rights to participate in any issues of shares or other interests in the company or any 
other entity.	  
During the year ended 30 June 2015 nil (2014: nil), ordinary shares of the Company were issued on the exercise of 
options granted. No further shares have been issued since year-end. No amounts are unpaid on any of the shares.	  
No person entitled to exercise the option had or has any right by virtue of the option to participate in any share issue of 
any other body corporate.
Auditor Independence  
Section 307C of the Corporations Act 2001 requires our auditors, William Buck, to provide the directors of the Company with 
an Independence Declaration in relation to the audit of the annual report. This Independence Declaration is attached to and 
forms part of this directors’ report for the year ended 30 June 2015.
Non-Audit Services  
The auditors provided no non-audit services during the financial period.  
 
The Directors report, incorporating the Remuneration Report, is signed in accordance with a resolution of the Board 
of Directors.
John Bell  
Chairman 
Dated this 30th day of September 2015
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
9	  	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
' W'll' B k
u I lam III:
AUDITOR'S INDEPENDENCE DECLARATION UNDER SECTION 3070 OF THE
CORPORATIONS ACT 2001 TO THE DIRECTORS OF MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
I declare that, to the best of my knowledge and belief during the year ended 30 June 2015
there have been:
— no contraventions of the auditor independence requirements as set out in the
Corporations Act 2001 in relation to the audit; and
— no contraventions of any applicable code of professional conduct in relation to the
audit
' W5  tam LL .
William Buck Audit (We) Pty Ltd
ABN 59116151136
Jﬁns '
Director
Dated this 30th day of September, 2015
CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
A ADVISORS
Melbourne Ofﬁce
Level 20. 181 William Street
Melbourne VIC 3000
Hawthorn 011199
Level 1. 465 Auburn Road
Hawthom East VIC 3123
PO Box 185, Toorak VIC 3142
Telephone: +61 3 9824 8555
williambuck.com
  a.   Pralgggas
Australlaand NewZealandwuthall-llatedoltlceswmldw-de Llabilltytlmlledhyaschemeappruvedundel M, H W UH W
pmlmmnal Standards Lagnmmamennmmcu mmm.“alnuance.semasllcensees ll m r l ll l l 


CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT  
 
The Board of Directors of MUI Corporation Ltd (the “Company” or “MUI”) is responsible for the corporate governance 
of the Company, having regard to the ASX Corporate Governance Council’s Corporate Governance Principles and 
Recommendations (3rd edition).  The Board guides and monitors the business and affairs of MUI on behalf of the 
shareholders by whom they are elected and to whom they are accountable. 
The Corporate Governance Council’s principles are summarised as follows: 
Principle 1   Lay solid foundations for management and oversight 
Principle 2   Structure the board to add value 
Principle 3   Act ethically and responsibly 
Principle 4   Safeguard integrity in corporate reporting 
Principle 5   Make timely and balanced disclosure 
Principle 6   Respect the rights of security holders 
Principle 7   Recognise and manage risk 
Principle 8   Remunerate fairly and responsibly
This statement outlines the main corporate governance practices in place during the year ended 30 June 2015, which 
comply with the ASX Corporate Governance Council recommendations, except where noted.
This Corporate Governance Statement is current as at 30 September 2015 and has been adopted by the Board.
To  ensure  that  the  Board  is  well  equipped  to  discharge  its  responsibilities,  it  has  established  guidelines  and 
accountability as the basis for the administration of corporate governance.  
Role of the Board 
The key responsibilities of the Board include: 
•
Setting strategic direction of the company, establishment of goals for management and monitoring the achievement 
of these goals, 
Appointing the Chair, 
Appointment  and  removal  of  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  including  determination  of  conditions  of  service  and 
monitoring of performance, 
Ratification  of  the  appointment  and,  if  appropriate  removal  of,  the  Chief  Financial  Officer  (or  equivalent),  the 
Company Secretary and / or other senior executives (if any), 
Approving the entity’s remuneration framework, 
Overseeing management’s implementation of the entity’s strategic objectives and its performance generally, 
Overseeing the integrity of the entity’s accounting and corporate reporting systems, including the external audit, 
Approval  and  monitoring  of  progress  of  operating  budgets,  major  capital  expenditure,  capital  management  and 
acquisitions, 
Setting and reviewing systems of risk management and internal compliance and control, codes of conduct and legal 
compliance including ensuring compliance with continuous disclosure requirements.
• 
•
•
• 
• 
• 
•
•
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
11                                                                           ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT (continued) 
 
Structure of the Board  
Directors of the Company are considered to be independent when they are independent of management and free from any business or 
other relationship that could materially interfere with or could reasonably be perceived to materially interfere with the exercise of their 
unfettered and independent judgment.  
 
Factors  relevant  to  assessing  independence  of  a  director  are  contained  in  box  2.3  of  the  ASX  Corporate  Governance  Council’s 
Corporate Governance Principles and Recommendations (3rd edition).  Generally these are as follows: 
 
Using these factors, generally an independent director is a non-executive director (i.e. is not a member of management) and:
within the last three years has not been employed in an executive capacity by the Company or its subsidiaries, or been a director 
after ceasing to hold any such employment; 
within the last three years is not a principal or employee of a professional adviser to the Company or its subsidiaries; 
within the last three years is not a significant supplier or customer of the Company or its subsidiaries, or an officer of or otherwise 
associated directly or indirectly with a significant supplier or customer. A significant supplier is defined as one whose revenues 
from  the  Company  are  a  material  amount  of  the  supplier's  total  revenue.  A  significant  customer  is  one  whose  amounts 
payable to the Company are a material amount of the customer's total operating costs;  
is not a substantial shareholder of the Company or an officer of, or otherwise associated directly with, a substantial shareholder of 
the Company;
has no material contractual relationship with the Company or its subsidiaries other than as a director of the Company;  
has no close family ties with any person who falls within any of the categories described above; or
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
has not served on the Board for a period which could, or could reasonably be perceived to, materially interfere with the director's 
ability to act in the best interests of the Company; and
Two of the directors of the Company are considered to be independent.  Mr Martino is a director of AusAsia Energy Pty Ltd and Jems 
Exploration Pty Ltd with whom the Company has entered into a material contractual relationship and is therefore not independent.  In 
accordance with director duties and Div 2 of Pt 2D.1, as Mr Martino has a personal interest in certain matters he is excluded from 
attending director meetings about, or voting on, these matters.
There  are  procedures  in  place,  agreed  by  the  Board,  to  enable  the  Directors  in  furtherance  of  their  duties  to  seek  independent 
professional advice at the Company’s expense.
The term in office held by each director is as follows:
Name 
J Bell 
P Silva 
D Martino
Term 
3 years, 7 months 
3 years, 7 months 
1 year, 6 months
When a Board vacancy exists, through whatever cause, or where it is considered that the Board would benefit from the service of 
a new director with particular skills, the Board will document the process behind a recommendation for a candidate or panel of 
candidates with the appropriate expertise.  
 
The  Board  then  appoints  the  most  suitable  candidate  who  must  stand  for  election  at  the  next  general  meeting  of 
shareholders.  
 
Board and Senior Executive Responsibilities 
As the Board acts on behalf of and is accountable to the shareholders, it seeks to identify the expectations of the shareholders, as well 
as other regulatory and ethical expectations and obligations.  In addition, the Board is responsible for identifying areas of significant 
business risk and ensuring arrangements are in place to adequately manage those risks. 
Currently the entire Board acts in a management capacity as there are no senior executives.  Those items discussed below in the 
Board Charter as being dealt with by the Managing Director are currently dealt with by the Board. 
The Company has a board charter that discloses the specific responsibilities of the Board, and those delegated to senior executives. 
The responsibility for the operation and administration of the Company is delegated by the Board to the Managing Director (currently 
the  entire  Board).  The  Board  ensures  that  the  Managing  Director  is  appropriately  qualified  and  experienced  to  discharge  his 
responsibilities,  and  has  in  place  procedures  to  assess  the  performance  for  the  Company’s  officers,  contractors  and  consultants.  
Senior executives are responsible for reporting all matters which fall within the Company’s materiality thresholds at first instance to the 
Managing Director or, if the matter concerns the Managing Director, directly to the Chairman.  If there is no Chairman in place, the 
matter is to be reported to the independent directors.  
 
The Board is responsible for ensuring that management’s objectives and activities are aligned with the expectations and 
risks identified by the Board.  It has a number of mechanisms in place to ensure this is achieved, including the following:
12
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT (continued)
•
•
implementation of operating plans and budgets by management and Board monitoring progress against budget; and 
 
procedures to allow directors, in the furtherance of their duties, to seek independent professional advice at the Company’s 
expense.
Board Skills Matrix 
The Board uses a skills matrix to guide its assessment of the skills and experience of current Directors, and those skills that the Board 
considers will complement the effective functioning of the Board.  Current Directors posses a range of professional skills summarised in 
the following table:
Corporate governance and compliance 
Strategy / business analysis 
Geographic experience – Asia Pacific 
Financially knowledgeable 
M&A experience / equity / capital markets 
Risk management skills / experience 
Other for profit directorship experience
66% 
100% 
100% 
66% 
100% 
66% 
100%
Remuneration and Nomination Committee  
The Board has not established a formal Remuneration and Nomination Committee. The full Board attends to the matters normally 
attended  to  by  a  Remuneration  and  Nomination  Committee.  Remuneration  levels  are  set  by  the  Company  in  accordance  with 
industry standards to attract suitable qualified and experienced Directors.  
 
For  full  discussion  of  the  Company’s  remuneration  philosophy  and  framework  and  the  remuneration  received  by  Directors  and 
executives in the current period please refer to the Remuneration Report, which is contained within the Directors’ Report.  
 
There is no scheme to provide retirement benefits to Non-Executive Directors.  
 
Audit and Risk Management Committee  
The Board has not established an Audit and Risk Management Committee.  The full Board attends to the matters normally attended to 
by such a Committee.
The Board acknowledges that the when the size and nature of the Company warrants an Audit and Risk Management Committee 
that the Committee will operate under a Charter approved by the Board.  It is the Board’s responsibility to ensure that an effective 
internal  control  framework  exists  within  the  Company.    This  includes  internal  controls  to  deal  with  both  the  effectiveness  and 
efficiency  of  significant  business  processes,  the  safeguarding  of  assets,  the  maintenance  of  proper  accounting  records,  and  the 
reliability of financial information as well as non-financial considerations such as the benchmarking of key performance indicators.
The Board will delegate responsibility for establishing and maintaining a framework of internal control and ethical standards to the Audit 
and Risk Management Committee as and when it is formed.
The Company’s Policy is to appoint external auditors who clearly demonstrate independence. The performance of the external 
auditor is reviewed annually by the Board. The Corporations Act provides a policy of rotating the audit partner at least every 5 years.  
 
Risk Management
The  Company  takes  a  proactive  approach  to  Risk  Management.  The  Board  is  responsible  for  ensuring  that  risks,  and  also 
opportunities,  are  identified  on  a  timely  basis  and  that  the  Company’s  objectives  and  activities  are  aligned  with  the  risks  and 
opportunities identified by the Board.
In addition to the fact that the Company is not of a size and nature to warrant a separate committee, the Board believes that it is crucial 
for all Board members to be a part of this process, and as such has not established a separate risk management committee.
The  Board  has  a  number  of  mechanisms  in  place  to  ensure  that  management’s  objectives  and  activities  are  aligned  with  the  risks 
identified by the Board, including implementation of Board approved operating plans and budgets and Board monitoring of progress 
against  these  budgets,  including  the  establishment  and  monitoring  of  performance  indicators  of  both  a  financial  and  non-financial 
nature.
13
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT (continued)
BEST	  PRACTICE	  RECOMMENDATION
Set  out  below  are  the  8  Principles  of  Good  Corporate  Governance  and  Best  Practice  Recommendations  as  outlined  by  the  ASX 
Corporate Governance Council (3rd edition).
Best	  Practice	  Recommendation
Principle	  1:	  Lay	  solid	  foundation	  for	  management	  and	  
oversight	  
	  
1.1  A listed entity should disclose: 
(a) The respective roles and responsibilities of its board and
management; and
(b) Those matters expressly reserved to the board and those
delegated to management
1.2  A listed entity should: 
(a)  Undertake appropriate checks before appointing a person, or 
putting forward to security holders a candidate for election, as 
a director; and
(b)  Provide security holders with all material information in its
possession relevant to a decision on whether or not to elect or 
re-elect a director.
1.3  A listed entity should have a written agreement with each 
director and senior executive setting out the terms of their 
employment.
1.4  The company secretary of a listed entity should be
accountable directly to the board, through the chair; on all 
matters to do with the proper functioning of the board.
1.5  A listed entity should: 
(a)  have a diversity policy which includes requirements for the
board or a relevant committee of the board to set measurable 
objectives for achieving gender diversity and to assess 
annually both the objectives and the entity’s progress in 
achieving them;
(b)  disclose that policy or a summary of it; and 
(c)  disclose as at the end of each reporting period the measurable 
objectives for achieving gender diversity set by the board or a 
relevant committee of the board in accordance with the entity’s 
diversity policy and its progress towards achieving them and 
either: 
(1) the respective proportions of men and women on the 
board, in senior executive positions and across the whole 
organisation (including how the entity has defined “senior 
executive” for these purposes); or 
(2) if the entity is a “relevant employer” under the Workplace 
Gender Equality Act, the entity’s most recent “Gender Equality 
Indicators”, as defined in and published under that Act.
1.6  A listed entity should: 
(a)  have and disclose a process for periodically evaluating the
performance of the board, its committees and individual 
directors; and
(b)  disclose, in relation to each reporting period, whether a
performance evaluation was undertaken in the reporting period 
in accordance with that process.
Action	  Taken
The Company’s corporate governance policies include a board charter 
that discloses the specific responsibilities of the Board, and those 
delegated to senior executives. Currently the responsibility for the 
operations and administration of the Company is with the Board as, 
given the Company’s current position, there is no senior executive / 
separate management team. 
 
 
The Board identifies potential candidates and may take advice from an 
external consultant. Potential new directors are subject to appropriate 
and prudent background and screening checks prior to appointment. 
Board candidates must stand for election at the next general meeting of 
shareholders following such appointment, where information is set out to 
shareholders including; biographical details, other material directorships, 
any material adverse information revealed by checks and details of 
interest, position, association or relationship that might have influence.  
 
 
The Company does not adhere to letters of appointment for directors. 
Their service is on a month to month basis. The performance of all 
senior executives is reviewed annually by the Chairman or independent 
directors which includes measuring actual performance against planned 
performance. There were no senior executives employed by the 
Company during the year.    
 
 
The Company Secretary reports directly to the Board and supports the 
Board by advising on governance matters, monitoring implementation of 
policy and procedures, co-ordinating and timely despatch of Board 
papers and ensuring minutes accurately capture the business conducted 
at Board meetings.  
 
 
 
The Company continues to strive towards achieving objectives 
established towards increasing diversity. It does not propose to establish 
measurable gender diversity objectives in the future as:
•
•
The Company’s Directors and senior executives is a small, 
stable team of experienced personal.  There is no intention to 
make changes in the near future; and 
The Company is committed to making all selection decisions 
on the basis of merit. Setting specific objectives for such a 
small team would potentially influence decision making to the 
detriment of the Company.
At the end of the reporting period (30 June 2015), the Board of Directors 
consisted of three men and the Company Secretary is female. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Evaluations of the Board, committees and individual directors occurred 
during the year. The Company has not disclosed the basis of such 
evaluation processes.  The Board takes ultimate responsibility for these 
matters and does not consider disclosure of performance evaluation 
necessary at this stage.
14
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT (continued)
Best	  Practice	  Recommendation
1.7  A listed entity should: 
(a)  have and disclose a process for periodically evaluating the
performance of its senior executives; and
(b)  disclose, in relation to each reporting period, whether a
performance evaluation was undertaken in the reporting period 
in accordance with that process.
Principle 2:  Structure the Board to add value 
2.1  The board of a listed entity should: 
(a)  have a nomination committee which:
(1)  has at least three members, a majority of whom are
independent directors; and
(2)  is chaired by an independent director,
and disclose:
(3)  the charter of the committee; 
(4)  the members of the committee; and 
(5)  as at the end of each reporting period, the number of times 
the committee met throughout the period and the individual 
attendances of the members at those meetings; OR
(b)  if it does not have a nomination committee, disclose that fact
and the processes it employs to address board succession 
issues and to ensure that the board has the appropriate 
balance of skills, knowledge, experience, independence and 
diversity to enable it to discharge its duties and responsibilities 
effectively.
2.2  A listed entity should have and disclose a board skills matrix
setting out the mix of skills and diversity that the board 
currently has or is looking to achieve in its membership.
2.3  A listed entity should disclose: 
(a)  the names of the directors considered by the board to be
independent directors;
(b)  if a director has an interest, position, association or
relationship of the type described in Box 2.3 but the board is of 
the opinion that it does not compromise the independence of 
the director, the nature of the interest, position, association or 
relationship in question and an explanation of why the board is 
of that opinion; and
(c)  the length of service of each director. 
 
 
2.4  A majority of the board of a listed entity should be
independent directors.
2.5  The chair of the board of a listed entity should be an
independent director and, in particular, should not be the 
same person as the CEO of the entity.
2.6  A listed entity should have a program for inducting new
directors and provide appropriate professional development 
opportunities for directors to develop and maintain the skills 
and knowledge needed to perform their role as directors 
effectively.
Action	  Taken
The Managing Director is responsible for annual evaluations of senior 
executives (if any). There are no senior executives (who are not 
directors) and therefore no evaluations of senior executives took place 
during the year, nor has the Company disclosed the basis of such 
evaluation processes adopted by the Company. The Board takes 
ultimate responsibility for these matters and does not consider disclosure 
of performance evaluation necessary at this stage.
The Company is not of a size that justifies having a separate nomination 
committee.  However, matters typically dealt with by such a committee 
are dealt with by the full Board. 
 
As part of its usual role, the full Board oversees the appointment and 
induction process for directors, and the selection, appointment, 
evaluation and succession planning process of the Company’s directors 
and senior executives.  When a vacancy exists or there is a need for a 
particular skill, the Board determines the selection criteria that will be 
applied.  The Board then identifies suitable candidates, with assistance 
from an external consultant if required, and will interview and assess the 
selected candidates. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Refer “Board Skills Matrix” above. 
 
 
 
 
 
Two of the three Board members are considered independent. Mr Bell 
and Mr Silva. 
 
Mr Bell has been executive director, however it has been in this interim 
whilst the Company looks for potential projects.  This is not considered to 
affect his independence. 
 
 
The length of service of each director is set out above under “Structure 
of the Board”. 
 
 
The majority of the board is independent.  To assist the Directors with 
independent judgement, it is the Board’s policy that if a director 
considers it necessary to obtain independent professional advice to 
properly discharge the responsibility of their office as a director then, 
provided the director first obtains approval from the Chairman or 
independent directors for incurring such expense, the Company will pay 
the reasonable expenses associated with obtaining such advice. 
 
 
The Chairman of the Company is independent. 
 
 
 
The Company has an informal process to educate new directors about 
the nature of the business, current issues, the corporate strategy and the 
expectations of the Company concerning performance of directors. 
Directors also have the opportunity to visit the Company’s areas of 
interest and meet with management to gain a better understanding of 
business operations. Directors are encouraged to undertake continuing 
professional education and, if this involves industry seminars and 
approved education courses, where appropriate, this is paid for by the 
Company.
15
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT (continued)
Best	  Practice	  Recommendation
Action	  Taken
Principle 3: Act Ethically and Responsibly 
3.1  A listed entity should:
have a code of conduct for its directors, senior 
executives and employees; and 
disclose that code or a summary of it.
(a)
(b)
Principle 4: Safeguard integrity in corporate reporting
4.1  The board of a listed entity should: 
(a)  have an audit committee which:
(1)  has at least three members, all of whom are non-executive 
independent
directors  and  a  majority  of  whom  are 
directors; and
(2)  is chaired by an independent director, who is not the chair
of the board,
and disclose: 
(3)  the charter of the committee; 
(4)  the relevant qualifications and experience of the members
of the committee; and
(5)  in  relation  to  each  reporting  period,  the  number  of  times 
the committee met throughout the period and the individual 
attendances of the members at those meetings; OR
(b)  if it does not have an audit committee, disclose that fact and
the processes it employs that independently verify and 
safeguard the integrity of its corporate reporting, including the 
processes for the appointment and removal of the external 
auditor and the rotation of the audit engagement partner
4.2 The board of a listed entity should, before it approves the
entity’s financial statements for a financial period, receive from 
its CEO and CFO a declaration that, in their opinion, the 
financial records of the entity have been properly maintained 
and that the financial statements comply with the appropriate 
accounting standards and give a true and fair view of the 
financial position and performance of the entity and that the 
opinion has been formed on the basis of a sound system of 
risk management and internal control which is operating 
effectively.
4.3 A listed entity that has an AGM should ensure that its external 
auditor attends its AGM and is available to answer questions 
from security holders relevant to the audit.
The Company recognises the need for Directors and employees to 
observe the highest standards of behaviour and business ethics in 
conducting its business activities and intends to maintain a reputation 
of integrity. The Company has subscribed to a general Code of 
Conduct.  The Code of Conduct lists the standards of ethical behaviour 
that are expected to be met by the Directors and employees of the 
Company.  Such persons are also expected to meet the ethical 
standards of any professional bodies they belong to. Any breaches of 
the Code of Conduct are to be reported to the Chairman for notification 
to the Board.  The Board will decide on appropriate disciplinary action 
and may report breaches to the appropriate authorities. 
 
All Directors, managers and employees are required to act honestly, in 
good faith and in the best interests of the Company while exercising 
due care and diligence, recognising and respecting their responsibility 
to shareholders and other stakeholders of the Company.  All Directors, 
managers and employees of the Company are required to act in an 
ethical manner at all times, avoiding conflicts of interest and observing 
the principals of independence in decision-making.
The Board is of the view that given the current size of the Company 
and  the  size  and  composition  of  the  Board,  that  there  would  be  no 
efficiencies  or  other  benefits  gained  by  having  a  separate  audit 
committee.    However,  the  issues  relevant  to  the  integrity  of  the 
Company’s financial reporting typically dealt with by such a committee 
are  dealt  with  by  the  full  Board.    The  Company  has  as  a  standing 
agenda  item  at  each  Board  meeting  to  deal  with  any  audit  related 
matters that would normally be carried out by an audit committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Chairman and Company Secretary/Chief Financial Officer (CFO) 
provide a certification to the Board on the integrity of the Company’s 
external financial reports for the half-year and full year.  The Chairman 
and  CFO  also  provide  assurance  to  the  Board  that  the  declaration 
provided  in  accordance  with  section 295A  of  the  Corporations  Act 
2001 is founded on a sound system of risk management and internal 
control,  and  that  the  system  is  operating  effectively  in  all  material 
respects in relation to financial reporting risks.  In addition reporting of 
the management of the Company’s material business risks, forms part 
of routine management reporting to the Board. 
 
The  Company  receives  assurances  from  the  Chairman  and  CFO  in 
respect  of  the  yearly  and  half-yearly  financial  statements.  Given  the 
volume  of  accounting  transaction  and  the  size  of  the  management 
team, quarterly assurances are not considered necessary. 
 
 
 
The performance of the external auditor is reviewed annually. It is both 
the  Company’s  and  the  auditor’s  policy  to  rotate  audit  engagement 
partners at least every five years.  
 
The external auditor provides an annual declaration of their 
independence to the Board.  The external auditor is requested to 
attend annual general meetings and be available to answer 
shareholder questions about the conduct of the audit and the 
preparation and content of the audit report.
16
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT (continued)
Best	  Practice	  Recommendation
Principle 5: Make timely and balanced disclosure 
5.1 A listed entity should:
(a)
(b)
have a written policy for complying with its continuous 
disclosure obligations under the Listing Rules; and 
disclose that policy or a summary of it.
Principle 6: Respect the rights of security holders 
6.1  A listed entity should provide information about itself and its
governance to investors via its website.
6.2  A listed entity should design and implement an investor
relations program to facilitate effective two-way 
communication with investors.
6.3  A listed entity should disclose the policies and processes it
has in place to facilitate and encourage participation at 
meetings of security holders.
6.4  A listed entity should give security holders the option to
receive communications from, and send communications to, 
the entity and its security registry electronically.
Principle 7: Recognise and manage risk 
7.1  The board of a listed entity should: 
(a)  have a committee or committees to oversee risk, each of
which: 
(1)  has  at  least  three  members,  a  majority  of  whom  are
independent directors; and
(2)  is chaired by an independent director, 
and disclose: 
(3)  the charter of the committee; 
(4)  the members of the committee; and 
(5)  as at the end of each reporting period, the number of times 
the committee met throughout the period and the individual 
attendances of the members at those meetings; OR
(b)  if it does not have a risk committee or committees that satisfy 
(a) above, disclose that fact and the processes it employs for 
overseeing the entity’s risk management framework.
7.2  The board or a committee of the board should: 
(a)  review the entity’s risk management framework at least
annually to satisfy itself that it continues to be sound; and
(b)  disclose, in relation to each reporting period, whether such a
review has taken place.
Action	  Taken
MUI has a formal written policy for the continuous disclosure of any 
price sensitive information concerning the Company.  The Board has 
also adopted a formal written policy covering arrangements to promote 
communications with shareholders and to encourage effective 
participation at general meetings. 
 
The Chairman and the Company Secretary have been nominated as 
the Company’s primary disclosure officers.     
 
MUI is committed to providing shareholders and stakeholders with 
extensive, transparent, accessible and timely communications on the 
Company’s activities, strategy and performance.
The Company does not have a website, given its current position.   
 
 
 
The Company does not currently have an investor relations program, 
however  shareholders  are  able  to  contact  the  company  secretary  or 
board directly should they have any queries / comments.  
 
 
The Board encourages full participation of shareholders at the Annual 
General  Meeting,  to  ensure  a  high  level  of  accountability  and 
identification with the Company’s strategy and goals.  
 
 
The  Company  does  not  currently  have  the  facilities  to  send  and 
receive  correspondence  electronically  with  shareholders. 
  The 
directors  will  review  this  option,  in  light  of  the  cost  associated  with 
maintaining the electronic system for communication
to
identify,  assess,  monitor  and  manage
The  Company  is  not  currently  considered  to  be  of  a  size,  nor  are  its 
affairs of such complexity to justify the establishment of a separate risk 
management  committee.  Instead,  the  Board,  as  part  of  its  usual  role 
and through direct involvement in the management of the Company’s 
operations  ensures  risks  are  identified,  assessed  and  appropriately 
managed.  Where  necessary,  the  Board  draws  on  the  expertise  of 
appropriate external consultants to assist in dealing with or mitigating 
risk.  
 
The  Company  has  in  place  policies  and  procedures,  including  a  risk 
management  framework,  which  is  developed  and  updated  to  help 
manage these risks.  
 
The  Company’s  risk  management  policy  is  designed  to  provide  the 
framework 
the  risks 
associated with the Company’s business. 
 
Main areas of risk include credit risk, fluctuating commodity prices and 
exchange  rate  fluctuation,  political  and  economic  climate,  exploration 
and  development  and  continuous  disclosure  obligations.    Regular 
consideration is given to these matters by the Board. 
 
 
The Company has in place an internal control framework to assist in 
identifying, assessing, monitoring and managing risk.  This framework 
includes quarterly financial reporting, maintenance of and adherence 
to the Company’s continuous disclosure policy and regular informal 
operations reports provided by Directors to the Board. 
 
The Company’s internal control system is monitored by the Board and 
assessed regularly to ensure effectiveness and relevance to the 
Company’s current and future operations. 
 
The Company has a small management team who interact with 
directors on a regular basis and ensures constant communication of 
material business risks.
17
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT (continued)
Best	  Practice	  Recommendation
7.3  A listed entity should disclose: 
 (a) if it has an internal audit function, how the function is
structured and what role it performs; OR
(b)  if it does not have an internal audit function, that fact and the 
processes it employs for evaluating and continually improving 
the effectiveness of its risk management and internal control 
processes.
Action	  Taken
The Company does not have a formally established internal audit 
function. The Board ensures compliance with the internal controls and 
risk management procedures previously mentioned.
7.4  A listed entity should disclose whether it has any material
exposure to economic, environmental and social 
sustainability risks and, if it does, how it manages or intends 
to manage those risks.
Principle 8: Remunerate fairly and responsibly 
8.1  The board of a listed entity should: 
(a)  have a remuneration committee which:
(1)  has  at  least  three  members,  a  majority  of  whom  are
independent directors; and
(2)  is chaired by an independent director, 
and disclose: 
(3)  the charter of the committee; 
(4)  the members of the committee; and 
(5)  as at the end of each reporting period, the number of times 
the committee met throughout the period and the individual 
attendances of the members at those meetings; OR 
if it does not have a remuneration committee, disclose that 
fact and the processes it employs for setting the level and 
composition of remuneration for directors and senior 
executives and ensuring that such remuneration is 
appropriate and not excessive.
(b)
8.2  A listed entity should separately disclose its policies and
practices regarding the remuneration of non-executive 
directors and the remuneration of executive directors and 
other senior executives.
8.3  A listed entity which has an equity-based remuneration
scheme should:
(a)  have a policy on whether participants are permitted to enter 
into transactions (whether through the use of derivatives or 
otherwise) which limit the economic risk of participating in the 
scheme; and
(b)  disclose that policy or a summary of it.
to
interaction  with
the  matters  normally  attended
The Company has an outstanding loan from AusAsia Energy Pty Ltd 
and an option to purchase exploration licences in Qld and, as such, it 
faces  risks  inherent  to  its  business,  including  credit  risk,  economic, 
environmental  and  social  sustainability  risks,  which  may  materially 
impact  the  Company’s  ability  to  create  or  preserve  value  for  security 
holders over the short, medium or long term. 
 
The  Company  views  sustainable  and  responsible  business  practices 
as an important long term driver of performance and shareholder value 
and  is  committed  to  transparency,  fair  dealing,  responsible  treatment 
of  employees  and  partners  and  positive 
the 
community. 
 
 
The Board has not established a formal remuneration committee. The 
full  Board  attends 
to  by  a 
remuneration  committee.    Remuneration  levels  are  set  by  the 
Company  in  accordance  with  industry  standards  to  attract  suitable 
qualified and experienced directors and senior executives. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For  full  discussion  of  the  Company’s  remuneration  philosophy  and 
framework and the remuneration received by directors and executives 
in the current period, please refer to the Remuneration Report, which 
is contained within the Directors’ Report.   
 
Non-executive  Directors  receive  fees  which  are  determined  by  the 
Board within the aggregate limit set by the shareholders at a general 
meeting. 
 
Executive  Directors’  remuneration  is  determined  by  the  Board  with 
reference to current market rates and remuneration paid to executives 
in comparable listed companies determined by the size and nature of 
operations. 
 
Remuneration  for  all  Directors  and  key  management  personnel  has 
been disclosed in the Directors’ Report. 
 
 
There  is  no  formal  equity-based  remuneration  scheme,  however 
shares  and  options  can  be  issued  as  part  remuneration.    Securities 
can  only  be  issued  to  Company  Directors  under  a  resolution  at  a 
general meeting of shareholders. The Directors and senior executives 
who  participate  in  equity-based  remuneration  are  prohibited  from 
entering into transactions or arrangements that limit the economic risk 
of  participating  in  unvested  entitlements  or  entitlements  subject  to  a 
holding lock.
18
STATEMENT OF PROFIT OR LOSS AND OTHER 
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME  
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2015
Notes
2(a) 
2(b) 
7 
 
 
3
4
4
2015 
$
137 
(375,751) 
(3,487,171) 
(45,543) 
(3,908,328) 
- 
(3,908,328) 
 
- 
(3,908,328)
(0.11)
(0.09)
2014 
$
1,288 
(477,968) 
- 
(42,178) 
(518,858) 
- 
(518,858) 
 
- 
(518,858) 
 
(0.02)
(0.01)
Revenue 
Corporate administrative expenses 
Impairment of financial asset 
Finance costs 
Loss before income tax expense 
Income tax expense 
Loss after tax attributable to the company 
Other Comprehensive Income 
Other comprehensive income, net of income tax 
Total comprehensive loss for the year attributable to the company 
 
Basic loss per share (cents per share) 
 
Diluted loss per share (cents per share)
The accompanying notes form part of these financial statements. 
 
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
19                                                                           ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
Notes
5 (a)
6 
7 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
10 
11
2015 
$ 
 
 
 
45,584 
26,833 
20,000 
- 
92,417
- 
- 
92,417 
 
 
278,538 
616,384 
894,922 
894,922 
(802,505)
35,764,430 
31,784 
(36,598,719) 
(802,505)
2014 
$ 
 
 
 
242,810 
22,445 
20,000 
1,040,000 
1,325,255 
 
2,435,062 
2,435,062 
3,760,317 
 
 
83,652 
570,842 
654,494 
654,494 
3,105,823 
 
35,764,430 
52,751 
(32,711,358) 
3,105,823
STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION  
AS AT 30 JUNE 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
ASSETS 
Current Assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Trade and other receivables 
Other current assets 
Financial assets 
Total Current Assets 
Non-Current Assets 
Financial asset 
Total Non-Current Assets 
Total Assets 
LIABILTIES 
Current Liabilities 
Trade and other payables 
Convertible notes 
Total Current Liabilities 
Total Liabilities 
Net Assets 
EQUITY 
Issued capital 
Options reserve 
Accumulated losses 
Total Equity
The accompanying notes form part of these financial statements.
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
20                                                                           ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
Notes
5 (b)
5 (a)
2015 
$ 
 
 
137 
(185,543) 
(185,406) 
 
 
 
(11,820) 
- 
(11,820) 
 
 
 
- 
- 
 
 
(197,226) 
242,810 
45,584
2014 
$ 
 
 
1,288 
(433,261) 
(431,973) 
 
 
 
(120,596) 
160,000 
39,404 
 
 
 
500,000 
500,000 
 
 
107,431 
135,379 
242,810
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash flows from operating activities 
Interest received 
Payments to suppliers and directors 
Net cash flows used in operating activities 
 
 
Cash flows from investing activities 
Loan to AusAsia Energy Pty Ltd 
Repayment of Loan by AusAsia Energy Pty Ltd 
Net cash flows used in investing activities 
 
 
Cash flows from financing activities 
Proceeds from issue of shares and options 
Net cash flows from financing activities 
 
 
Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents 
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 
Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The accompanying notes form part of these financial statements.
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
21                                                                           ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
Issued 
Capital 
$
Options 
Reserve 
$
Accumulated 
Losses 
$
35,307,863 
- 
- 
 
(13,433) 
470,000 
35,764,430
35,764,430 
- 
- 
 
- 
35,764,430
39,318 
- 
- 
 
13,433 
- 
52,751
52,751 
- 
- 
 
(20,967) 
31,784
(32,192,500) 
(518,858) 
(518,858) 
 
- 
- 
(32,711,358)
(32,711,358) 
(3,908,328) 
(3,908,328) 
 
20,967 
(36,598,719)
Total 
Equity 
$
3,154,681 
(518,858) 
(518,858) 
 
- 
470,000 
3,105,823
3,105,823 
(3,908,328) 
(3,908,328) 
 
- 
(802,505)
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2015
Balance at 1 July 2013 
Loss for the year 
Total Comprehensive income/ (loss) for the year 
Transactions with owners in their capacity as owners: 
Options granted to underwriter 
Contribution of equity, net of transaction costs 
At 30 June 2014 
 
 
 
Balance at 1 July 2014 
Loss for the year 
Total Comprehensive loss for the year 
Transactions with owners in their capacity as owners: 
Expiry of Options  
At 30 June 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The accompanying notes form part of these financial statements
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
22                                                                          ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2015 
1.  SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES 
(a) Basis of Preparation 
These  financial  statements  are  general  purpose  financial  statements,  that  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with 
Australian  Accounting  Standards,  Australian  Accounting  Interpretations,  other  authoritative  pronouncements  of  the 
Australian Accounting Standards Board and the Corporations Act 2001. 
The financial statements have also been prepared on an accruals basis and are based on historical costs.  
The financial statements are presented in Australian dollars.  
MUI Corporation Limited (the “Company”) is a for-profit listed Public Company, incorporated in Australia.  
(b)   Statement of Compliance  
The financial report was authorised for issue on the day of the Directors’ Report.  
The financial report complies with Australian Accounting Standards (“AASB’s”). Compliance with AASB’s ensures that 
the  financial  report,  comprising  the  financial  statements  and  notes  thereto,  complies  with  International  Financial 
Reporting Standards (IFRS).  
(c)  Going Concern  
These financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, notwithstanding the fact that for the year ended 
30 June 2015 the company generated a loss after tax of $3,908,328 and incurred net cash outflows from operations of 
$185,406.    As  at  30  June  2015  the  company  had  available  cash  reserves  of  $45,584  and  negative  working  capital  of 
$802,505. 
The Company has entered into a payment arrangement with AusAsia Energy Pty Ltd (“AusAsia”) for the repayment of MUI 
Corporation  Limited’s  (“MUI’s”)  loan  to  AusAsia  and  the  relinquishment  of  MUI’s  option  to  purchase  JEMS  (the  “MUI 
Agreement”) (refer Note 3). To date the Company has received $160,000 as repayment of the AusAsia loan.  AusAsia has 
not made any further instalment payments and consequently the Directors believe that it is prudent for the Company to 
fully  provide  for  AusAsia’s  loan  in  the  financial  statements.    The  Directors  are  currently  in  discussions  concerning  an 
achievable payment plan with AusAsia. MUI is also reviewing its options in respect of the security and guarantee held in 
respect of the loan. 
For the 12 months from the date of this report, the Directors have determined that MUI is a going concern based upon a 
cash  flow  budget  prepared  by  management.    The  cash  flow  budget  incorporates  a  control  of  costs,  as  and  where 
appropriate, including the potential to place payments on hold as well as no long term leases, commitments or employee 
contracts.  MUI has, at its discretion, the ability to convert the convertible note held by the Company to equity and the 
ability to exercise the Company’s security relating to AusAsia’s loan and liquidate the asset, thereby creating a cash flow.  
The  Company  also  has  the  ability  of  a  listed  entity  to  raise  capital  in  the  public  market.    Lastly,  the  Company  has  the 
support of a director and shareholder that will ensure it has adequate working capital for at least 12 months from the date 
of this report.  In addition to this, the Company has received an undertaking in relation to trade and other payables totalling 
$262,153 as at 30 June 2015 owing to Directors and director related parties confirming that repayment of these amounts 
will not be required for a period of 12 months from the date of this report unless the Company has sufficient cash flows 
available.  
For these reasons, the Directors believe that the assumption of a going concern basis in preparation of these financial 
statements  is  appropriate.    The  financial  statements  do  not  include  any  adjustments  in  relation  to  the  recoverability  or 
classification of recorded assets or liabilities that might be necessary should the Company not be able to continue as a 
going concern.  
(d)  Critical Accounting Estimates and Judgements  
The application of accounting policies requires the use of judgements, estimates and assumptions about carrying values of 
assets  and  liabilities  that  are  not  readily  apparent  from  other  sources.  The  estimates  and  associated  assumptions  are 
based on historical experience and other factors that are considered to be relevant. Actual results may differ from these 
estimates.  
The estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis. Revisions are recognised in the period in 
which the estimate is revised if it affects only that period, or in the period of the revision and future periods if the revision 
affects both current and future periods.  
Assessment of Impairment of Financial Asset:  
As assessment is undertaken at the end of each reporting period as to whether a financial asset is impaired.  If there 
is objective evidence that an impairment loss on a financial asset measured at amortised cost has been incurred, the 
amount  of  the  loss  is  measured  as  the  difference  between  the  asset’s  carrying  amount  and  the  present  value  of 
estimated future cash flows discounted at the financial asset’s original effective interest rate (i.e. the effective interest 
rate computed at initial recognition).  The carrying amount of the asset shall be reduced either directly or through use 
of a provision account.  The amount of the loss shall be recognised in profit or loss.
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
23                                                                          ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued) 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2015 
 
1.  SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued) 
Convertible Notes:  
The  fair  value  of  convertible  notes  comprises  the  fair  value  of  the  liability  and  the  equity  residual  value.    The 
Company has recorded convertible notes at the amount of money advanced.  This is because, given the nature and 
size of the Company, the face value of the unsecured debt under the convertible note is the most reliable estimate of the 
fair value of the unsecured debt (i.e. there exists no market for debt of this nature to facilitate a fair value estimate). 
Equity-based Payment Transactions:  
The  Company  measures  the  cost  of  equity-settled  transactions  with  directors  by  reference  to  the  fair  value  of  the 
equity instruments at the date at which they are granted. The fair value is determined by using the Black-Scholes model, 
taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the instruments were granted. 
The accounting estimates and assumptions relating to equity based payment transactions would have no impact on the 
carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next reporting period but may impact profit or loss or equity. 
(e)  Revenue Recognition  
Revenue is recognised to the extent that it is probable that the economic benefits will flow to the Company and the 
revenue can be reliably measured. The following specific recognition criteria must also be met before revenue is 
recognised:  
Interest Income:  
Interest revenue is recognised on a time proportionate basis that takes into account the effective yield on the financial 
asset. 
(f)  Cash and Cash Equivalents 
Cash comprises cash at bank and on hand. Cash equivalents are short term, highly liquid investments that are readily 
convertible to known amounts of cash and which are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value.  
For  the  purposes  of  the  statement  of  cash  flows,  cash  and  cash  equivalents  consist  of  cash  and  cash  equivalents  as 
defined above.  
(g) 
The income tax expense or benefit for the period is the tax payable on the current year’s taxable income (loss) based on 
the applicable income tax rate for each jurisdiction adjusted by changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities attributable to 
temporary differences and to unused tax losses.  
The current income tax charge (benefit) is calculated on the basis of the tax laws enacted or substantively enacted at the 
end of the reporting period.  Management periodically evaluates positions taken in tax returns with respect to situations in 
which  applicable  tax  regulation  is  subject  to  interpretation.    It  establishes  provisions  where  appropriate  on  the 
basis of amounts expected to be paid to the tax authorities.  
Current tax assets and liabilities for the current and prior periods are measured at the amount expected to be recovered 
from or paid to the taxation authorities. The tax rates and tax laws used to compute the amount are those that are 
enacted or substantively enacted at the end of the reporting period.  
Deferred income tax is provided on all temporary differences at the end of the reporting period between the tax bases of 
assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts for financial reporting purposes.  
Deferred income tax liabilities are recognised for all taxable temporary differences except when the deferred income tax 
liability arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or from an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business 
combination and that, at the time of the transaction, affects neither the accounting profit nor taxable profit or loss.  
Deferred income tax assets are recognised for all deductible temporary differences, carry-forward of unused tax assets 
and unused tax losses, to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the deductible 
temporary differences and the carry-forward of unused tax credits and unused tax losses can be utilised, except when 
the  deferred  income  tax  asset  relating  to  the  deductible  temporary  difference  arises  from  the  initial  recognition  of  an 
asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business combination and, at the time of the transaction, affects neither the 
accounting profit nor taxable profit or loss.  
Unrecognised deferred income tax assets are reassessed at the end of each reporting period and are recognised to the 
extent that it has become probable that future taxable profit will allow the deferred tax asset to be recovered.  
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply to the year when the 
asset  is  realised  or  the  liability  is  settled,  based  on  tax  rates  (and  tax  laws)  that  have  been  enacted  or  substantively 
enacted at the end of each reporting period.  
Income taxes relating to items recognised directly in equity are recognised in equity and not in profit or loss.  
Deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are offset only if a legally enforceable right exists to set off current tax 
assets against current tax liabilities and the deferred tax assets and liabilities relate to the same taxable entity and the 
same taxation authority.
Income Tax
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
24                                                                          ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued) 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2015 
 
 
1.  SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued) 
(h)  Other Taxes 
Revenues, expenses and assets are recognised net of the amount of GST except:  
•
when the GST incurred on a purchase of goods and services is not recoverable from the taxation authority, in which 
case  the  GST  is  recognised  as  part  of  the  cost  of  acquisition  of  the  asset  or  as  part  of  the  expense  item  as 
applicable; and  
receivables and payables, which are stated with the amount of GST included.
• 
The net amount of GST recoverable from, or payable to, the taxation authority is included as part of receivables or 
payables in the statement of financial position.  
Cash flows are included in the statement of cash flows on a gross basis and the GST component of cash flows arising 
from investing and financing activities, which is recoverable from, or payable to, the taxation authority are classified as 
operating cash flows.  
Commitments and contingencies are disclosed net of the amount of GST recoverable from, or payable to, the taxation 
authority.  
(i)  Financial Instruments 
Recognition and initial measurement 
Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognised when the entity becomes a party to the contractual provisions to the 
instrument. For financial assets, this is equivalent to the date that the company commits itself to either the purchase or 
sale of the asset (ie trade date accounting is adopted).  
Financial instruments are initially measured at fair value plus transaction costs, except where the instrument is classified 
“at fair value through profit or loss”, in which case transaction costs are expensed to profit or loss immediately. 
 
Classification and subsequent measurement 
Financial instruments are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method, or cost. 
Amortised cost is the amount at which the financial asset or financial liability is measured at initial recognition less principal 
repayments and any reduction for impairment, and adjusted for any cumulative amortisation of the difference between that 
initial amount and the maturity amount calculated using the effective interest method. 
The effective interest method is used to allocate interest income or interest expense over the relevant period and is 
equivalent to the rate that discounts estimated future cash payments or receipts (including fees, transaction costs and 
other premiums or discounts) through the expected life (or when this cannot be reliably predicted, the contractual term) of 
the financial instrument to the net carrying amount of the financial asset or financial liability. Revisions to expected future 
net cash flows will necessitate an adjustment to the carrying value with a consequential recognition of an income or 
expense item in profit or loss.
Loans and receivables 
Loans and receivables are non-derivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an 
active market and are subsequently measured at amortised cost. 
Loans and receivables are included in current assets, where they are expected to mature within 12 months after the end of 
the reporting period.
Financial liabilities 
Loans and borrowings are initially recognised at the fair value of the consideration received, net of transaction costs. They 
are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method. 
Payables are carried at amortised cost and represent liabilities for goods and services provided to the Company prior to 
the end of the financial year that are unpaid and arise when the Company becomes obliged to make future payments in 
respect of the purchase of these goods and services. 
Non-derivative financial liabilities (excluding financial guarantees) are subsequently measured at amortised cost.
Impairment 
 
At the end of each reporting period, the Company assesses whether there is objective evidence that a financial instrument 
has been impaired.  As assessment is undertaken at the end of each reporting period as to whether a financial asset 
is impaired.  If there is objective evidence that an impairment loss on a financial asset measured at amortised cost 
has been incurred, the amount of the loss is measured as the difference between the asset’s carrying amount and the 
present value of estimated future cash flows discounted at the financial asset’s original effective interest rate (i.e. the 
effective  interest  rate  computed  at  initial  recognition).    The  carrying  amount  of  the  asset  shall  be  reduced  either 
directly or through use of a provision account.  The amount of the loss shall be recognised in profit or loss. 
 
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
25                                                                          ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued) 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2015 
1.  SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued) 
Derecognition 
 
Financial assets are derecognised where the contractual rights to receipt of cash flows expire or the asset is transferred to 
another party whereby the entity no longer has any significant continuing involvement in the risks and benefits associated 
with the asset. Financial liabilities are derecognised where the related obligations are discharged, cancelled or expired. 
The difference between the carrying value of the financial liability extinguished or transferred to another party and the fair 
value of consideration paid, including the transfer of non-cash assets or liabilities assumed, is recognised in profit or loss. 
(j)  Convertible Notes 
The component of the convertible notes that exhibits characteristics of a liability is recognised as a liability in the statement 
of financial position, net of transaction costs.  
On the issue of the convertible notes, in accordance with accounting practice, the fair value of the liability component is 
determined using a market rate for an equivalent non-convertible bond and this amount is carried as a non-current liability 
on the amortised cost basis until extinguished on conversion or redemption. The increase in the liability due to the 
passage of time is recognised as a finance cost. The remainder of the proceeds are allocated to the conversion option that 
is recognised and included in shareholders equity as a convertible note reserve, net of transaction costs. The carrying 
amount of the conversion option is not remeasured in the subsequent years. The corresponding interest on convertible 
notes is expensed to profit or loss. 
 
In the financial statements, the fair value of convertible notes comprises the fair value of the liability and the equity 
residual value.  The Company has recorded convertible notes at the amount of money advanced.  This is because, 
given the nature and size of the Company, the face value of the unsecured debt under the convertible note is the most 
reliable estimate of the fair value of the unsecured debt (i.e. there exists no market for debt of this nature to facilitate a fair 
value estimate). 
(k) 
Ordinary shares are classified as equity. Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of new shares or options are 
shown in equity as a deduction, net of tax, from the proceeds. 	  
(l)  Earnings / (loss) per Share  
Basic earnings / (loss) per share is calculated as net profit attributable to members of the parent, adjusted to exclude any 
costs of servicing equity (other than dividends), divided by the weighted average number of ordinary shares, adjusted for 
any bonus element. 
  
Diluted earnings per share is calculated as net profit attributable to members of the parent, adjusted for:  
• 
•
costs of servicing equity (other than dividends);  
the  after  tax  effect  of  dividends  and  interest  associated  with  dilutive  potential  ordinary  shares  that  have  been 
recognised as expenses;  
other  non-discretionary  changes  in  revenues  or  expenses  during  the  period  that  would  result  from  the  dilution  of 
potential ordinary shares; and 
divided by the weighted average number of ordinary shares and dilutive potential ordinary shares, adjusted for any 
bonus element.
Issued Capital
•
•
(m)  Share Based Payment 
Equity-settled share-based compensation benefits may be provided to employees. 
 
Equity-settled transactions are awards of shares, or options over shares that are provided to employees in exchange for 
the rendering of services. 
 
The cost of equity-settled transactions is measured at fair value on grant date. Fair value is independently determined 
using the Black-Scholes option pricing model that takes into account the exercise price, the term of the option, the impact 
of dilution, the share price at grant date and expected price volatility of the underlying share, the expected dividend yield 
and  the  risk  free  interest  rate  for  the  term  of  the  option,  together  with  non-vesting  conditions  that  do  not  determine 
whether the consolidated entity receives the services that entitle the employees to receive payment. No account is taken 
of any other vesting conditions. 
 
The cost of equity-settled transactions are recognised as an expense with a corresponding increase in equity over the 
vesting period. The cumulative charge to profit or loss is calculated based on the grant date fair value of the award, the 
best estimate of the number of awards that are likely to vest and the expired portion of the vesting period. The amount 
recognised  in  profit  or  loss  for  the  period  is  the  cumulative  amount  calculated  at  each  reporting  date  less  amounts 
already recognised in previous periods.
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
26                                                                          ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued) 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2015 
 
1.  SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued) 
Market conditions are taken into consideration in determining fair value. Therefore any awards subject to market conditions 
are considered to vest irrespective of whether or not that market condition has been met, provided all other conditions are 
satisfied.	  
If equity-settled awards are modified, as a minimum an expense is recognised as if the modification has not been made. An 
additional expense is recognised, over the remaining vesting period, for any modification that increases the total fair value of 
the share-based compensation benefit as at the date of modification.	  
If the non-vesting condition is within the control of the consolidated entity or employee, the failure to satisfy the condition is 
treated as a cancellation. If the condition is not within the control of the consolidated entity or employee and is not satisfied 
during the vesting period, any remaining expense for the award is recognised over the remaining vesting period, unless the 
award is forfeited.	  
If equity-settled awards are cancelled, it is treated as if it has vested on the date of cancellation, and any remaining expense 
is recognised immediately. If a new replacement award is substituted for the cancelled award, the cancelled and new award 
is treated as if they were a modification.	  
 
(n)  Application of new and revised accounting standards 
The Company has adopted all of the new and revised standards and interpretations issued by the Australian Accounting 
Standards Board (the AASB) that are relevant to their operations and effective for the current reporting period.  
 
The adoption of all the new and revised standards and interpretations has not resulted in any changes to the Company’s 
accounting  policies  and  has  no  effect  on  the  amounts  reported  for  the  current  or  prior  periods.    Any  new,  revised  or 
amending Accounting Standards or Interpretations that are not yet mandatory have not been adopted early.
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
27                                                                          ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued) 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2015
INCOME TAX EXPENSE
2.  REVENUES AND EXPENSES 
 
a)  Other Revenue 
Interest received 
 
b)  Corporate Administration Expenses 
Write-off of financial asset (option to acquire AusAsia Energy Pty Ltd ) 
Legal fees 
Occupancy costs 
Professional fees 
 
3. 
The prima facie tax benefit on loss from ordinary activities 
before income tax is reconciled to the income tax expense as follows: 
Prima facie tax/(benefit) on loss before income tax at 30% (2014: 30%) 
 
Less: 
Deferred tax asset on current year losses not brought to account 
Income tax expense attributable to loss 
 
Deferred tax assets (at 30%) not brought to account, the benefits of which will only be 
realised if the conditions for deductibility set out in the accounting policies note occur. 
 
Tax losses 
 
4. 
 
Loss per share:  
The loss and weighted average number of ordinary shares used in 
the calculation of basic and diluted earnings per share is as follows: 
Loss from continuing operations
LOSS PER SHARE
Weighted average number of shares used to determine basic loss per share  
Conversion of options on issue 
Conversion of convertible note 
 
 
Weighted average number of shares used to determine diluted loss per share:
2015 
$ 
 
 
 
137
- 
11,371 
65,899 
120,000 
 
 
 
 
(1,172,498) 
 
 
1,172,498 
-
10,379,057
(3,908,328)
Number 
3,693,857,804 
50,000,000 
616,384,455
2014 
$ 
 
 
 
1,288 
 
 
25,000 
25,736 
63,364 
120,000 
 
 
 
 
(155,657) 
 
 
155,657 
-
9,206,559
(518,858)
Number 
3,399,337,256 
120,000,000 
570,841,830
4,360,242,259
4,090,179,086
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
28                                                                           ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
2015 
$
45,584 
45,584
2014 
$
242,810 
242,810
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued) 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2015 
	  
 
  
5.  CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS  
 
(a)    Reconciliation of cash  
Cash at the end of the financial year as shown in the statement of cash flows 
is reconciled to items in the statement of financial position as follows: 
Cash at bank and cash in hand 
 
 
Cash at bank earns interest at floating rates based on daily bank deposit rates. 
The Company has no credit standby arrangements, loan or overdraft facilities. 
 
(b)    Reconciliation  of  net  loss  after  tax  to  net  cash flows from  
        operations 
Net loss 
 
Adjustments for non-cash items: 
Impairment of Loan to AusAsia Energy Pty Ltd 
Write-off of option (to acquire AusAsia Energy Pty Ltd) 
Interest accrued on convertible notes 
 
Changes in assets and liabilities: 
(Increase)/decrease in receivables and other assets 
(Decrease)/increase in trade payables and accruals 
Net cash used in operating activities 
 
Non-Cash Financing and Investing Activities 
Options granted to underwriter
(3,908,328)
3,487,171 
- 
45,543 
 
 
(4,388) 
194,596 
(185,406)
(518,858) 
 
 
- 
25,000 
42,178 
 
 
15,086 
4,621 
(431,973) 
 
 
13,433 
13,433 
 
 
 
 
20,000
- 
-
20,000
FINANCIAL ASSETS
6.  OTHER CURRENT ASSETS 
 
Film library 
 
 
  
7. 
 
Current 
Related Party Loan – AusAsia Energy Pty Ltd (refer note 17(c)) 
Provision for Loan 
 
Non-Current 
Related Party Loan – AusAsia Energy Pty Ltd (refer note 17(c)) 
 
The  Company  executed  a  Put  and  Call  Option  Deed  to  acquire  all  of  the  issued  capital  of  AusAsia  Energy  Pty  Ltd 
(“AusAsia”),  which  in  turn  owns  100%  of  Jems  Exploration  Pty  Ltd  (“JEMS”).  JEMS  holds  the  rights  over  coal  mining 
tenements  in  Queensland.  The  expiry  date  of  the  Put  and  Call  Option  has  been  extended  from  15  December  2014  to 
15 December 2015.
3,487,171 
(3,487,171) 
- 
 
-
1,040,000 
- 
1,040,000 
 
2,435,062
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
29                                                                           ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued) 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2015
Given the current market conditions particularly in the junior coal sector, MUI and AusAsia have agreed binding terms to 
relinquish MUI’s call option to purchase JEMS and for the repayment of MUI’s loan.  This binding agreement includes the 
repayment of the loan to AusAsia. 
 
To date, $160,000 of the agreed repayment of the loan has been received.  AusAsia has not made any further payment of 
subsequent instalments and consequently the Directors believe that it is prudent for the Company to fully provide for the 
amount of loan outstanding in the financial statements.   
 
Directors are currently working towards finalising discussions concerning an achievable payment plan with AusAsia. MUI is 
also reviewing its options in respect of the security and guarantee held in respect of the loan. 
 
The Company’s Loan Facility Agreement continues to provide a secured loan to AusAsia Energy Pty Ltd to fund exploration 
work.  In summary, the Loan Facility Agreement provides the following:
•  A loan facility amount of $4,000,000 of which $3,487,171 has been loaned as at 30 June 2015. The loaning of 
funds under the agreement is at MUI’s discretion and is only in respect of costs associated with the coal mining 
tenements.  Any costs funded by MUI in respect of the mining tenements from 2 June 2014 are to be reimbursed 
by AusAsia;
•  Security – General security over the assets of AusAsia Energy Pty Ltd and Jems Exploration Pty Ltd; 
•  Guarantee – Corporate guarantee by Jems Exploration Pty Ltd. Personal guarantee from Mr Domenic Martino who
unconditionally and irrevocably guarantees the payment of loan amount and any accrued or capitalised interest; 
The loan is interest free provided full repayment of the funds lent is made prior to the expiry date.  Default interest 
accrues at 12% p.a.
•
2015 
$
2014 
$ 
8.  OTHER NON-CURRENT ASSETS 
 
165,000 
Investment in CAMI (i) 
(5,800) 
Less: Net proceeds from deposit 
(159,200) 
Less: Impairment 
- 
 
 
 
140,000 
Investment in Bauxite asset (ii) 
(140,000) 
Less: Impairment 
- 
 
(i)  The  Company  paid  $165,000  for  a  15%  equity  interest  in  CAMI  China;  a  software-based  business  in  China.    On 
9 February  2011  the  Company  signed  a  Heads  of  Agreement  with  O'Connell  Street  Holdings  Pty  Ltd  (a  company 
associated with a former director) for a total consideration of $200,000; a deposit of $20,000 was received at this date 
(legal fees and commissions in relation to the agreement totalled $14,200) with the remaining $180,000 due by 9 August 
2011. As at the date of this report the $180,000 remains outstanding.  
 
(ii) As announced on 14 September 2010 the Company entered into an agreement to acquire a 15% interest in bauxite 
tenements  located  in  northern  New  South  Wales  with  an  option  (the  "option")  to  acquire  a  further  35%  interest.  Total 
consideration for the interest was $140,000.  At 31 December 2010 the Company decided not to continue pursuing further 
investment in the asset and commenced negotiations with a number of interested parties in relation to selling the current 
15% interest it held.  The Company is currently reviewing its options in respect of this asset.
165,000 
(5,800) 
(159,200) 
- 
 
140,000 
(140,000) 
-
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
30                                                                           ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued) 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2015
9.  CONVERTIBLE NOTES
Current 
Convertible Note 
Accrued Interest
During  the  2013  financial  year  the  Company  issued  unsecured  convertible  notes  to 
raise  $500,000.    The  notes  attract  an  annual  interest  rate  of  7.75%,  calculated 
quarterly and payable upon conversion.  The conversion price is 0.1 cents per ordinary 
share and are convertible at the Company’s discretion.
10.     ISSUED CAPITAL 
 
Ordinary shares issued and fully paid 
 
 
On a show of hands every member present at a meeting in person or by proxy shall 
have one vote and upon a poll each share shall have one vote. Shares have no par 
value and the Company does not have an authorised amount of share capital.
(i) Movement in Ordinary Shares on Issue
2015 
$ 
 
 
 
500,000 
116,384 
616,384
2014 
$ 
 
 
 
500,000 
70,842 
570,842
2014 
$ 
 
 
35,764,430
2015 
$ 
 
 
35,764,430
Number
Number
3,693,857,804 
- 
3,693,857,804
3,193,857,804 
500,000,000 
3,693,857,804
At 1 July 
Fully paid shares issued for cash 
At 30 June 
 
 
(ii) Capital Management 
 
The Board controls the capital of the Company in order to fund its operations and continue as a going concern.  
 
The Company’s capital includes ordinary share capital and financial liabilities, supported by financial assets.  
 
There are no externally imposed capital requirements except for the restrictions imposed by the ASX Listing Rules, which 
restricts the amount of equity to be issued without shareholder approval (with the exception of rights issues).  At balance 
date, the number of securities able to be issued by the Company without shareholder approval or without being issued on a 
pro rata basis totalled 923,464,451. 
 
Management  effectively  manages  the  Company’s  capital  by  assessing  the  Company’s  financial  risks  and  adjusting  its 
capital structure in response to changes in these risks and in the market.  These responses include the management of 
debt levels, distributions to shareholders and share issues.
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
31                                                                           ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued) 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2015 
 
 
11.    OPTIONS RESERVE 
At 30 June 2014 
Options expired  
At 30 June 2015 
 
The options reserve reflects options issued to the underwriter for a placement in September 2013.  The options are 
exercisable at $0.001 and expire 3 December 2016. 
 
12. 
Options issued under share based payment arrangements entered into, or existing during the years ended 30 June 2015 
or 30 June 2014 are set out below.
120,000,000 
(70,000,000) 
50,000,000
52,751 
(20,967) 
31,784
SHARE BASED PAYMENT
$
Number
Opening balance 
Granted during the year 
Forfeited during the year 
Exercised during the year 
Expired during the year 
Closing balance 
Exercisable at the end of the year
2015 
 
No. of 
Options 
120,000,000 
- 
- 
- 
(70,000,000) 
50,000,000 
50,000,000
Weighted 
Average 
Exercise Price 
$0.001 
- 
- 
- 
$0.001 
$0.001 
$0.001
2014 
 
No. of Options
70,000,000 
50,000,000 
- 
- 
- 
120,000,000 
120,000,000
Weighted 
Average 
Exercise Price 
$0.01 
$0.01 
- 
- 
- 
$0.01 
$0.01
(i)
(ii)
Under the underwriting agreement in respect of the Rights Issue completed in December 2012, the Company was to 
issue  50  million  options  to  the  underwriter.  The  cost  associated  with  these  options  was  fully  vested  into  the  2013 
financial  year  accounts  ($18,351).    On  4  December  2013,  the  Company  issued  the  50  million  options  to  the 
underwriter.  The terms of these options are an expiry date of 3 December 2016 and an exercise price of $0.01. These 
remain outstanding as at 30 June 2015. 
Under the underwriting agreement entered in to in September 2013, the underwriter is entitled to 37,313,433 options 
(with an exercise price of 0.01 cents and expiry date 3 years from the date of issue) on the placement of 500 million 
shares made on 31 January 2014.  These options are yet to be issued, but the associated expense of $13,433 has 
been accrued in the accounts.  
The fair value of each option when granted was determined as 0.036 cents per option. These values were calculated 
using the Black-Scholes option pricing model applying the following inputs: 	  
Share Price: 
Exercise Price: 
Expected share price volatility: 
Vesting date: 
Expiry date: 
Risk-free interest rate: 
Dividends:
0.1 cents	  
0.1 cents	   
49.87%	   
30 November 2014	   
30 November 2017	   
3.25%  
0%
Comparable company volatility has been the basis for determining expected share price volatility as it is assumed that 
this is indicative of future movements.
13.     FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS 
The Company’s principal financial instruments comprise receivables, payables, convertible notes, options and cash 
and cash equivalents.  
The main purpose of these financial instruments is to finance the Company’s operations. The main risks arising from the 
Company’s financial instruments are liquidity risk and credit risk.  The Board reviews and agrees policies for managing 
each of these risks and they are summarised below.  
Details of the significant accounting policies and methods adopted, including the criteria for recognition, the basis of 
measurement and the basis on which income and expenses are recognised, in respect of each class of financial asset, 
financial liability and equity instrument are disclosed in note 1 to the financial statements.  
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
32                                                                           ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued) 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2015 
Credit Risk  
Exposure to credit risk relating to financial assets arises from the potential non-performance by counterparties of contract 
obligations that could lead to a financial loss to the Company.  
 
The company has a credit risk exposure with AusAsia Energy Pty Ltd (a related party), which as at 30 June 2015 owed 
the company $3,487,171 (2014: $3,475,062). Security over its assets has been obtained from AusAsia Energy Pty Ltd. 
Collateral held by the Company, securing the receivable, is detailed in Note 7.  Domenic Martino is a director of AusAsia 
and has provided a personal guarantee for the payment of the loan and any accrued interest. 
 
The company has obtained securities and guarantees over assets of sufficient value to mitigate the risk.  Charges over the 
assets  of  AusAsia  Energy  Pty  Ltd  and  JEMS  Exploration  Pty  Ltd  are  registered  on  the  Personal  Property  Securities 
Register (“PPSR”).
Liquidity Risk  
Liquidity  risk  arises  from  the  possibility  that  the  Company  might  encounter  difficulty  in  settling  its  debts  or  otherwise 
meeting its non-cancellable obligations related to financial liabilities. The company manages liquidity risk by monitoring 
forecast cash flows and only investing surplus cash with major financial institutions. 
 
Cash flows realised from financial assets reflect management’s expectation as to the timing of realisation.  Actual timing 
may  therefore  differ  from  that  disclosed.    The  timing  of  cash  flows  presented  in  the  table  to  settle  financial  liabilities 
reflects the earliest contractual settlement dates
Maturing In
Over 1 to 5 years
2015
2014
$
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
 
-
$
- 
- 
2,435,062 
2,435,062
- 
- 
- 
 
2,435,062
Over 5 years 
2015
2014
$
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
 
-
$
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
 
-
2015 
$
21,500
2014 
$
23,400
1 year or less 
2015
2014
$
45,584 
26,833 
- 
72,417
(278,538) 
(616,384) 
(894,922) 
 
(822,505)
$
242,810 
22,445 
1,040,000 
1,305,255
( 83,652) 
(570,842) 
(654,494) 
 
650,761
Financial Instrument
Financial Assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Trade receivables 
Related party loan 
Total anticipated inflows
Financial Liabilities 
Trade payables 
Convertible notes 
Total expected outflows 
Net inflows (outflows) on financial 
instruments
14.   AUDITOR’S REMUNERATION  
The auditor of MUI Corporation Limited is William Buck Audit (Vic) Pty Ltd 
Amounts received or due and receivable by William Buck for an audit or review of the 
financial report of the entity
15.   SEGMENT INFORMATION  
The directors have considered the requirements of AASB 8 - Operating Segments and the internal reports that are 
reviewed by the chief operating decision maker (the Board) in allocating resources and have concluded that at this time 
there are no separately identifiable segments.  
 
During the year, the Company considers that it has only operated in one segment, being the film industry in Australia. 
16.   CONTROLLED ENTITIES 
The Company has a 100% owned subsidiary, Media Education International Pty Ltd. Currently no operations are carried 
out through this subsidiary and the company is currently dormant.  As a consequence, the parent entity’s statement of 
financial position and performance for the years ended 30 June 2015 and 30 June 2014 are exactly the same as that of 
the consolidated entity.
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
33                                                                           ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (continued) 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2015 
 
17.   RELATED PARTY DISCLOSURES 
(a)  Details of Key Management Personnel 
J Bell 
P Silva 
D Martino 
(b)  Remuneration of Directors and Named Executives  
Refer to the Remuneration Report contained in the Directors’ Report for details of the remuneration paid or payable to 
each member of the Company’s key management personnel (“KMP”) for the year ended 30 June 2015.  
The total remuneration paid to KMP of the Company during the year is as follows:
(Non-Executive Chairman)  
(Non-Executive Director)  
(Non-Executive Director)
Short-term employee benefits 
Termination benefits 
Equity-based payments
2015 
$ 
108,000 
- 
- 
108,000
2014 
$ 
138,000 
- 
- 
138,000
(c)  Other Transactions with Directors 
With  the  exception  of  the  transactions  noted  below,  there  are  no  other  specific  transactions  or  balances  with  related 
parties. 
Mr Domenic Martino was appointed a director on 19 December 2013: 
1)  Mr Martino is a director of AusAsia Energy Pty Ltd (“AusAsia”) and JEMS Exploration Pty Ltd.  As at 30 June 2015, 
AusAsia owed the Company $3,487,171 on the terms as set out in Note 7.  The loan is interest free provided full 
repayment of the funds lent is made prior to the expiry date.  Default interest accrues at 12% p.a.; 
Mr  Martino  has  provided  a  personal  guarantee  to  unconditionally  and  irrevocably  guarantee  the  payment  of  loan 
amount and any accrued or capitalised interest. 
MUI  also  currently  holds  a  call  option  to  purchase  100%  of  the  shares  of  JEMS  Exploration  Pty  Ltd  (“JEMS”),  a 
company  that  owns  four  Exploration  Permits  for  Coal  in  Queensland  from  AusAsia  Energy  Pty  Ltd  (“AusAsia”).  
Further information concerning this transaction is in Note 7.
2)  Mr Martino’s son is the sole director of Transaction Services Pty Ltd, a company that provides MUI with company 
secretarial, accounting, office rental and administrative services.  The amount payable to Transaction Services Pty Ltd 
since Mr Martino’s appointment to the end of the financial year totalled $204,956.  As at 30 June 2015, $136,137 was 
owing to Transaction Services Pty Ltd; and
3)  Mr  Martino’s  son  is  the  sole  director  of  Minimum  Risk  Pty  Ltd,  a  company  that  provides  MUI  with  underwriting 
services.  The latest underwriting agreement was entered in to in September 2013 (prior to Minimum Risk Pty Ltd 
being a related party), entitling Minimum Risk Pty Ltd to an underwriting fee equal to 6% of the amount raised plus 
options.  In January 2014, $500,000 was raised under this underwriting agreement, creating an amount payable to 
Minimum Risk Pty Ltd of $30,000 plus 37,313,433 options (with an exercise price of $0.001 and expiry date 3 years 
from the date of issue).  These options are yet to be issued, but the associated expense of $13,433 has been accrued 
in the accounts. As at 30 June 2015, a total of $62,816 was owing to Minimum Risk Pty Ltd for underwriting services.
18.   COMMITMENTS, CONTINGENCIES AND LEASE COMMITMENTS  
There are no capital or lease commitments and no contingent liabilities.
19.   EVENTS AFTER THE REPORTING DATE  
There are no events subsequent to the reporting period.
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
34                                                                           ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
DIRECTORS’ DECLARATION  
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2015 
 
 
In the opinion of the directors of MUI Corporation Limited (the “Company”):
(a)
the financial statements, notes and additional disclosures included in the director’s report designated as audited 
are in accordance with the Corporations Act 2001, including:
(i)     giving a true and fair view of the Company’s financial position as at 30 June 2015 and of its performance
for the year then ended; and
(ii)
complying with Australian Accounting Standards and the Corporations Regulations 2001; and
(c)
(b)   there are reasonable grounds to believe that the Company will be able to pay its debts as and when they
become due and payable; and
the  financial  statements  and  notes  thereto  are  in  accordance  with  International  Financial  Reporting 
Standards issued by the International Accounting Standards Board.
2.   This declaration has been made after receiving the declarations required to be made to the directors in accordance
with sections 295A of the Corporations Act 2001 for the year ended 30 June 2015.
This declaration is signed in accordance with a resolution of the Board of Directors.  
 
 
 
 
 
John Bell 
Director  
 
Dated this 30th day of September 2015
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
35                                                                           ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
' - -
u Wllllam Buck
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR‘S REPORT
TO THE MEMBERS OF MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
Report on the Financial Report
We have audited the accompanying ﬁnancial report of MUI Corporation Limited (the
Company), which comprises the consolidated statement of ﬁnancial position as at 30 June
2015, the statement of proﬁt of loss and other comprehensive income, the statement of
changes in equity and the statement of cash ﬂows for the year then ended, notes comprising
a summary of significant accounting policies and other explanatory information, and the
directors' declaration,
Directors' Responsibility for the Financial Report
The directors of the Company are responsible for the preparation of the ﬁnancial report that
gives a true and fair view in accordance with Australian Accounting Standards and the
Corporations Act 2001 and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to
enable the preparation of the ﬁnancial report that gives a true and fair view and is free from
material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error,
Auditor's Responsibilin
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the ﬁnancial report based on our audit, We
conducted our audit in accordance with Australian Auditing Standards Those standards
require that we comply with relevant ethical requirements relating to audit engagements and
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the ﬁnancial report
is free from material missmtement,
An audit involves pertorming procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and
disclosures in the ﬁnancial report, The procedures selected depend on the auditors
judgement, including the assessment of me risks of material misstatement of the ﬁnancial
report, whether due to fraud or error, In making those risk assessments, the auditor
considers internal control relevant to the entity’s preparation of the ﬁnancial report that gives
a tme and lair view in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the
circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the eftectiveness of the
entity's internal control. An audit also includes evaluating the appropriateness of accounting
policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates made by the directors, as well
as evaluating the overall presentation of the ﬁnancial report,
CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufﬁcient and appropriate to provide a & ADVISORS
basis (or our audit opinion. Melbourne Oliice
Level 20, 181 William Street
Independence MelbourneVlC 3000
In conducting our audit, we have complied with the independence requirements of the Hawthorn omoe
Corporations Act 2001. Level 1 ‘55 “Wm “03"
Hawthorn East VIC 3123
PO Box 135, Tcorak Vic 3142
Telephone: +61 3 9024 8555
wllllambuck.com
   o.   .,. Pramy;
Australia and NEW mum with altiliatadotlicas mama has...” “mm by a schemeappmvcd mg m W. M. MW. 0,
Prolass-onal smasma Legislation other Ihan lo: ants or omissions oi imam: services licensees mnmtnuu mm


- .. -
.. William Buck

INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT
TO THE MEMBERS OF MUI CORPORATION LIMITED (CONT)
Auditor’s Opinion
in our opinion:
a) the ﬁnancial report of MUI Corporan'on Limited is in accordance with the Corporations Act

2001. including:

it giving a true and fair view 0' the Company‘s ﬁnancial position as at 30 June 2015

and of its performance for the year ended on that date; and
ii, complying with Australian Accounting Standards (including the Australian
Accounting Interpretations) and the Corporations Regulations 2001; and

b) the ﬁnancial report also complies with International Financial Reporting Standards as

disclosed in Note 1.
Emphasis of Matter
Without modifying our conclusion, we draw attention to Note 1 in the ﬁnancial report
which indicates that the entity incurred a net loss of $3,908,328 during the year ended
30 June 2015, and, as of that date, the company's current liabilities exceeded its total
assets by $802,505. These conditions, along with other matters as set forth in Note 1,
indicate the existence of a material uncertainty that may cast signiﬁcant doubt about the
consolidated entity’s ability to continue as a going concern and therefore the
consolidated entity may be unable to realise its assets and discharge its liabilities in the
normal course of business.
Other Matter
Without modifying our conclusion, we draw attention to Note 17(c) in the ﬁnancial report
which discloses that Mr, Domenic Martino is a Director of MUI Corporation Limited and a
Director of AusAsia Energy Pty Ltd and JEMS Exploration Pty Ltd As at 30 June 2015,
AusAsia owed MUI Corporation Limited $3,487,171 and during the year ended 30 June 2015,
the Board of MUl Corporation Limited decided to fully impair the value of the loan by creating
a provision as disclosed in Note 7 of the ﬁnancial report Mr Martino has provided a personal
guarantee to unconditionally and irrevocany guarantee payment of the loan amount and any
accmed or capitalised interest We consider that these circumstances raise a signiﬁcant
perceived conﬂict of interest which we believe is tundamental to a users understanding of
these ﬁnancial statements.
Report on the Remuneration Report
We have audited the Remuneration Report included in the directors’ report for the year ended
30 June 2015. The directors of the company are responsible for the preparation and
presentation of the Remuneration Report in accordance with section 300A of the
Corporations Act 2001. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Remuneration
Report, based on our audit conducted in accordance with Australian Audlting Standards
Auditor's Opinion
In our opinion, the Remuneration Report of MUI Corporation Limited for the year ended 30
June 2015, complies with section 300A of the Corporations Act 2001.


' - -
.- Wllllam Buck
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT
TO THE MEMBERS OF MUI CORPORATION LIMITED (cow)
Matters Relating to the Electronic Presentation of the Audited Financial Report
This auditors report relates to the ﬁnancial report of MUI Corporation Limited tor the year
ended 30 June 2015 included on MUI Corporation Limited's web site. The company's
directors are responsible for the integrin of the MUI Corporation Limited's web site. We have
not been engaged to report on the integrity of the MUI Corporation Limited's web site The
auditors report refers only to the ﬁnancial report. It does not provide an opinion on any other
information which may have been hyperlinked to/from these statements. If users Of this
report are concerned with the inherent risks arising from electronic data communications they
are advised to refer to the hard copy of the audited ﬁnancial report to conﬁrm the information
included in the audited ﬁnancial report presented on this web site
\A/I \\ a.“ 3.4;. ,
William Buck Audlt (Vic) Pty Ltd
ABN 59116151136
Jﬁw
Director
Dated this 30th day Of September 2015


ASX ADDITIONAL INFORMATION  
Additional information required by the Australian Securities Exchange Ltd, and not shown elsewhere in this report is as 
follows. The information is current as at 15 September 2015.   
 
(a)  Distribution of Equity Securities 
 
Ordinary share capital 
3,693,857,804 fully paid shares held by 1,181 shareholders.  All issued ordinary shares carry one vote per share and 
carry the rights to dividends.
The number of ordinary shareholders, by size of holding are:
1 - 1,000 
1,001 - 5,000 
5,001 - 10,000 
10,001 - 100,000 
100,001 and over
Fully Paid Ordinary Shares 
74,478 
271,071 
144,922 
13,821,384 
3,679,545,949 
3,693,857,804
168 
118 
21 
272 
602 
1,181
754 Shareholders hold less than a marketable parcel
(b)  Twenty Largest Holders of Quoted Equity Securities (fully paid ordinary shares)
UOB Kay Hian (Hong Kong) Limited <Clients A/C> 
Coal Contractors Pty Ltd <Coal Contractors A/C> 
Roadhound Electronics Pty Ltd 
Dobrani Pty Ltd 
Coalindo Pte Limited 
Red And White Holdings Pty Ltd <Blood Super Fund A/c> 
Island Shore Aust Pty Ltd 
Seabreaze Pty Ltd 
Wobbly Investments Pty Ltd 
Mr James David William Taylor + Mrs Erin Ann Taylor <Taylor Super Fund A/C> 
Mr Philip Lowry + Mrs Wendy Lowry <The Lowry Super Fund A/c> 
Klen Pty Limited 
Ningbo Inwit Pty Ltd <Ducks Family A/c> 
Mr Mark John Bahen + Mrs Margaret Patricia Bahen <Superannuation Account> 
Brynwilliams Pty Limited 
A2B Logistics Pty Ltd 
Penat Pty Ltd <Penat Pty Ltd Super Fund a/c> 
Mr Stephen Michael Warren 
Royal Jewels Pty Ltd <CJK Superfund A/C> 
Mr Richard Clarnette
Fully Paid 
Number 
500,000,000 
273,268,000 
158,400,000 
151,400,000 
139,690,955 
105,000,000 
100,000,000 
76,000,000 
75,000,000 
67,500,000 
67,000,000 
66,000,000 
54,000,000 
50,000,000 
50,000,000 
48,600,000 
45,250,000 
45,000,000 
37,590,000 
26,000,000
Percentage 
% 
13.54 
7.40 
4.29 
4.10 
3.78 
2.84 
2.71 
2.06 
2.03 
1.83 
1.81 
1.79 
1.46 
1.35 
1.35 
1.32 
1.23 
1.22 
1.02 
0.70
2,135,698,955
57.82
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
39                                                                           ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015
ASX ADDITIONAL INFORMATION (continued)
(c)  Substantial Shareholders (fully paid ordinary shares)
Coal Contractors Pty Ltd <Coal Contractors A/C> al
Fully Paid 
Number 
273,268,000
Percentage 
% 
7.40
(d)  Voting Rights  
All ordinary shares carry one vote per share without restriction.  
 
 
(e)  Restricted Securities  
The Company has no restricted securities on issue.  
 
 
(f)  Business Objective 
The  Company  has  used  its  cash  and  assets  that  are  readily  convertible  to  cash  in  a  way  consistent  with  its  business 
objectives.
MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
40                                                                           ANNUAL REPORT 30 June 2015