
EX-99.1 2 exhibit99-1.htm EXHIBIT 99.1 Energy Fuels Inc.: Exhibit 99.1 - Filed by
newsfilecorp.com
Energy Fuels Announces Approval of Amendments to Convertible Debentures
Lakewood, Colorado – August 4, 2016
Energy Fuels Inc. (NYSE MKT: UUUU; TSX: EFR) (“Energy Fuels” o r the “Company”), a
leading producer of uranium in the United States, is pleased to announce that the holders of its
floating-rate  convertible  unsecured  subordinated  debentures  (the  “Debentures”)  approved  the
previously announced amendments (the “Amendments”) to the Debentures at a special meeting
of the holders of the Debentures (the “Debentureholders”) held today.
As  previously  announced,  the  Amendments  will  result  in  the  following  changes  to  the
Debentures:
1. Extend the maturity date of the Debentures from June 30, 2017 to December 31, 2020;
 
2. Reduce the conversion price of the Debentures from Cdn$15.00 to Cdn$4.15 per common
share of the Company;
3. Add  a  redemption  provision  that  enables  the  Company  to redeem  the  Debentures  upon
providing not less than 30-days’ notice, in cash, in whole or in part, at any time after June 30,
2019, but prior to maturity, at a price of 101% of the aggregate principal amount redeemed;
4. Add a right in favor of each Debentureholder to enable the Debentureholder to require the
Company to purchase, for cash, on June 30, 2017 up to 20% of the Debentures held by the
Debentureholder at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount purchased;
5. Provide a consent fee to each Debentureholder who voted in favor of the Amendments in
the amount of Cdn$20.00 per Cdn$1,000 of principal amount of Debentures held; and
6. Make  other  amendments  to  the  indenture  as  required  by  the U.S.  Trust  Indenture  Act  of
1939,  along  with  certain  other  amendments  to remove provisions of the indenture that no
longer apply.
The Amendments will apply to all outstanding Debentures. Following today’s special meeting of
the  Debentureholders,  Energy  Fuels  entered  into  an  amended  and  restated  convertible
debenture indenture (the“ Amended Indenture”) with BNY Trust Company of Canada and The
Bank of New York Mellon.
Stephen P. Antony, President and CEO of Energy Fuels commented: “We are very pleased with
the results of today’s special meeting, whereby the Debentureholders approved amendments to
Energy Fuels’  Debentures. The extension of the maturity date will provide the Company with
additional  financial  flexibility  for  execution  of  our  business  plan  and  optimally  position  the
Company  for  a  recovering  uranium  market.  In  addition,  the  extension  removes  the  specter  of
potential  shareholder  dilution  which  may  have  resulted  if  the  Company  redeemed  the
Debentures  in  shares  on  the  previous  maturity  date  of  June  30,  2017.  We  thank  the
Debentureholders  who  voted  in  favor  of  the  Amendments  and  look  forward  to  an  improving
uranium market benefitting both the Debentureholders and our common shareholders.”
About Energy Fuels: Energy Fuels is a leading integrated US-based uranium mining company,
supplying U3O8  to  major  nuclear  utilities.  Energy  Fuels  holds  three  of  America’s  key  uranium
production  centers,  the  White  Mesa  Mill  in  Utah,  the  Nichols  Ranch  Processing  Facility  in
Wyoming,  and  the  Alta  Mesa  Project  in  Texas.  The  White  Mesa  Mill  is  the  only  conventional
uranium mill operating in the U.S. today and has a licensed capacity of over 8 million pounds of
U3O8  per  year.  The  Nichols  Ranch  Processing  Facility  is  an  ISR  production  center  with  a
licensed capacity of 2 million pounds of U3O8 per year. Alta Mesa is an ISR production center
currently on standby. Energy Fuels also has the largest NI 43-101 compliant uranium resource
portfolio  in  the  U.S.  among  producers,  and  uranium  mining  projects  located  in  a  number  of
Western  U.S.  states,  including  one  producing  ISR  project,  mines  on  standby,  and  mineral
properties in various stages of permitting and development. The Company’s common shares are
listed on the NYSE MKT under the trading symbol “UUUU”, and on the Toronto Stock Exchange
under  the  trading  symbol  “EFR”.  The  Company’s  Debentures  are  listed  on  the  Toronto  Stock
Exchange under the trading symbol “EFR.DB.”
1
Cautionary  Note  Regarding  Forward-Looking  Statements: Certain information contained in
this news release, including any information relating to: the Company being a leading producer
of uranium in the U.S.;  the effective date of the Amendments; any expected benefits associated
with  the  Amendments;  financial  flexibility  afforded  to  the  Company  by  the  Amendments;  the
Company’s  expectations  of  improving  uranium  markets;  the  potential  for  future  shareholder
dilution  resulting  from  the  redemption  of  the  Debentures  in  shares;  and  any  other  statements
regarding  Energy  Fuels’  future  expectations,  beliefs,  goals  or  prospects;  constitute  forward-
looking information within the meaning of applicable securities legislation (collectively, "forward-
looking statements"). All statements in this news release that are not statements of historical fact
(including statements containing the words "expects", "does not expect", "plans", "anticipates",
"does  not  anticipate",  "believes",  "intends",  "estimates",  "projects",  "potential",  "scheduled",
"forecast", "budget" and similar expressions) should be considered forward-looking statements.
All such forward-looking statements are subject to important risk factors and uncertainties, many
of  which  are  beyond  Energy  Fuels’  ability  to  control  or  predict.  A  number  of  important  factors
could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those indicated or implied by such
forward-looking statements, including without limitation factors relating to: the Company being a
leading  producer  of  uranium  in  the  U.S.;  the  effective  date  of  the  Amendments;  any  expected
benefits  associated  with  the  Amendments;  financial  flexibility  afforded  to  the  Company  by  the
Amendments; the Company’s expectations of improving uranium markets; the potential for future
shareholder dilution resulting from the redemption of the Debentures in shares; and other risk
factors  as  described  in  Energy  Fuels’  most  recent  annual  report  on  Form  10-K  and  quarterly
financial  reports.  Energy  Fuels  assumes  no  obligation  to  update  the  information  in  this
communication, except as otherwise required by law. Additional information identifying risks and
uncertainties is contained in Energy Fuels’ filings with the various securities commissions which
are  available  online  at  www.sec.gov  and  www.sedar.com.  Forward-looking  statements  are
provided  for  the  purpose  of  providing  information    about  the  current  expectations,  beliefs  and
plans of the management of Energy Fuels relating to the future. Readers are cautioned that such
statements may not be appropriate for other purposes. Readers are also cautioned not to place
undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, that speak only as of the date hereof.
Investor Relations Inquiries:
 
Energy Fuels Inc.
Curtis Moore – VP – Marketing & Corporate Development
(303) 974-2140 or Toll free: (888) 864-2125
investorinfo@energyfuels.com
www.energyfuels.com
2