
Attendance Card
Please bring this card with you to the Meeting and present it at Shareholder registration/accreditation.
San Leon Energy Plc invites you to attend the Annual General 
Meeting of San Leon Energy Plc to be held at Herbert Park Hotel, 
Ballsbridge, Dublin 4, at 11.00 am on Friday 26 September 2014.
Shareholder Reference Number
@
Cast your Proxy online 24 hours a day...It’s fast, easy and secure!
www.eproxyappointment.com
You will be asked to enter the Control Number, the Shareholder Reference Number (SRN) and PIN and agree to certain terms and conditions.
Reference Numb
To view the Annual Report and Notice of AGM online visit www.sanleonenergy.com 
To be effective, all votes must be lodged at the ofﬁce of the Company’s registrars at:
must be lodged at the o
Control Number:  912462
Only
OOO
nn n 
mation
mation
mationday...It’
atio
ma
mvisit www
rmmited, Heron House, C
For Inform
Fo
or a shareholder, the full vot
e AGM, a Shareholder, pres
ast all their votes in the sam
be lodged at
, Heron Hou
r 2014. A reply paid e
14. A reply
bove. A Shareho
SRN.
Explanatory Notes:
1.  Every  holder  has  the  right  to  appoint  some  other  person(s)  of  their  choice,  who  need  not  be  a  
shareholder, as his proxy to exercise all or any of his rights, to attend, speak and vote on their behalf at 
the meeting. If you wish to appoint a person other than the Chairman, please insert the name of your 
chosen proxy holder in the space provided (see reverse).  If the proxy is being appointed in relation 
to less than your full voting entitlement, please enter in the box next to the proxy holder’s name (see 
reverse) the number of shares in relation to which they are authorised to act as your proxy. If left blank 
your proxy will be deemed to be authorised in respect of your full voting entitlement (or if this proxy 
form has been issued in respect of a designated account for a shareholder, the full voting entitlement 
for that designated account). Where a poll is taken at the AGM, a Shareholder, present in person or 
proxy, holding more than one share is not required to cast all their votes in the same way.
ase insert th
an, please insert the name o
is being appoin
proxy is being appointed in 
next to the proxy holder’s n
o the proxy hold
orised to act as your p
horised to act as your proxy. 
r full voting entitlem
ur full voting entitlement (or
areholder, the fu
r  choice,  who  need  not  be
choice,  who  need 
speak and vote on their beha
eak and vote on thei
areholde
their votes in the
2.  To be effective, the completed Form of Proxy together with any power of attorney or other authority 
under  which  it  is  executed,  or  a  notarially  certiﬁed  copy  thereof,  must  be  deposited  with  the  
Registrar of the Company before the deadline set out above. A Shareholder wishing to appoint a proxy 
by electronic means may do so on the Registrar’s website www.eproxyappointment.com.  Details of the 
requirements are set out in the box above.
her with any power of attorn
tiﬁed  copy  thereof,  must  b
out above. A Shareholder w
s website
s website www.eproxyappoin
copy  thereof,  m
h any powe
www.eproxp
3.  The ‘Vote Withheld’ option overleaf is provided to enable you to abstain on any particular resolution.  
However, it should be noted that a ‘Vote Withheld’ is not a vote in law and will not be counted in the 
calculation of the proportion of the votes ‘For’ and ‘Against’ a resolution.
ded to enable you to abst
ded to enab
ld’ is not a
ld’ is not a vote in l
ainst’ a reso
ainst’ a
4.  Pursuant to regulation 14 of the Companies Act, 1990 (Uncertiﬁcated Securties) Regulations 1996, 
entitlement to attend and vote at the meeting and the number of votes which may be cast thereat will
be determined by reference to the Register of Members of the Company at close of business on the 
day which is two days before the date of the meeting. Changes to entries on the Register of Members 
after that time shall be disregarded in determining the rights of any person to attend and vote at  
the meeting.
5.  To  appoint  a  proxy  or  to  give  an  instruction  to  a  proxy  (whether  previously  appointed  or 
otherwise)  via  the  CREST  system,  CREST  messages  must  be  received  by  the  issuer’s  agent  
(ID  number  3RA50)  not  later  than  11.00  am  on  24  September  2014.  For  this  purpose,  the  time 
of receipt will be taken to be the time (as determined by the timestamp generated by the CREST 
system) from which the issuer’s agent is able to retrieve the message. The Company may treat as 
invalid a proxy appointment sent by CREST in the circumstances set out in Regulation 35(5)(a) of the  
Companies Act, 1990 (Uncertiﬁcated Securities) Regulations 1996.
6.  The above is how your address appears on the Register of Members. If this information is incorrect 
please ring the registrar’s helpline on +353 1 447 5566 to request a change of address form or go to 
www.investorcentre.com/ie to use the online Investor Centre service.
7. Any alterations made to this form should be initialled.
8.  The appointment of a proxy will not preclude a member from attending the meeting and voting in person.
Form of Proxy - Annual General Meeting (‘AGM’) of San Leon Energy Plc (‘the Company’) to be held on 26 September 2014
gy Pl
Computershare Investor Services (Ireland) Limited, Heron House, Corrig Road, Sandyford Industrial Estate, Dublin 18, Ireland,
by not later than 11 am on 24 September 2014. A reply paid envelope is enclosed to enable the return of proxy forms.
PIN.
Kindly Note: This form is issued only to the addressee(s) and is specific to the 
unique designated account printed hereon. This personalised form is not transferable 
between  different  (i)  account  holders;  or  (ii)  uniquely  designated  accounts.  
The Company and Computershare Investor Services (Ireland) Limited accept no 
liability for any instruction that does not comply with these conditions.
All Holders
SG150
123SVB D01
Poll Card To be completed only at the AGM if a Poll is called.
Resolutions
Ordinary Business
1.
To receive and consider the Report of the Directors and Financial Statements for the year ended 31 December 2013
2.  (a) To elect Mr. Piotr Rozwadowski as a Director of the Company
(b) To re-elect Mr. Raymond Albert King as a Director of the Company who retires in accordance with the Articles of Association
(c) To re-elect Mr. Jeremy Boak as a Director of the Company who retires in accordance with the Articles of Association
Vote
    For         Against   Withheld
Please leave this box blank if you have selected the Chairman. Do not insert your own name(s).
e(s).
as  my/our  proxy  to  attend,  speak  and  vote  in  respect  of  my/our  full  voting  entitlement*  on  my/our  behalf  at  the  Annual  General  Meeting  of  
SAN LEON ENERGY PLC to be held at the Herbert Park Hotel, Ballsbridge, Dublin 4, on Friday 26 September 2014 at 11.00 am and at any adjourned meeting.
full  voting
dge, Dublin 4
sbridge, Dublin 4, on
. . . . . . . .
FOLD 
HERE
I/We direct that my/our vote(s) be cast on the speciﬁed resolutions as indicated by inserting an X in the appropriate box.
. . . . . . . .
FOLD 
HERE
Vote
    For         Against   Withheld
Resolutions
Ordinary Business
1.
To authorise the Directors to ﬁx the remuneration of the Auditors
3.
Special Business
 4.
To amend the Articles of Association to give the Directors authority to allot new ordinary shares
5.
6.
To authorise the Directors to allot equity securities for cash pursuant to Section 24 of the Companies (Amendment) Act, 1983 as if Section 23(1)  
of that Act did not apply
To authorise the Directors to allot ordinary shares to Oisín Fanning in lieu of salary.
Form of Proxy
Please use a black pen.  Mark with an X 
inside the box as shown in this example.
I/We hereby appoint the Chairman of the Meeting OR the following person
n
X
Signature
ment) Act, 1983 as
titititin name(s).
y
nlydment) Act, 1983 as if Se
O
Oture
ation Only
forma/our  full  voting  ent
nfofo
nI
or In
r
For
Fo
ation of the AFFFtion to give the Directors
as indicated by insert
ndicated by in
To receive and consider the Report of the Directors and Financial Statements for the year ended 31 December 2013
Financial Statements for 
Financial Statemen
2.  (a) To elect Mr. Piotr Rozwadowski as a Director of the Company
Company
pany
(b) To re-elect Mr. Raymond Albert King as a Director of the Company who retires in accordance with the Articles of Association
or of the Company who 
or of the Compan
(c) To re-elect Mr. Jeremy Boak as a Director of the Company who retires in accordance with the Articles of Association
f the Company who retir
Company who
To authorise the Directors to ﬁx the remuneration of the Auditors
uneration of the Auditor
3.
Special Business
4.
To amend the Articles of Association to give the Directors authority to allot new ordinary shares
tion to give the Dire
5.
6.
To authorise the Directors to allot equity securities for cash pursuant to Section 24 of the Companies (Amendment) Act, 1983 as if Section 23(1)  
of that Act did not apply
To authorise the Directors to allot ordinary shares to Oisín Fanning in lieu of salary.
securities fo
securit
I/we would like my/our proxy to vote on the resolutions proposed at the Meeting as indicated on this form. Unless otherwise instructed the proxy may vote as he or she 
sees ﬁt or abstain in relation to any business of the meeting.
Signature
Date
/        /
In the case of a corporation, this proxy must be given under its common 
seal or be signed on its behalf by an attorney or ofﬁcer duly authorised, 
stating their capacity (e.g. director, secretary).
E
X T
10
7
1
0 8
S L E I
123SVB D01