
EX-99.4 5 exhibit99-4.htm EXHIBIT 99.4 Tahoe Resources Inc.: Exhibit 99.4 - Filed by
newsfilecorp.com
Form 52-109F2
Certification of Interim Filings
Full Certificate
I, C. Kevin McArthur, Chief Executive Officer of Tahoe Resources Inc., certify the following:
3.
1. Review: I  have  reviewed  the  interim financial  report  and  interim  MD&A  (together,  the
“interim filings”) of Tahoe Resources Inc. (the “issuer”) for the interim period ended June 30,
2016.
2. No misrepresentations: Based on my knowledge, having exercised reasonable diligence,
the  interim  filings  do not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a
material fact required to be stated or that is necessary to make a statement not misleading in
light of the circumstances under which it was made, with respect to the period covered by
the interim filings.
 
Fair  presentation: Based  on  my  knowledge, having  exercised  reasonable  diligence,  the
interim  financial  report together with the other financial information included in the interim
filings  fairly  present  in  all  material  respects  the  financial  condition, financial  performance
and cash flows of the issuer, as of the date of and for the periods presented in the interim
filings.
4. Responsibility: The issuer’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing
a n d maintaining  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  (DC&P)  and  internal control  over
financial  reporting  (ICFR),  as  those  terms  are  defined  in National  Instrument  52-109
Certification of Disclosure in Issuers’ Annual and Interim Filings, for the issuer.
5. Design: Subject to the limitations, if any, described in paragraphs 5.2 and 5.3, the issuer’s
other certifying officer(s) and I have, as at the end of the period covered by the interim filings
 
(a) designed  DC&P,  or  caused  it  to  be  designed  under  our supervision,  to  provide
reasonable assurance that
 
(i) material  information  relating  to  the  issuer  is  made  known to  us  by  others,
(ii)
particularly during the period in which the interim filings are being prepared; and
 
information  required  to  be  disclosed  by  the  issuer  in  its annual  filings,  interim
filings  or  other  reports  filed  or  submitted  by  it under  securities  legislation  is
recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in
securities legislation; and
(b) designed  ICFR,  or  caused  it  to  be  designed  under  our supervision,  to  provide
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation
of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with the issuer’s GAAP.
Control framework: The control framework the issuer’s other certifying officer(s) and I used
5.1
Control framework: The control framework the issuer’s other certifying officer(s) and I used
to design the issuer’s ICFR is Internal Control – Integrated Framework (COSO Framework)
published  by  The  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the  Treadway Commission
(COSO).
5.2 “N/A”
 
 
5.3 Limitation on scope of design: The issuer has disclosed in its interim MD&A
(a)
the fact that the issuer’s other certifying officer(s) and I have limited the scope of our
design  of  ICFR  to  exclude  controls, policies  and  procedures  of  a  business  that  the
issuer acquired not more than 365 days before the last day of the period covered by the
interim filings; and
(b) summary  financial  information  about  the  proportionately consolidated  entity,  special
purpose  entity  or  business  that  the  issuer acquired  that  has  been  proportionately
consolidated or consolidated in the issuer’s financial statements.
1
6. Reporting changes in ICFR: The issuer has disclosed in its interim MD&A any change in
the issuer’s ICFR that occurred during the period beginning on April 1, 2016 and ended on
June 30,  2016  that  has  materially  affected,  or  is  reasonably  likely  to materially  affect,  the
issuer’s ICFR.
Date: August 9, 2016
/s/ Kevin McArthur
C. Kevin McArthur
Chief Executive Officer and Executive Chair
2