
10-12B 1 o18603e10v12b.htm FORM 12B-25 e10v12b
UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
Form 12b-25
NOTIFICATION OF LATE FILING
(Check One):
o
o
o
o
o
o Form 10-K
þ Form 10-Q
For Period Ended:
September 30, 2005
Transition Report on Form 10-
K
Transition Report on Form 20-
F
Transition Report on Form 11-
K
Transition Report on Form 10-
Q
Transition Report on Form N-
SAR
o Form 20-F
o Form N-SAR
o Form 11-K
For the Transition Period Ended:     
 
Read Instruction (on back page) Before Preparing Form. Please Print or Type.
NOTHING IN THIS FORM SHALL BE CONSTRUED TO IMPLY THAT THE COMMISSION HAS
VERIFIED ANY INFORMATION CONTAINED HEREIN.
If the notification relates to a portion of the filing checked above, identify the Item(a) to which the
notification relates:
PART I — REGISTRANT INFORMATION
Full Name of Registrant
GeoGlobal Resources Inc.
Former Name if Applicable
Address of Principal Executive Office (Street and Number)
200, 630 – 4th Avenue, SW
City, State and Zip Code
Calgary, Alberta T2P 0J9
Canada
PART II — RULES 12b-25(b) AND (c)
If the subject report could not be filed without unreasonable effort or expense and the registrant
seeks relief pursuant to rule 12B-25(b), the following should be completed. (Check box if
appropriate):
The reasons described in reasonable detail in Part III of this form could not be
eliminated without unreasonable effort or expense;
(a)
The subject annual report, semi-annual report, transition report on Form 10-K, Form 20-
F, 11-K, Form N-SAR, or portion thereof, will be filed on or before the fifteenth calendar
day following the prescribed due date; or the subject quarterly report or transition report
on Form 10-Q, or portion thereof will be filed on or before the fifth calendar day
following the prescribed due date; and
The accountant’s statement or other exhibit required by Rule 12b-25(c) has been
attached if applicable.
2
(b)
(c)
þ
PART III — NARRATIVE
State below in reasonable detail the reasons why the form 10-K, 11-K, 10-Q, N-SAR, or the
transition report or portion thereof, could not be filed within the prescribed time period.
Because of the travel by the registrant’s chief executive officer and the chief financial officer to
India for the signing of the new Production Sharing Contracts, review and completion of the
Report consumed more time than anticipated and delayed the filing of the Report.
PART IV — OTHER INFORMATION
(1) Name and telephone number of person to contact in regard to this notification
Allan J. Kent
(Name)
403
(Area Code)
777-9250
(Telephone Number)
(2) Have all other periodic reports required under section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange
act of 1934 or Section 30 of the Investment Company Act of 1940 during the preceding
12 months (or for such shorter) period that the registrant was required to file such reports)
been filed?
If the answer is no, identify report(s)   þ Yes o No
(3) Is it anticipated that any significant change in results of operations from the corresponding
period for the last fiscal year will be reflected by the earnings statements to be included in the
subject report or portion thereof?   o Yes þ No
If so, attach an explanation of the anticipated change, both narratively and quantitatively, and,
if appropriate, state the reasons why a reasonable estimate of the results cannot be made.
3
GeoGlobal Resources Inc.
(Name of Registrant as Specified in Charter)
has caused this notification to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned hereunto duly
authorized.
 
 
Date: November 14, 2005 
 
 
 
INSTRUCTION: The form may be signed by an executive officer of the registrant or by any other
duly authorized representative. The name and title of the person signing the form shall be typed
or printed beneath the signature. If the statement is signed on behalf of the registrant by an
authorized representative (other than an executive officer), evidence of the representative’s
authority to sign on behalf of the registrant shall be filed with the form.
By /s/ Allan J. Kent  
Executive Vice President 
and Chief Financial Officer
ATTENTION
INTENTIONAL MISSTATEMENTS OR OMISSIONS OF FACT
CONSTITUTE FEDERAL CRIMINAL VIOLATIONS (SEE 18 U.S.C 1001).
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS
1. This form is required by Rule 12b-25 (17 CFR 240, 12b-25) of the General Rules and
Regulations under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
2. One signed original and four conformed copies of this form and amendments thereto must be
completed and filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Washington, D.C. 20549,
in accordance with Rule 0-3 of the General Rules and Regulations under the Act. The
information contained in or filed with the form will be made a matter of public record in the
Commission files.
3. A manually signed copy of the form and amendments thereto shall be filed with each national
securities exchange on which any class of securities of the registrant is registered.
4. Amendments to the notifications must also be filed on Form 12b-25 but need not restate
information that has been correctly furnished. The form shall be clearly identified as an
amended notification.
4
5. Electronic Filers. This form shall not be used by electronic filers unable to timely file a report
solely due to electronic difficulties. Filers unable to submit a report within the time period
prescribed due to difficulties in electronic filing should comply with either Rule 201 or rule 202
of Regulation S-T or apply for an adjustment in filing date pursuant to rule 13(b) of
Regulation S-T.
5