
​ Share Issuance Pursuant to Voluntary Conversion - RNS - London Stock Exchange​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
Regulatory Story
Go to market news section
​ ​ ​
New World Resources Plc  -  NWR
Share Issuance Pursuant to
Voluntary Conversion
Released 08:30 31-Aug-2016
RNS Number : 4401I
New World Resources Plc
31 August 2016
Amsterdam / London, 31 August 2016
Share Issuance Pursuant to a Voluntary Conversion of Convertible Notes by a Noteholder
New World Resources Plc ('NWR Plc') and New World Resources N.V. ('NWR NV') announce
the issue of 129,088 A ordinary shares in NWR Plc pursuant to NWR Plc's obligations under a
deed poll entered into on 7 October 2014.
Introduction
On 7 October 2014, in connection with the balance sheet restructuring, NWR NV issued EUR
150,000,000 4.00 per cent./8.00 per cent. PIK Mandatory Convertible Notes due 2020
(Regulation S Notes: Common Code 110730462 / ISIN XS1107304625; Rule 144A Notes:
Common Code 110730489 / ISIN XS1107304898) (the 'Convertible Notes') convertible into
shares of NWR NV which are immediately exchangeable for fully paid A ordinary shares of NWR
Plc having a nominal value at the issue date of €0.0004 each ('A Shares').
On 7 October 2014, NWR Plc entered into a deed poll, which contains irrevocable undertakings
to NWR NV and to each holder of ordinary shares in NWR NV delivered upon conversion of the
Convertible Notes, to purchase such ordinary shares in NWR NV in consideration for the issue of
A Shares (the 'Deed Poll').
Conversion of the Convertible Notes and the issue of A Shares
Following NWR Plc's announcement on 16 May that holders of the Convertible Notes may wish
to consult with their advisers to determine their position regarding conversion of their Convertible
Notes into NWR Plc shares and the timing of any such conversion (noting the solvency position
of the Group), NWR NV has received multiple conversion notices from holders of Convertible
Notes. Most recently, on 5 August, NWR Plc announced the receipt by NWR NV of conversion
notices in respect of a principal amount of notes to be converted of EUR 6,751,036 plus accrued
and unpaid interest.
Since the announcement on 5 August, NWR NV has received further conversion notices in
respect of a principal amount of notes to be converted of EUR 8,280 plus accrued and unpaid
interest thereon payable as PIK Interest (as defined in the terms and conditions of the Convertible
Notes) on the date of conversion (the 'Principal Amount').
Following the conversions that are being announced today, the aggregate outstanding principal
amount of the Convertible Notes is EUR 57,583,571.00.
A total of 129,088 A Shares have been issued in order to satisfy NWR Plc's obligations under the
Deed Poll to issue A Shares to the holder of the Converted Shares as consideration for the
purchase of the Converted Shares.
Authorisation to allot A Shares for the purpose of satisfying NWR Plc's obligations under the
Deed Poll was granted by shareholders of NWR Plc at a general meeting on 20 August 2014.
The A Shares rank pari passu with the existing A Shares of EUR 0.0004 nominal value each in
the capital of NWR Plc including the right to receive in full all dividends and other distributions
declared, made or paid.
As of today, the issued share capital of NWR Plc consists 4,924,874,478 (excluding shares held
by the Company) A Shares of EUR 0.0004 nominal value each, 10,000 B Ordinary Shares of
EUR 0.40 nominal value each and 264,477,400,857 D Shares of EUR 0.0004 nominal value
each.
As noted in our announcement of 16 May 2016, NWR Plc does not intend to apply for listing of
any further shares issued pursuant to a conversion of any Convertible Notes, unless the
suspension of the trading of shares in NWR Plc is lifted.
- End -
Investor and Media Contact:
Tel: +31 20 2404 390
Tel: +44 20 7317 5990
info@nwrgroup.eu
Website:  www.newworldresources.eu
Website: www.newworldresources.eu
About NWR Plc
New World Resources Plc is a Central European hard coal producer. NWR Plc produces quality
coking and thermal coal for the steel and energy sectors in Central Europe through its subsidiary
OKD, the largest hard coal mining company in the Czech Republic.
About NWR N.V.
New World Resources N.V. is a wholly owned subsidiary of NWR Plc. It is a company
incorporated under the laws of the Netherlands and registered at Dutch Trade Register of the
Chamber of Commerce under number 34239108 and registered as an overseas company at
Companies House in the UK with UK establishment number BR016952 and its address at 115
Park Street, London, W1K 7AP, United Kingdom (Telephone +44 (0) 207 371 5990, Fax +44 (0)
207 371 5999).
Disclaimer and cautionary note on forward looking statements and notes on certain other matters
Certain statements in this announcement are not historical facts and are or are deemed to be
"forward-looking". The Company's prospects, plans, financial position and business strategy, and
statements pertaining to the capital resources, future expenditure for development projects and
results of operations, may constitute forward-looking statements. In addition, forward-looking
statements generally can be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology including, but
not limited to; "may", "expect", "intend", "estimate", "anticipate", "plan", "foresee", "will", "could",
"may", "might", "believe" or "continue" or the negatives of these terms or variations of them or
similar terminology. Although the Company believes that the expectations reflected in these
forward-looking statements are reasonable, it can give no assurance that these expectations will
prove to have been correct.  These forward-looking statements involve a number of risks,
uncertainties and other factors that may cause actual results to be materially different from those
expressed or implied in these forward-looking statements because they relate to events and
depend on circumstances that may or may not occur in the future and may be beyond NWR's
ability to control or predict. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future
performances.
Factors, risks and uncertainties that could cause actual outcomes and results to be materially
different from those projected include, but are not limited to, the following: risks relating to
changes in political, economic and social conditions in the Czech Republic, Poland and the CEE
region; future prices and demand for the Company's products, and demand for the Company's
customers' products; coal mine reserves; remaining life of the Company's mines; coal production;
trends in the coal industry and domestic and international coal market conditions; risks in coal
mining operations; future expansion plans and capital expenditures; the Company's relationship
with, and conditions affecting, the Company's customers; competition; railroad and other
transportation performance and costs; availability of specialist and qualified workers; and
weather conditions or catastrophic damage; risks relating to Czech or Polish law, regulations and
taxation, including laws, regulations, decrees and decisions governing the coal mining industry,
the environment and currency and exchange controls relating to Czech and Polish entities and
their official interpretation by governmental and other regulatory bodies and by the courts; and
risks relating to global economic conditions and the global economic environment. Additional risk
factors are as described in the Company's annual report.
Forward-looking statements are made only as of the date of this announcement.  The Company
expressly disclaims any obligation or undertaking to release, publicly or otherwise, any updates
or revisions to any forward-looking statement contained in this announcement to reflect any
change in its expectations or any change in events, conditions, assumptions or circumstances on
which any such statement is based unless so required by applicable law.
This information is provided by RNS
The company news service from the London Stock Exchange
 
END
 
 
MSCAKKDPDBKDDFN ​ ​ ​ 
Close
London Stock Exchange plc is not responsible for and does not check content on this
Website. Website users are responsible for checking content. Any news item (including
any prospectus) which is addressed solely to the persons and countries specified therein
should not be relied upon other than by such persons and/or outside the specified
countries. Terms and conditions, including restrictions on use and distribution apply.
©2014 London Stock Exchange plc. All rights reserved
Share Issuance Pursuant to Voluntary Conversion - RNS
​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​