
,
ENERGX ASX ANNOUNCEMENT
RESDIIRCFS [h F),
“mm” 29 July -016
HIGHLIGHTS
ASX: EER
o All DNFtM statutory reporting requirements completed and in East Energy Resources is a ma.
compliance. exploration and development
company primarily focused in the
I I I I I Eromanga Basin in Queensland.
0 Monitoring progress of adjacent Galilee Basm developments
continues, including the progress of the Carmichael project EER has combined Total JORC
Resources oi 3.4ABt oi Thermal
Coal (627.5Mt Indicated and
0 Continued focus on cost reduction to minimise expenditure for the 2817M Inferred) located south
west oi the major deposits of GVK
next two to three years' Hancock Coal and Waratah Coal
in the Galilee Basin.
BLACKALL COAL PROJECT Capital St'ucmre
. . . . . h P ' : . 4
The Blackall Protect conSIsts of three main coal resource areas Within 5 we "Ge $0 00
MDL464, EP01398 and EP01399. It is located immediately to the south of Marke'cap' $1'426m
the township of Blackall in central western Queensland Shams 0" “SUE: 355480930
These permits host a combined JORC Total Coal Resource Estimate of B d IDI
3.44 billion tonnes of thermal quality coal.N°‘9‘ °ar ° new“
I I I I I I Mark Basso
In addition, an Exploration Target In the range of 20 to 2.5 billion tonnes has Managing Director
been identified with EPC 1398 and EPC 1399. References to Reported Ranko Matte
Exploration Targets are in accordance with the guidelines of the JORC Code Non-Executive Director
(2012). The potential quantity and grade of the targets is conceptual in nature Rex Littleonod
and there has been insufficient exploration to estimate a Mineral Resource. N°"'EXEC“""9 [mam
it is uncertain if further exploration will result in the estimation of a Mineral Chris Thoroughgood _
Note 1 Alternative Non-Executive
Resource. Director (to Rex Littlewood)
With the continued downturn in the thermal coal market the company has
reduced expenditure on all activities to an absolute minimum while Contact Us
continuing to monitor the resources sector for signs of an upturn. Alternative wwweaslenerg coma“
strategies for development of the resource will continue to be assessed. Level 3
216 St Georges Terrace
PERTH WA 6000
Nme‘ See ASX announcement dated 10 Jul 2014 - EEFl REPORTS 3 44 BILLION P0 B” 7775
' y ' CLOISTERS SQUARE WA 6850
TONNE JORC RESOURCE
. Ph: 1 22
Disclaimer: The Company confirms that it is not aware of any new information or Faxfmssggzgesfggo
data that would materially affect the resources and all material assumptions and Email; info@easgenergy£om_au
technical parameters underpinning the Resource estimates continue to apply and Web: www.eastenergy.com.au
have not materially changed in the meantime.
Page 1 of a


R E S I) H k C E S
l. I M I T E D
\ \ ~\ in“: 'I a“ are an 1er
' round ,5 Q
._ 
,5 ‘2 I. «u z. m 
" °“""°"‘ " ’ $ :1 55m.“
‘«  . % :1 Sum-am
'   
Wnralah Coal .\  Hui m_ “a 
‘ H" ‘ " g...— cam
m _ \ fl? l __ a mum-
\ \ _, \
i .' K t ‘ ,' t
  ) i, g
i i' ‘ » \
1*,- mm.  1 
w w- m‘.  w it 7
{WWW m . ‘3‘ .  ,i’  m
Fig mm» ‘\ ‘ \., e m
.l  evens“) \\ ‘ ' ‘
H  EPC1149 ,
' /
m m “’C‘m m °—4'Im'" '3”
Mineral Development License (MDL 4641
MDL464 was granted for a period of 5 years, with a commencement date from 1 August 2014. The MDL
covers some 37,000a over the central portion of the main coal resource where initial mining is most likely
to occur should the project proceed.
Statutory Compliance and Hegorﬁng
The Annual Report for EPC 1149 was completed and lodged with DNRM during the quarter in compliance
with the terms of the lease.
Approval was received from DNRM for a further three year renewal of EPC 1398 through to June 2019.
Reduction/Postponement of Work Programs
The Company has approval from DNRM for minimal annual work programs and expenditure for most of
the EPC’s and MDL464 within the Blackall Coal Project.
The revised plans for EPC 1399 and EPC 1400 are still under assessment by the Department.
Level 3/21e st eeoiges lCrram, Perth Western Australia 5000 Page 2 or 4
PO Box 7775, Cloisters Square Parth Western Australia 6&5!)
Ph. +61 8 9225 5833 Fax. +61 8 9226 4300 www.eastenergy com au


R E S I) H k C E S
l. I M I T E D
CORPORATE
During the June 2016 quarter the Company continued assessing the development options for the coal
resource within MDL 464 and the three EPCs covering the main body of the Blackall Project.
The Board of Directors is monitoring further developments since the recent approval of Adani‘s
Carmichael Coal mine in the Galilee basin. The rail line for the Carmichael project will provide a crucial
link for the future transport of coal from the Blackall Project should it go ahead.
All tenements remain in good standing with statutory obligations complied with and the necessary
departmental reports lodged on time.
KEY OBJECTIVES FOR SEPTEMBER 2016 QUARTER
v Continue to review strategic options for development of the Blackall Project;
v Continue to appraise the market outlook for thermal coal
v Monitoring of Galilee Basin coal projects and government approvals
v Monitoring and assessment of rail and port infrastructure commitments by other proponents as to their
impact on the potential development of the Blackall Project
Summary of tenement holdings and movements held by East Energy Resources Ltd
snacks". om
Blackall. QLD
snacks". om
Blackall. QLD
snacks". om
Blacks". ow
snacks". om
Summary of Farm-in and Farm-out Arrangements held by East Energy Resources Ltd
-m_
Further information:
Mark Basso
Managing Director
T | +61 8 9225 5833
E | inioneastenergyLomau
W| www.eastenergy.com.au
Level 3/210 st oeorges lcrratc, Parth Western Australia 5000 Page 3 or 4
PO Box HIS, Cloisters Square Perth Western Australia 6&50
Ph, +61 8 9225 5833 Fax +01 8 9216 4300 www.eastenergy com au


R E S 0 H R C F. S
L I M I 1' F. D

Competent Persons statement - EM 1399 Resources
The information in this report relating to estimates of Mineral Resources within ERC1399, is based on information compiled by Mr Peter Tighe who is a
member of the Australian lnstitute of Mining and Metallurgy. Mr Tighe is employed full time as Exploration Manager with East Energy Resources Limited. Mr
Tighe has had over 30 years’ experience in exploration, mining and resource evaluation and has sufficient experience which is relevant to the style of
mineralisation and type of deposit under consideration and to the activity which he is undertaking to qualify as Competent Person as defined in the 2012
Edition of the “Australasian Code for Reporting ofExploration Results, Mineral Resources and are Reserves”. Mr Tighe consents to the inclusion in the report
of the matters based on the information, in the form and context in which it appears
Competent Persons statement - EM 139.? Resources
The information in this announcement relating to the estimates ofMineral Resources within EPC 1398 is based on the 2004 will: code and information
reviewed by Mr Bill Knox, who is a Member of The AuslMM. This information was prepared and first disclosed under theloRC Code 2004. it has notbeen
updated since to comply with the lORC Code 2012 on the basis that the information has not materially changed since it was last reported Mr Knox has
sufficient experience which is relevant to the style ofmineralisation and type ofdeposit under consideration and to the activity which he is undertaking to
qualify as a Competent Person as defined in the 2012 Edition of the lORC Code. Mr Knox consents to the inclusion in this announcement of the matters based
on this information in the form and context in which it appears.
Competent Persons Statement - EM 1149 Resources
The Coal Resource estimation for the Blackall Rrofect lEPC1149f presented in this announcementhas been carried out in accordance with the principles and
guidelines of theAustralasian Code for Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and are Reserves flORC Code 2004) and the Australian
Guidelines for Estimating and Reporting of lnventory Coal, Coal Resources and Coal Reserves, 2003.The information in the announcement to which this
statementis attached, that relates to East Energy’s Blackall Coal Resource on EPC1149 is based on information reviewed by Dr Gerard McCaughan, who is a
Member of The AuslMM and is a full time employee of5RK. . This information was prepared and first disclosed under the lORC Code 2004. it has not been
updated since to comply with the lORC Code 2012 on the basis that the information has not materially changed since it was lastreported. 0r McCaughan
has sufficient experience which is relevant to the style of mineralisation and type of deposit under consideration and to the activity which he is undertaking
to qualify as a Competent Person as defined in the 2004 Edition of the jORE Code. Dr McCaughan consents to the inclusion in the announcement of the
matters based on this information in the form and context in which it appears.
Eamgetent Persons Sratemem- Exglamrl'an Tamers
The information in this announcement relating to Exploration Targets within EPC1393 and EPC1399 is based on information compiled by Mr Peter Tighe who
is a Member of The AuslMM and a full time employee of East Energy Resources Ltd. Mr Tighe has sufficient experience which is relevant to the style of
mineralisation and type of deposit under consideration and to the activity which he is undertaking to qualify as a Competent Person as defined in the 2012
Edition of the "Australasian Code for Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and are Reserves”. Mr Tighe consents to the inclusion in this
announcement of the matters based on this information in the form and context in which it appears.
Fanlvard tanking Statements
This Announcement may contain forward looking statements. The words ’anflcipare‘, ’belleve‘, 'expect', 'proiect', 'forecast', ’estimate’, 'Ilkely', ‘lrlterld’, 'should',
’leld', ‘may', ‘mrget’, ‘plarl’ and other similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. indications of, and guidance on, future
earnings and financial position and peiformance are also forward-looking statements. forward-looking statements are subfect to risk factors associated with
the Company’s business, many of which are beyond the control of the Company. it is believed that the expectations reflected in these statements are
reasonable but they may be affected by a variety of variables and changes in underlying assumptions which could cause actual results or trends to differ
materially from those expressed or implied in such statements. There can be no assurance that actual outcomes will not differ materially from these
statements. You should not place undue reliance on forward-looking statements and neither East Energy Resources Limited nor any ofits directors, employees,
servants, advisers or agents assume any obligation to update such information.
The company confirms that it is not aware of any new information or data that materially affects the information included in the original market
announcements and, in the case of estimates of Mineral Resources, thatall material assumptions and technical parameters underpinning the estimates in the
relevantmarket announcementcontinue to apply andhave not materially changed. The company confirms that the form and contextin which the Competent
Persans’ findings are presented have not been materially modified from the original market announcement.
Lcdd 3/116; SI bco'gcs lmram PC'Zl‘i W DSKrﬁ Atroth a bum) Page 4 of 4
FE} Box ///‘2, Uabtm; Siludli Pclm W DSKrﬁ Aust'Jha USBU
NV #1189115 ms rox AblésSQZb/HLIU wwvveastenergycom cu

