
424B3 1 fieldpoint_424b3.htm FIELDPOINT PETROLEUM CORPORATION FieldPoint
Petroleum Corporation
Filed pursuant to Rule 424(b)(3)
SEC File No. 333-209443
PROSPECTUS
FIELDPOINT PETROLEUM CORPORATION
$20,000,000
Common Stock
Warrants
Convertible Debt Securities
Debt Securities
Rights
Units
FieldPoint Petroleum Corporation may offer and sell from time to time up to $20,000,000 of its
shares of common stock, par value $0.01, warrants, convertible debt securities, debt securities,
rights or units or any combination of these securities, in one or more transactions on terms to be
determined at the time of sale.
This prospectus provides you with a general description of the securities that we may offer. Each
time that securities are offered and sold by us using this prospectus, we will provide a
supplement to this prospectus that contains specific information about the offering, including the
offering price of the securities. The supplement may also add, update or change information
contained in this prospectus. You should read both this prospectus and the prospectus
supplement, together with any additional information which is incorporated by reference into this
prospectus before you invest in our securities.
We may sell the securities to or through underwriters, dealers or agents or directly to purchasers
on a continuous or delayed basis. The prospectus supplement, which we will provide to you
each time we offer securities, will set forth the names of any underwriters, dealers or agents
involved in the sale of the securities, and any applicable fee, commission or discount
arrangements with them. For additional information on the methods of sale, you should refer to
the section entitled "Plan of Distribution" in this prospectus.
Our common stock is traded on the NYSE MKT under the symbol "FPP.” On May 24, 2016, the
closing price for our common stock on the NYSE MKT was $0.73 per share.  As of May 24, 2016,
the aggregate market value of our outstanding common stock held by non-affiliates, or the public
float, was approximately $3,661,172, which was calculated based on 5,015,304 shares of
outstanding common stock held by non-affiliates and on a price per share of $0.73, the closing
price of our common stock on NYSE MKT on May 24, 2016.  Pursuant to General Instruction I.B.6
of Form S-3, in no event will we sell our common stock in a public primary offering with a value
exceeding more than one-third of our public float in any 12-month period so long as our public
float remains below $75.0 million. During the 12 calendar months prior to and including the date
of this prospectus, we have not sold any securities pursuant to General Instruction I.B.6 of
Form S-3.
This prospectus may not be used to offer and sell securities unless accompanied by the
applicable prospectus supplement.
Investing in our securities involves risks. For a discussion of certain risks that should be
considered by prospective investors, see "Risk Factors" beginning on page 10 of this
prospectus.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission
has approved or disapproved of these securities or determined if this prospectus is
truthful or complete. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
The date of this prospectus is August 15, 2016
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN INFORMATION BY REFERENCE
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
OUR BUSINESS
RISK FACTORS
DILUTION
USE OF PROCEEDS
LEGAL OWNERSHIP
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
THE SECURITIES WE MAY OFFER
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON STOCK
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
DESCRIPTION OF CONVERTIBLE DEBT SECURITIES AND DEBT
SECURITIES
DESCRIPTION OF RIGHTS
DESCRIPTION OF UNITS
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
Page
4
5
6
7
9
10
10
10
11
16
18
18
19
21
30
31
31
31
As used in this prospectus, the terms "FieldPoint Petroleum Corporation," “FieldPoint”, "we,"
"our," "ours" and "us" may, depending on the context, refer to FieldPoint Petroleum Corporation.
References in this prospectus to "$" are to United States dollars.
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
This prospectus is part of a registration statement that we filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission, which we sometimes refer to in this prospectus as the SEC, using a "shelf"
registration process on Form S-3. Under the shelf registration, we may sell any combination of
the securities described in this prospectus in one or more offerings up to a total dollar amount of
$20,000,000.
The rules and regulations of the SEC allow us to omit from this prospectus certain information
that is included in the registration statement. For further information about us and our securities,
you should review the registration statement and the exhibits filed with the registration statement.
In addition, the SEC allows us to incorporate by reference into this prospectus information in the
reports and other documents that we file with the SEC, which means that we can disclose
important information to you by referring you to those reports and other documents. The
information incorporated by reference is considered to be part of this prospectus, and information
that we later file with the SEC will automatically update and, where applicable, modify or
supersede that information. You may read the registration statement (including its exhibits) and
the reports and other documents that we file with the SEC at the SEC’s website, www.sec.gov ,
or at the SEC’s Public Reference Room described below under the heading “Where You Can
Find More Information”.
This prospectus provides you with a general description of the securities that we may offer. Each
time that we sell securities, we will provide a prospectus supplement that will contain specific
information about the terms of that offering. The prospectus supplement also may add, update or
change information contained in this prospectus. You should read both this prospectus and any
prospectus supplement together with additional information incorporated by reference in this
prospectus before making an investment in our securities. See "Where You Can Find More
Information" below for more information. We may use this prospectus to sell securities only if it is
accompanied by a prospectus supplement.
You should rely only on information contained or incorporated by reference in this prospectus.
We have not authorized anyone to provide you with information different from that contained or
incorporated in this prospectus. If anyone provides you with different or inconsistent information,
you should not rely on it. You should not assume that the information appearing in this
prospectus, any prospectus supplement or any document incorporated by reference is accurate
at any date other than as of the date of each such document, even though this prospectus and
any related prospectus supplement is delivered or securities are sold on a later date. Our
business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects may have changed since the
date indicated on the cover page of such documents. The distribution of this prospectus may be
restricted by law in certain jurisdictions. You should inform yourself about and observe any of
these restrictions. This prospectus does not constitute, and may not be used in connection with,
an offer or solicitation by anyone in any jurisdiction in which the offer or solicitation is not
authorized, or in which the person making the offer or solicitation is not qualified to do so, or to
any person to whom it is unlawful to make the offer or solicitation.
This prospectus and the related prospectus supplement do not constitute an offer to sell or the
solicitation of an offer to buy any securities other than the registered securities to which they
relate,
nor do this prospectus and the related prospectus supplement constitute an offer to sell or the
solicitation of an offer to buy securities in any jurisdiction to any person to whom it is unlawful to
make such offer or solicitation in such jurisdiction.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We file annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy statements and other information with the
SEC. You may read and copy any of these documents at the SEC's public reference room at
100 F Street N.E., Room 1580, Washington, D.C. 20549. Please call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-
0330 for further information on the public reference room. Our SEC filings are also available to
the public at the SEC's website at www.sec.gov.
INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN INFORMATION BY REFERENCE
The SEC allows us to "incorporate by reference" the information we file with the SEC, which
means that we can disclose important information in this prospectus by referring you to the
document that contains the information. We hereby incorporate by reference the documents listed
below, which were previously filed with the SEC, and any future filings made with the SEC under
Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, which we
sometimes refer to in this prospectus as the Exchange Act, other than information in a Current
Report on Form 8-K furnished pursuant to Item 2.02 or Item 7.01 of Form 8-K and exhibits filed in
connection with such information:
•
our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015, filed with the SEC
on March 30, 2016;
•
our Current Reports on Form 8-K, filed with the SEC on March 31, 2016 and May 16, 2016.
•
our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2016 as filed with the SEC
on May 16, 2016.
In addition, all reports and documents filed by us pursuant to the Exchange Act, other than
information in a Current Report on Form 8-K furnished pursuant to Item 2.02 or Item 7.01 of
Form 8-K and exhibits filed in connection with such information, after the date of the initial filing of
this registration statement on Form S-3 to which this prospectus relates and prior to the time that
we sell all the securities offered by this prospectus shall be deemed to be incorporated by
reference into this prospectus.
Any statement contained in a document incorporated or deemed to be incorporated by
reference in this prospectus shall be deemed modified, superseded or replaced, as applicable,
for purposes of this prospectus to the extent that a statement contained in this prospectus, or in
any subsequently filed document that also is deemed to be incorporated by reference in this
prospectus, modifies, supersedes or replaces such statement. Any statement so modified,
superseded or replaced shall not be deemed, except as so modified, superseded or replaced, to
constitute a part of this prospectus. Subject to the foregoing, all information appearing in this
prospectus is qualified in its entirety by the information appearing in the documents incorporated
by reference.
Statements contained in this prospectus as to the contents of any contract or other document
are not necessarily complete, and in each instance we refer you to the copy of the contract or
document filed as an exhibit to the registration statement or the documents incorporated by
reference in this prospectus, each such statement being qualified in all respects by such
reference.
You may receive a copy of any of these filings, at no cost, by writing or calling Phillip
Roberson, President, FieldPoint Petroleum Corporation, 609 Castle Road, #335, Austin, TX
 78746,  Telephone: (512) 250-8692 or by contacting the SEC as described above.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Certain statements contained in this Form S-3 constitute “forward-looking statements’ within
the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act and Section 27A of the Exchange Act
and Section 21E of the Exchange Act.  All statements, other than statements of historical facts,
included in this Form S-3 that address activities, events or developments that the Company
expects, projects, believes or anticipates will or may occur in the future, including such matters as
oil and natural gas reserves, future drilling and operations, future production of oil and natural
gas, future net cash flows, future capital expenditures and other such matters, are forward-looking
statements.  Such forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties
and other factors which may cause the actual results, performance or achievements of the
Company to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements
expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements.  Such factors include, among others,
the following:  the volatility of oil and natural gas prices, the Company’s drilling and acquisition
results, the Company’s ability to replace reserves, the availability of capital resources, the
reliance upon estimates of proved reserves, operating hazards and uninsured risks, competition,
government regulation, the ability of the Company to implement its business strategy and other
factors referenced in this prospectus.
Although we believe that our plans, intentions and expectations reflected in these forward-
looking statements are reasonable, we cannot be certain that these plans, intentions or
expectations will be achieved. Actual results, performance or achievements could differ
materially from those contemplated, expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements
contained or incorporated by reference in this prospectus. Disclosure of important factors that
could cause actual results to differ materially from our plans, intentions or expectations are
included under the heading "Risk Factors" in this prospectus and our Annual Report on Form 10-
K for the year ended December 31, 2015.
For example, a few of the uncertainties that could affect the accuracy of forward-looking
statements, besides the specific factors identified above in the Risk Factors section of this
prospectus, include:
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
adverse economic conditions in the United States and globally;
difficult and adverse conditions in the domestic and global capital and credit markets;
changes in domestic and global demand for oil and natural gas;
volatility in the prices we receive for our oil and natural gas;
operational constraints and potential mechanical failure at production facilities,
processing plants or pipelines;
the availability of sufficient pipeline and transportation facilities;
the effects of government regulation, permitting and other legal requirements;
future developments with respect to the quality of our properties, including, among
other things, the existence of reserves in economic quantities;
uncertainties about the estimates of our oil and natural gas reserves;
our ability to increase our production and oil and natural gas income through
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
our ability to increase our production and oil and natural gas income through
exploration and development;
our ability to successfully apply horizontal drilling techniques and tertiary recovery
methods;
the number of well locations to be drilled, the cost to drill and the time frame within
which they will be drilled;
drilling and operating risks;
the availability of equipment, such as drilling rigs and gathering and transportation
pipelines;
changes in our drilling plans and related budgets; and
the adequacy of our capital resources and liquidity including, but not limited to, access
to additional borrowing capacity.
In light of the significant uncertainties inherent in the forward-looking statements made in this
prospectus, particularly in view of our early stage of operations, the inclusion of this information
should not be regarded as a representation by us or any other person that our objectives and
plans will be achieved.
Many of these factors are beyond our ability to control or predict. These factors are not
intended to represent a complete list of the general or specific factors that may affect us. We may
note additional factors elsewhere in this prospectus and in any documents incorporated by
reference into this prospectus. All forward-looking statements speak only as of the date made. All
subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to us, or persons acting on
our behalf, are expressly qualified in their entirety by the cautionary statements. Except as
required by law, we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statement.
OUR BUSINESS
FieldPoint Petroleum Corporation, a Colorado corporation (the “Company”), was formed on
March 11, 1980, to acquire and enhance mature oil and natural gas field production in the mid-
continent and the Rocky Mountain regions. Since 1980, the Company had engaged in oil and
natural gas operations and, in 1986, divested all oil and natural gas assets and operations.  From
December 1986, until its reverse acquisition on December 31, 1997, the Company had not
engaged in oil and natural gas operations.
As of December 31, 2015, the Company had varying ownership interest in 472 gross
productive wells (113.26 net) located in five states, including Texas, New Mexico, Oklahoma,
Wyoming and Louisiana.  The Company operates 13 of the 472 wells; the other wells are
operated by independent operators under contracts that are standard in the industry.  It is a
primary objective of the Company to operate some of the oil and natural gas properties in which it
has an economic interest, and the Company will also partner with larger oil and natural gas
companies to operate certain oil and natural gas properties in which the Company has an
economic interest.  The Company believes, with the responsibility and authority as operator, it is
in a better position to control cost, safety, and timeliness of work as well as other critical factors
affecting the economics of a well.
RISK FACTORS
Investing in our securities involves a high degree of risk. Before you decide whether to
purchase any of our securities, in addition to the other information in this prospectus and the
related prospectus supplement, you should carefully consider the risks described under the
heading “Risk Factors” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2015 and any updates in our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q or Current Reports
on Form 8-K, which is incorporated by reference into this prospectus, as the same may be
updated from time to time by our subsequent filings with the SEC. You should also carefully
consider any additional risks that are described in the prospectus supplement related to the
offering of our securities. If one or more of these risks materializes, our business, financial
condition and results of operations may be adversely affected. In that event, the value of our
securities could decline.
DILUTION
The net tangible book value of the Company at March 31, 2016 was $23,486, or $0.003 per
share, based upon 8,890,101 shares outstanding. Net tangible book value per share is
determined by dividing the number of outstanding shares of common stock into the net tangible
book value of the Company (total assets less total liabilities and intangible assets).
If any securities in the form of common stock or securities convertible into or exercisable to
purchase common stock (collectively “Common Stock and Common Stock Equivalents”) are sold
under this prospectus, the number of common shares outstanding will increase and the
Company's net tangible book value will increase. The sale of any Common Stock or Common
Stock Equivalents at a price per share which is greater than the Company's net tangible book
value per share will increase the net tangible book value per share of shares held by the then
current shareholders and decrease the net tangible book value per share of the shares
purchased pursuant to the sale of securities under this prospectus. Dilution is the reduction of
value of the purchaser's investment measured by the difference between the effective price per
share of Common Stock or Common Stock Equivalent sold under this prospectus and the net
tangible book value per share after the Offering. The dilution per share will decrease with the
sale of additional securities under this prospectus because the proceeds from each such sale will
increase the Company's net tangible book value.
USE OF PROCEEDS
Unless otherwise indicated in the applicable prospectus supplement, we intend to use the
net proceeds from the sale of the securities offered under this prospectus for general corporate
purposes, including, without limitation, working capital, crude oil and natural gas exploration,
development and production and other business opportunities, the acquisition, exploration and
development of additional companies, properties or interests. Pending the application of the net
proceeds, we expect to invest the proceeds in investment grade, interest-bearing securities.
LEGAL OWNERSHIP AND BOOK-ENTRY ISSUANCE
In this section, we describe special considerations that will apply to registered securities
issued in global—i.e., book-entry—form. First we describe the difference between legal
ownership and indirect ownership of registered securities. Then we describe special provisions
that apply to global securities.
Who is the Legal Owner of a Registered Security?
Each debt security, share of common stock or warrant in registered form will be represented
either by a certificate issued in definitive form to a particular investor or by one or more global
securities representing the entire issuance of securities. We refer to those who have securities
registered in their own names, on the books that we or the trustee or other agent maintain for this
purpose, as the “holders” of those securities. These persons are the legal holders of the
securities. We refer to those who, indirectly through others, own beneficial interests in securities
that are not registered in their own names as indirect owners of those securities. As we discuss
below, indirect owners are not legal holders, and investors in securities issued in book-entry form
or in street name will be indirect owners.
Book-Entry Owners
We expect to issue debt securities in book-entry form only. We may issue shares of common
stock in book-entry form. This means those securities will be represented by one or more global
securities registered in the name of a financial institution that holds them as depositary on behalf
of other financial institutions that participate in the depositary's book-entry system. These
participating institutions, in turn, hold beneficial interests in the securities on behalf of themselves
or their customers.
Under each indenture or other applicable agreement, only the person in whose name a
security is registered is recognized as the holder of that security. Consequently, for securities
issued in global form, we will recognize only the depositary as the holder of the securities and we
will make all payments on the securities, including deliveries of common in exchange for
exchangeable debt securities, to the depositary. The depositary passes along the payments it
receives to its participants, which in turn pass the payments along to their customers who are the
beneficial owners. The depositary and its participants do so under agreements they have made
with one another or with their customers; they are not obligated to do so under the terms of the
securities.
As a result, investors will not own securities directly. Instead, they will own beneficial interests
in a global security, through a bank, broker or other financial institution that participates in the
depositary's book-entry system or holds an interest through a participant. As long as the
securities are issued in global form, investors will be indirect owners, and not holders, of the
securities.
Street Name Owners
In the future we may terminate a global security or issue securities initially in non-global form.
In these cases, investors may choose to hold their securities in their own names or in street
name. Securities held by an investor in street name would be registered in the name of a bank,
broker or
other financial institution that the investor chooses, and the investor would hold only a beneficial
interest in those securities through an account he or she maintains at that institution.
For securities held in street name, we will recognize only the intermediary banks, brokers and
other financial institutions in whose names the securities are registered as the holders of those
securities and we will make all payments on those securities, including deliveries of common in
exchange for exchangeable debt securities, to them. These institutions pass along the payments
they receive to their customers who are the beneficial owners, but only because they agree to do
so in their customer agreements or because they are legally required to do so. Investors who
hold securities in street name will be indirect owners, not holders, of those securities.
Legal Holders
Our obligations, as well as the obligations of the trustee under any indenture and the
obligations, if any, of any other third parties employed by us, the trustee or any agents, run only to
the holders of the securities. We do not have obligations to investors who hold beneficial
interests in global securities, in street name or by any other indirect means. This will be the case
whether an investor chooses to be an indirect owner of a security or has no choice because we
are issuing the securities only in global form.
For example, once we make a payment or give a notice to the holder, we have no further
responsibility for that payment or notice even if that holder is required, under agreements with
depositary participants or customers or by law, to pass it along to the indirect owners but does not
do so. Similarly, if we want to obtain the approval of the holders for any purpose—e.g., to amend
the indenture for a series of debt securities or to relieve us of the consequences of a default or of
our obligation to comply with a particular provision of an indenture—we would seek the approval
only from the holders, and not the indirect owners, of the relevant securities. Whether and how
the holders contact the indirect owners is up to the holders.
When we refer to “you” in this section of the prospectus, we mean those who invest in the
securities being offered by this prospectus and the applicable prospectus supplement, whether
they are the holders or only indirect owners of those securities. When we refer to “your securities”
in this section of the prospectus, we mean the securities in which you will hold a direct or indirect
interest.
Special Considerations for Indirect Owners
If you hold securities through a bank, broker or other financial institution, either in book-entry
form or in street name, you should check with your own institution to find out:
·
how it handles securities payments and notices;
· whether it imposes fees or charges;
·
how it would handle a request for the holders' consent, if ever required;
· whether and how you can instruct it to send you securities registered in your own name
so you can be a holder, if that is permitted in the future;
how it would exercise rights under the securities if there were a default or other event
triggering the need for holders to act to protect their interests; and
if the securities are in book-entry form, how the depositary's rules and procedures will
affect these matters.
·
·
What is a Global Security?
A global security is issued in book-entry form only. Each security issued in book-entry form
will be represented by a global security that we deposit with and register in the name of one or
more financial institutions or clearing systems, or their nominees, which we select. A financial
institution or clearing system that we select for any security for this purpose is called the
“depositary” for that security. A security will usually have only one depositary but it may have
more.
Each series of these securities will have one or more of the following as the depositaries:
·
·
·
·
The Depository Trust Company, New York, New York, which is known as “DTC”;
a financial institution holding the securities on behalf of Euroclear Bank S.A./N.V., as
operator of the Euroclear system, which is known as “Euroclear”;
a financial institution holding the securities on behalf of Clearstream Banking, société
anonyme, Luxembourg, which is known as “Clearstream”; and
any other clearing system or financial institution named in the applicable prospectus
supplement.
The depositaries named above may also be participants in one another's systems. Thus, for
example, if DTC is the depositary for a global security, investors may hold beneficial interests in
that security through Euroclear or Clearstream, as DTC participants. The depositary or
depositaries for your securities will be named in your prospectus supplement; if none is named,
the depositary will be DTC.
A global security may represent one or any other number of individual securities. Generally,
all securities represented by the same global security will have the same terms. We may,
however, issue a global security that represents multiple securities of the same kind, such as
debt securities, that have different terms and are issued at different times. We call this kind of
global security a master global security. Your prospectus supplement will indicate whether your
securities are represented by a master global security.
A global security may not be transferred to or registered in the name of anyone other than the
depositary or its nominee, unless special termination situations arise. We describe those
situations below under “—Holder's Option to Obtain a Non-Global Security; Special Situations
When a Global Security Will Be Terminated”.  As a result of these arrangements, the depositary,
or its nominee, will be the sole registered owner and holder of all securities represented by a
global security, and investors will be permitted to own only indirect interests in a global security.
Indirect interests must be held by means of an account with a broker, bank or other financial
institution that in turn has an account with the depositary or with another institution that does.
Thus, an investor whose security is
represented by a global security will not be a holder of the security, but only an indirect owner of
an interest in the global security.
If the prospectus supplement for a particular security indicates that the security will be issued
in global form only, then the security will be represented by a global security at all times unless
and until the global security is terminated. We describe the situations in which this can occur
below under “—Holder's Option to Obtain a Non-Global Security; Special Situations When a
Global Security Will Be Terminated”. If termination occurs, we may issue the securities through
another book-entry clearing system or decide that the securities may no longer be held through
any book-entry clearing system.
Special Considerations for Global Securities
As an indirect owner, an investor's rights relating to a global security will be governed by the
account rules of the depositary and those of the investor's financial institution or other
intermediary through which it holds its interest (e.g., Euroclear or Clearstream, if DTC is the
depositary), as well as general laws relating to securities transfers. We do not recognize this type
of investor or any intermediary as a holder of securities and instead deal only with the depositary
that holds the global security.
If securities are issued only in the form of a global security, an investor should be aware of
the following:
· An investor cannot cause the securities to be registered in his or her own name, and
cannot obtain non-global certificates for his or her interest in the securities, except in
the special situations we describe below;
· An investor will be an indirect holder and must look to his or her own bank or broker for
payments on the securities and protection of his or her legal rights relating to the
securities, as we describe above under “—Who is the Legal Owner of a Registered
Security?”;
· An investor may not be able to sell interests in the securities to some insurance
companies and other institutions that are required by law to own their securities in non-
book-entry form;
· An investor may not be able to pledge his or her interest in a global security in
circumstances where certificates representing the securities must be delivered to the
lender or other beneficiary of the pledge in order for the pledge to be effective;
·
The depositary's policies will govern payments, deliveries, transfers, exchanges,
notices and other matters relating to an investor's interest in a global security, and
those policies may change from time to time. We, the trustee and any agents will have
no responsibility for any aspect of the depositary's policies, actions or records of
ownership interests in a global security. We, the trustee and any agents also do not
supervise the depositary in any way;
The depositary will require that those who purchase and sell interests in a global
security within its book-entry system use immediately available funds and your broker
or bank may require you to do so as well; and
Financial institutions that participate in the depositary's book-entry system and through
which an investor holds its interest in the global securities, directly or indirectly, may
also have their own policies affecting payments, deliveries, transfers, exchanges,
notices and other matters relating to the securities, and those policies may change
from time to time. For example, if you hold an interest in a global security through
Euroclear or Clearstream, when DTC is the depositary, Euroclear or Clearstream, as
applicable, will require those who purchase and sell interests in that security through
them to use immediately available funds and comply with other policies and
procedures, including deadlines for giving instructions as to transactions that are to be
effected on a particular day. There may be more than one financial intermediary in the
chain of ownership for an investor. We do not monitor and are not responsible for the
policies or actions or records of ownership interests of any of those intermediaries.
·
·
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
We may sell the securities offered by means of this prospectus and any related prospectus
supplement directly to one or more purchasers, through agents, or through underwriters or
dealers designated from time to time. We may distribute such securities from time to time in one
or more transactions at a fixed price or prices (which may be changed from time to time), at
market prices prevailing at the times of sale, at prices related to these prevailing market prices or
at negotiated prices. We may offer securities in the same offering, or we may offer securities in
separate offerings. The applicable prospectus supplement will describe the terms of the offering
of our securities, including:
•the offeror of the securities;
•the terms of the securities to which the prospectus supplement relates;
•the name or names of any underwriters;
•the purchase price of the securities (if then known) and the proceeds to be received from the
sale;
•any underwriting discounts and other items constituting underwriters' compensation; and
•any discounts or concessions allowed or reallowed or paid to dealers.
The securities offered by us may be sold from time to time in one or more transactions at:
•
 
•
 
•
 
•
 
•
a fixed price or prices, which may be changed;
   
  market prices prevailing at the time of sale;
   
  prices related to the prevailing market prices;
   
  varying prices determined at the time of sale; or
   
  negotiated prices.
We may sell and distribute securities offered by this prospectus in “at the market” offerings
within the meaning of Rule 415(a)(4) of the Securities Act.
We may solicit directly offers to purchase the securities being offered by this prospectus. We
may also designate agents to solicit offers to purchase the securities from time to time.
If we utilize one or more dealers in the sale of the securities being offered by this
prospectus, we will sell the securities to the dealers, as principal. The dealers may then resell the
securities to the public at varying prices to be determined by the dealers at the time of resale.
If underwriters are used in the sale, the securities will be acquired by the underwriters for
their own account and may be resold from time to time in one or more transactions, including
negotiated
transactions, at a fixed public offering price or at varying prices determined at the time of sale.
The securities may be either offered to the public through underwriting syndicates represented by
managing underwriters or by underwriters without a syndicate. The obligations of the
underwriters to purchase securities will be subject to the conditions precedent agreed to by the
parties and the underwriters will be obligated to purchase all the securities of a class or series if
any are purchased. Any initial public offering price and any discounts or concessions allowed or
reallowed or paid to dealers may be changed from time to time.
During and after an offering through underwriters, the underwriters may purchase and sell
the securities in the open market. These transactions may include stabilizing transactions, over-
allotment transactions, syndicate covering transactions and penalty bids in accordance with
Regulation M under the Exchange Act. These stabilizing transactions, over-allotment
transactions, syndicate covering transactions and penalty bids may have the effect of raising or
maintaining the market price of the offered securities or preventing or retarding a decline in the
market price of the offered securities. As a result, the price of the offered securities may be higher
than the price that might otherwise exist in the open market. These transactions may be effected
on the NYSE MKT or otherwise and, if commenced, may be discontinued at any time.
Securities may be sold directly by us or through agents or underwriters designated by us
from time to time. We may authorize agents or underwriters to solicit offers by eligible institutions
to purchase securities from us at the public offering price set forth in the prospectus supplement
under delayed delivery contracts providing for payment and delivery on a specified date in the
future. The conditions to these contracts and any underwriting compensation paid by us to
underwriters or agents in connection with the offering of securities offered by means of this
prospectus, and any discounts, concessions or commissions allowed by underwriters to
participating dealers, will be set forth in the applicable prospectus supplement. Underwriters,
dealers and agents participating in the distribution of the offered securities may be deemed to be
underwriters, and any discounts or commissions received by them and any profit realized by
them upon the resale of the offered securities may be deemed to be underwriting discounts and
commissions, under the Securities Act.
Agents and underwriters may be entitled to indemnification by us against some civil
liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act, or to contribution with respect to payments
which the agents or underwriters may be required to make relating to these liabilities. Agents and
underwriters may be customers of, engage in transactions with, or perform services for, us in the
ordinary course of business.
In addition, any securities covered by this prospectus that qualify for sale pursuant to
Rule 144 or Rule 144A under the Securities Act, may be sold under Rule 144 or Rule 144A
rather than pursuant to this prospectus.
Each class or series of securities other than the common stock will be a new issue of
securities with no established trading market. Any underwriter may make a market in these
securities, but will not be obligated to do so and may discontinue any market making at any time
without notice. No assurance can be given as to the liquidity of the trading market for any
securities.
THE SECURITIES THAT WE MAY OFFER
We, directly or through underwriters, dealers or agents designated by us from time to time,
may offer and sell, together or separately:
shares of our common stock;
   
  warrants to purchase shares of our common stock;
units consisting of shares of our common stock, and/or warrants in any
units consisting of shares of our common stock, and/or warrants in any
combination;
   
  debt securities and/or convertible debt securities; and
   
  rights
The common stock, the warrants, the debt and convertible debt securities, the rights and the units
collectively are referred to in this prospectus as the “securities”.
We have summarized below the material terms of the various types of securities that we
may offer. We will describe in the applicable prospectus supplement the detailed terms of the
securities offered by that supplement. If indicated in the prospectus supplement, the terms of the
offered securities may differ from the terms summarized below.
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON STOCK
We are authorized to issue 75,000,000 shares of $.01 par value common stock.  As of May
24, 2016, 9,817,101 shares were issued and 8,890,101 shares were outstanding.  As of May 24,
2016,  7,177,010 shares of common stock were reserved for issuance under outstanding
warrants.
Dividend Rights
Holders of our common stock may receive dividends when, as and if declared by our board
on the common stock, subject to the preferential dividend rights of any other classes or series of
shares of our company. In no event may a dividend be declared or paid on the common stock if
payment of the dividend would cause the realizable value of our assets to be less than the
aggregate of our liabilities and the amount required to redeem all of the shares having
redemption or retraction rights that are then outstanding.
Voting and Other Rights
Holders of our common stock are entitled to one vote per share, and in general, all matters
will be determined by a majority of votes cast, other than the election of directors as discussed
below. Holders of our common stock are not entitled to pre-emptive rights.
Election of Directors
Directors are elected by a plurality of the votes cast by the holders of our common stock in a
meeting at which a quorum is present. "Plurality" means that the individuals who receive the
largest
number of votes cast are elected as directors, up to the maximum number of directors to be
chosen at the meeting.
Liquidation
In the event of any liquidation, dissolution or winding up of FieldPoint Petroleum
Corporation, holders of our common stock have the right to a ratable portion of the assets
remaining after payment of liabilities and liquidation preferences of any preferred stock or other
securities that may then be outstanding.
Redemption and Conversion
Our common stock is not redeemable or convertible.
Other Provisions
All outstanding shares of our common stock are, and the shares offered by this prospectus or
obtainable on exercise or conversion of other securities offered hereby, if issued in the manner
described in this prospectus and the applicable prospectus supplement will be, fully paid and
nonassessable.
You should read the prospectus supplement relating to any offering of common stock, or of
securities convertible, exchangeable or exercisable for common stock, for the terms of the
offering, including the number of shares offered, the initial offering price and market prices
relating to the shares.
This section is a summary and may not describe every aspect of our common stock that may
be important to you. We urge you to read our articles of incorporation, and our bylaws because
they, and not this description, define your rights as a holder of our common stock. See "Where
You Can Find More Information" for information on how to obtain copies of these documents.
Stock Transfer Agent and Registrar
Computershare Trust Company, Inc., in Golden, Colorado is the transfer agent and registrar
for our common stock.
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
We may offer and sell warrants to purchase shares of our common stock. The warrants may
be issued independently or as a part of units consisting of shares of our common stock and
warrants to purchase additional shares of our common stock. If the warrants are issued pursuant
to warrant agreements, we will so specify in the prospectus supplement relating to the warrants
being offered pursuant to the prospectus supplement.
The following description will apply to the warrants offered by this prospectus unless we
provide otherwise in the applicable prospectus supplement. The applicable prospectus
supplement for a particular series of warrants may specify different or additional terms. The forms
of any warrant
certificates or warrant agreements evidencing the warrants that we issue will be filed with the
SEC and incorporated by reference into this prospectus, and you should carefully review such
documents.
The prospectus supplement will describe the following terms of warrants to purchase our
common stock, to the extent applicable:
•
    
   •
    
   •
    
   •
    
   •
•
•
    
   •
•
    
   •
    
   •
•
the title of the warrants;
   
  the common stock for which the warrants are exercisable;
   
  the price at which the warrants will be issued and the exercise price of the warrants;
   
  the aggregate number of warrants offered;
   
  the number of shares of common stock  that may be purchased upon the exercise of each
warrant;
   
  whether the warrants are being offered separately or as a part of units consisting of shares
of our common stock  and warrants to purchase additional shares of our common stock;
   
  the terms of any right by us to redeem the warrants;
   
  the date on which the right to exercise the warrants will commence and the date on which
this right will expire;
   
  the procedures for exercising the warrants;
   
  the terms on which the warrants may be amended;
   
  the terms of any adjustments in the warrant exercise price and the number of shares of
common stock  purchasable upon the exercise of each warrant to be made in certain
events, including the issuance of a stock dividend to holders of common stock  or a stock
split, reverse stock split, combination, subdivision or reclassification of common stock;
   
  the effect on the warrants of our merger or consolidation with another entity or our sale of all
•
•
    
   •
the effect on the warrants of our merger or consolidation with another entity or our sale of all
or substantially all of our assets;
   
  the maximum or minimum number of warrants which may be exercised at any time; and
   
  the material United States income tax consequences applicable to the warrants and their
exercise.
Holders of warrants to purchase common stock will not be entitled, by virtue of being such
holders, to vote, consent, receive dividends, receive notice as shareholders with respect to any
meeting of shareholders for the election of our directors or any other matter, or to exercise any
rights whatsoever as our shareholders.
Warrants may be exercised at any time up to the close of business on the expiration date
set forth in the prospectus supplement relating to the warrants offered thereby. After the close of
business on the expiration date, unexercised warrants will become void. Upon our receipt of the
exercise price of the warrants upon the due exercise of the warrants, we will, as soon as
practicable, forward the securities purchasable upon exercise. If less than all of the warrants
represented by such warrant certificate are exercised, a new warrant certificate will be issued for
the remaining warrants.
DESCRIPTION OF CONVERTIBLE DEBT SECURITIES AND DEBT SECURITIES
This prospectus describes certain general terms and provisions of our debt securities and
convertible debt securities that we may offer from time to time. When we offer to sell a particular
series of debt securities or convertible debt securities, we will describe the specific terms of the
series in a supplement to this prospectus. If there are any differences between the applicable
prospectus supplement and this prospectus, the applicable prospectus supplement will control.
 As a result, the statements we make in this section may not apply to the debt security or
convertible debt security that you purchase. As of the date of this prospectus, we have no
outstanding registered debt securities.
The debt securities will be issued under an indenture between us and a duly qualified
financial institution, as trustee. Any such indenture entered into by us will be governed by the
Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as amended (“Trust Indenture Act”). Unless otherwise specified in a
supplement to this prospectus, the debt securities or convertible debt securities will be our direct,
senior unsecured obligations and will rank equally with all of our other senior unsecured
indebtedness. We have summarized select portions of the indenture below. The summary may
not contain all the terms that are important to you. You should read the form of the indenture that
has been filed as an exhibit to the registration statement of which this prospectus is a part.
Capitalized terms used in the summary have the meanings specified in the indenture.
General
The terms of each series of debt securities or convertible debt securities will be established
by or pursuant to a resolution of our board of directors and set forth or determined in the manner
provided in an officer's certificate or by a supplemental indenture. The particular terms of each
series of debt securities or convertible debt securities will be described in a prospectus
supplement relating to such series.
The indenture does not limit the amount of debt securities or convertible debt securities that
we may issue under the indenture. The debt securities or convertible debt securities may be
issued in one or more series with the same or various maturities, at par, at a premium, or at a
discount. We will set forth in a prospectus supplement relating to any series of debt securities or
convertible debt securities being offered the aggregate principal amount, prices and terms of the
securities. These terms may include:
• the title of the debt securities;
• the price or prices (expressed as a percentage of the principal amount) at which we will sell the
debt securities;
• any limit on the aggregate principal amount of the debt securities;
• the date or dates on which we will pay the principal on the debt securities;
• the rate or rates (which may be fixed or variable) per annum or the method used to determine
the rate or rates (including any commodity, commodity index, stock exchange index or financial
index) at which the debt securities will bear interest, the date or dates from which interest will
accrue, the date or dates on which interest will commence and be payable and any regular
record date for the interest payable on any interest payment date;
• the place or places where principal, premium and interest payments may be made on the debt
securities;
• the currency or currencies in which the debt securities are issued and payable;
• the conversion or exchange provisions applicable to the debt securities;
• any mandatory or optional redemption provisions applicable to the debt securities;
• any sinking fund or analogous provisions applicable to the debt securities;
• the denominations in which the debt securities will be issued, if other than denominations of
$1,000 and any integral multiple thereof;
• whether the debt securities will be issued in the form of certificated debt securities or global
debt securities;
• the portion of principal amount of the debt securities payable upon declaration of acceleration of
the maturity date, if other than the entire principal amount;
• any provisions relating to any security provided for in the debt securities;
• any additions or changes to, or deletions from, the events of default, covenants or acceleration
provisions applicable to the debt securities;
• the trustee for the series of debt securities and any depositories, interest rate calculation agents,
exchange rate calculation agents or other agents with respect to the debt securities; and,
• any other specific terms of the debt securities, which may modify or delete any provision of the
indenture as it applies to that series.
We may issue debt securities or convertible debt securities that provide for an amount less
than their stated principal amount to be due and payable upon declaration of acceleration of their
maturity pursuant to the terms of the indenture.
If we denominate the purchase price of any of the debt securities or convertible debt
securities in a foreign currency or currencies or a foreign currency unit or units, or if the principal
of and any premium and interest on any series of debt securities or convertible debt securities is
payable in a
foreign currency or currencies or a foreign currency unit or units, we will provide you with
information on the restrictions, elections, general tax considerations, specific terms and other
information with respect to that issue of debt securities or convertible debt securities and such
foreign currency or currencies or foreign currency unit or units in the applicable prospectus
supplement.
Each debt security or convertible debt security will be represented by either one or more
global securities registered in the name of The Depository Trust Company, as depositary, or a
nominee (we refer to any debt security or convertible debt security represented by a global debt
security as a "book-entry debt security"), or a certificate issued in definitive registered form (we
refer to any debt security represented by a certificated security as a "certificated debt security") as
set forth in the applicable prospectus supplement. Except as set forth under the heading "Book-
Entry Debt Securities" below, debt securities will not be issuable in certificated form.
Book-Entry Debt Securities
Each global debt security representing book-entry debt securities will be deposited with, or
on behalf of, the depositary, and registered in the name of the depositary or a nominee of the
depositary. The depositary has indicated it intends to follow the following procedures with
respect to book-entry debt securities.
Ownership of beneficial interests in book-entry debt securities will be limited to persons that
have accounts with the depositary for the related global debt security, which we refer to as
participants, or persons that may hold interests through participants. Upon the issuance of a
global debt security, the depositary will credit, on its book-entry registration and transfer system,
the participants' accounts with the respective principal amounts of the book-entry debt securities
represented by such global debt security beneficially owned by such participants. The accounts
to be credited will be designated by any dealers, underwriters or agents participating in the
distribution of the book-entry debt securities. Ownership of book-entry debt securities will be
shown on, and the transfer of such ownership interests will be effected only through, records
maintained by the depositary for the related global debt security (with respect to interests of
participants) and on the records of participants (with respect to interests of persons holding
through participants). The laws of some states may require that certain purchasers of securities
take physical delivery of such securities in definitive form. These laws may impair the ability to
own, transfer or pledge beneficial interests in book-entry debt securities.
So long as the depositary for a global debt security, or its nominee, is the registered owner of
that global debt security, the depositary or its nominee, as the case may be, will be considered
the sole owner or holder of the book-entry debt securities represented by such global debt
security for all purposes under the indenture. Except as described below, beneficial owners of
book-entry debt securities will not be entitled to have securities registered in their names, will not
receive or be entitled to receive physical delivery of a certificate in definitive form representing
securities and will not be considered the owners or holders of those securities under the
indenture. Accordingly, each person beneficially owning book-entry debt securities must rely on
the procedures of the depositary for the related global debt security and, if such person is not a
participant, on the procedures of the participant through which such person owns its interest, to
exercise any rights of a holder under the indenture.
We understand, however, that under existing industry practice, the depositary will authorize
the persons on whose behalf it holds a global debt security to exercise certain rights of holders of
debt
securities, and the indenture provides that we, the trustee and our respective agents will treat as
the holder of a debt security the persons specified in a written statement of the depositary with
respect to that global debt security for purposes of obtaining any consents or directions required
to be given by holders of the debt securities pursuant to the indenture.
We will make payments of principal of, and premium and interest on, book-entry debt
securities to the depositary or its nominee, as the case may be, as the registered holder of the
related global debt security. FieldPoint Petroleum, the trustee and any other agent of ours or
agent of the trustee will not have any responsibility or liability for any aspect of the records
relating to or payments made on account of beneficial ownership interests in a global debt
security or for maintaining, supervising or reviewing any records relating to beneficial ownership
interests.
We expect that the depositary, upon receipt of any payment of principal of, or premium or
interest on, a global debt security, will immediately credit participants' accounts with payments in
amounts proportionate to the respective amounts of book-entry debt securities held by each
participant as shown on the records of such depositary. We also expect that payments by
participants to owners of beneficial interests in book-entry debt securities held through those
participants will be governed by standing customer instructions and customary practices, as is
now the case with the securities held for the accounts of customers in bearer form or registered in
"street name," and will be the responsibility of those participants.
We will issue certificated debt securities in exchange for each global debt security if the
depositary is at any time unwilling or unable to continue as depositary or ceases to be a clearing
agency registered under the Exchange Act, and a successor depositary registered as a clearing
agency under the Exchange Act is not appointed by us within 90 days. In addition, we may at any
time and in our sole discretion determine not to have the book-entry debt securities of any series
represented by one or more global debt securities and, in that event, will issue certificated debt
securities in exchange for the global debt securities of that series. Global debt securities will also
be exchangeable by the holders for certificated debt securities if an event of default with respect
to the book-entry debt securities represented by those global debt securities has occurred and is
continuing. Any certificated debt securities issued in exchange for a global debt security will be
registered in such name or names as the depositary shall instruct the trustee. We expect that
such instructions will be based upon directions received by the depositary from participants with
respect to ownership of book-entry debt securities relating to such global debt security.
We have obtained the foregoing information concerning the depositary and the depositary's
book-entry system from sources we believe to be reliable, but we take no responsibility for the
accuracy of this information.
Certificated Debt Securities
You may transfer or exchange certificated debt securities at any office we maintain for this
purpose in accordance with the terms of the indenture. No service charge will be made for any
transfer or exchange of certificated debt securities, but we may require payment of a sum
sufficient to cover any tax or other governmental charge payable in connection with a transfer or
exchange.
You may effect the transfer of certificated debt securities and the right to receive the principal
of, premium and interest on certificated debt securities only by surrendering the certificate
representing those certificated debt securities and either reissuance by us or the trustee of the
certificate to the new holder or the issuance by us or the trustee of a new certificate to the new
holder.
No Protection In the Event of a Change in Control
Unless we state otherwise in the applicable prospectus supplement, the debt securities will
not contain any provisions which may afford holders of the debt securities protection in the event
we have a change in control or in the event of a highly leveraged transaction (whether or not
such transaction results in a change in control) which could adversely affect holders of debt
securities.
Covenants
We will set forth in the applicable prospectus supplement any restrictive covenants
applicable to any issue of debt securities. Unless otherwise provided in the applicable
prospectus supplement, the following covenant will apply to all debt securities.
Consolidation, Merger and Sale of Assets.     We may not, unless the terms of debt securities
provide otherwise, consolidate with or merge with or into, or convey, transfer or lease all or
substantially all of our properties and assets to, any person, which we refer to as a successor
person, unless:
• we are the surviving corporation, or the surviving entity (if other than FieldPoint Petroleum, Inc.)
or the acquiror of our properties and assets is a corporation organized and validly existing under
the laws of any U.S. domestic jurisdiction and expressly assumes our obligations under the debt
securities and the indenture;
• immediately prior to and after giving effect to the transaction, no default or event of default, and
no event which, after notice or lapse of time, or both, would become an event of default, shall
have occurred and be continuing under the indenture; and,
• certain other conditions are met.
Events of Default
Unless otherwise provided in the applicable prospectus supplement, the indenture defines
an event of default with respect to any series of debt securities, as one or more of the following:
• default in the payment of any interest upon any debt security of that series when it becomes due
and payable, and continuance of that default for a period of 30 days;
• default in the payment of principal of any debt security of that series when due and payable;
• an event of default occurs and is continuing, or the failure by us to comply with any of the
agreements contained in the debt securities of that series or the indenture (other than a covenant
or warranty that has been included in the indenture solely for the benefit of a series of debt
securities other than that series), which default continues uncured for a period of 60 days after we
receive written notice from the trustee or from the holders of not less than 50% in principal
amount of the outstanding debt securities of that series as provided in the indenture;
• certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization of our company; and
• any other event of default provided with respect to debt securities of that series that is described
in the applicable prospectus supplement.
No event of default with respect to a particular series of debt securities (except as to certain
events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization) necessarily constitutes an event of default
with respect to any other series of debt securities. The occurrence of an event of default may
constitute an event of default under other indebtedness in existence from time to time, including
bank debt, if any. In addition, the occurrence of certain events of default or an acceleration under
the indenture may constitute an event of default under certain of our other indebtedness
outstanding from time to time.
If an event of default with respect to debt securities of any series at the time outstanding
occurs and is continuing, then the trustee or the holders of not less than 50% in principal amount
of the outstanding debt securities of that series may, by a notice in writing to us (and to the trustee
if given by the holders), declare to be due and payable immediately the principal (or, if the debt
securities of that series are discount securities, that portion of the principal amount as may be
specified in the terms of that series) of and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on all debt
securities of that series. In the case of an event of default resulting from certain events of
bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization, the principal (or such lesser amount) of and accrued
and unpaid interest, if any, on all outstanding debt securities will become and be immediately
due and payable without any declaration or other act on the part of the trustee or any holder of
outstanding debt securities. At any time after a declaration of acceleration with respect to debt
securities of any series has been made, but before a judgment or decree for payment of the
money due has been obtained by the trustee, the holders of a majority in principal amount of the
outstanding debt securities of that series may rescind the acceleration if all events of default,
other than the non-payment of accelerated principal and interest, if any, with respect to debt
securities of that series, have been cured or waived as provided in the indenture. We refer you to
the prospectus supplement relating to any series of debt securities that are discount securities for
the particular provisions relating to acceleration of a portion of the principal amount of such
discount securities upon the occurrence of an event of default.
Subject to certain rights of the trustee, the holders of a majority in principal amount of the
outstanding debt securities of any series will have the right to direct the time, method and place of
conducting any proceeding for any remedy available to the trustee or exercising any trust or
power conferred on the trustee with respect to the debt securities of that series. The indenture
provides that the trustee will be under no obligation to exercise any of its rights or powers under
the indenture at the request of any holder of outstanding debt securities if the request conflicts
with law or the indenture, is unduly prejudicial to the rights of another holder of debt securities of
that series, or may involve the trustee in personal liability.
No holder of any debt security of any series will have any right to institute any proceeding,
judicial or otherwise, with respect to the indenture or for the appointment of a receiver or trustee,
or for any remedy under the indenture, unless:
• that holder has previously given to the trustee written notice of a continuing event of default with
respect to debt securities of that series; and,
• the holders of at least a majority in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of that
series have made written request, and offered reasonable indemnity, to the trustee to institute the
proceeding as trustee, and the trustee has not received from the holders of a majority in principal
amount of the outstanding debt securities of that series a direction inconsistent with that request
and has failed to institute the proceeding within 60 days.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the holder of any debt security's right to receive payment of
the principal of, premium and any interest on that debt security on or after the due dates
expressed in that debt security and to institute suit for the enforcement of payment shall not be
impaired or affected without the consent of the holder.
The indenture requires us, within 120 days after the end of our fiscal year, to furnish to the
trustee a statement as to compliance with the indenture. The indenture provides that the trustee
may withhold notice to the holders of debt securities of any series of any default or event of
default (except in payment on any debt securities of that series) with respect to debt securities of
that series if it in good faith determines that withholding notice is in the interest of the holders of
those debt securities.
Modification and Waiver
FieldPoint Petroleum and the trustee as to any series of debt securities may modify and
amend the indenture with the consent of the holders of at least a majority in principal amount of
the outstanding debt securities of each series affected by the modifications or amendments. The
holders of at least a majority in principal amount of outstanding debt securities of the series
affected may also waive compliance in a particular instance with any provision of the indenture.
Nevertheless, in no event may a modification, amendment or waiver, without the consent of each
holder of each series of affected debt security then outstanding:
• reduce the amount of debt securities whose holders must consent to an amendment or waiver;
• reduce the amount of, or postpone the date fixed for, the payment of a sinking fund or analogous
provision;
• reduce the rate of or extend the time for payment of interest (including default interest) on any
debt security;
• reduce the principal of or premium on or change the fixed maturity of any debt security or waive
a redemption payment or alter the redemption provisions with respect thereto;
• make the principal of or premium or interest on any debt security payable in a currency other
than that stated in the debt security;
• reduce the principal amount of original issue discount securities payable upon acceleration of
maturity;
• make any change to the provisions of the indenture relating to the right of holders of debt
securities to receive payment of the principal of, premium and interest on those debt securities
and to institute suit for the enforcement of any such payment after such debt security has become
due and to waivers or amendments; or,
• waive a default in the payment of the principal of, premium or interest on any debt security
(except a rescission of acceleration of the debt securities of any series by the holders of at least a
majority in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding debt securities of that series and a
waiver of the payment default that resulted from such acceleration).
Subject to the limitations discussed above, the holders of a majority in principal amount of
the outstanding debt securities of any series may on behalf of the holders of all the debt
securities of such series waive any existing or past default or event of default under the indenture
with respect to that series and its consequences, except a default or event of default in the
payment of the principal of, premium or any interest on any debt security of that series or in
respect of a covenant or provision which cannot be modified or amended without the consent of
the holder of each outstanding debt security of the series affected; provided, however, that the
holders of a majority in principal amount of the outstanding debt securities of any series may
rescind an acceleration and its consequences, including any related payment default that
resulted from the acceleration.
Defeasance of Debt Securities and Certain Covenants in Certain Circumstances
Legal Defeasance.   The indenture provides that, unless otherwise provided by the terms of
the applicable series of debt securities, we may be discharged from any and all obligations in
respect of the debt securities of any series (except for certain obligations to register the transfer or
exchange of debt securities of such series, to replace stolen, lost or mutilated debt securities of
such series, and to maintain paying agencies and certain provisions relating to the treatment of
funds held by paying agents). We will be so discharged upon the deposit with the trustee, in trust,
of money and/or United States government obligations or, in the case of debt securities
denominated in a single currency other than United States dollars, foreign government
obligations, that, through the payment of interest and principal in accordance with their terms, will
provide money in an amount sufficient in the opinion of a nationally recognized firm of
independent public accountants to pay and discharge each installment of principal, premium and
interest on and any mandatory sinking fund payments in respect of the debt securities of that
series on the stated maturity of those payments in accordance with the terms of the indenture and
those debt securities.
This discharge may occur only if, among other things, we have delivered to the trustee an
opinion of counsel to the effect that the holders of the debt securities of that series will not
recognize income, gain or loss for United States federal income tax purposes as a result of the
deposit, defeasance and discharge and will be subject to United States federal income tax on the
same amounts and in the same manner and at the same times as would have been the case if
the deposit, defeasance and discharge had not occurred.
Covenant Defeasance.   The indenture provides that, unless otherwise provided by the
terms of the applicable series of debt securities, upon compliance with certain conditions:
• we may omit to comply with the covenant described above under the heading "Covenants" and
certain other covenants set forth in the indenture, as well as any additional covenants which may
be set forth in the applicable prospectus supplement; and
• any omission to comply with those covenants will not constitute a default or an event of default
with respect to the debt securities of that series.
The conditions include:
• depositing with the trustee money and/or United States government obligations or, in the case
of debt securities denominated in a single currency other than United States dollars, foreign
government obligations, that, through the payment of interest and principal in accordance with
their terms, will provide money in an amount sufficient in the opinion of a nationally recognized
firm of independent public accountants to pay and discharge each installment of principal of,
premium and interest on and any mandatory sinking fund payments in respect of the debt
securities of that series on the stated maturity of those payments in accordance with the terms of
the indenture and those debt securities; and
• delivering to the trustee an opinion of counsel to the effect that the holders of the debt securities
of that series will not recognize income, gain or loss for United States federal income tax
purposes as a result of the deposit and related covenant defeasance and will be subject to
United States federal income tax on the same amounts and in the same manner and at the same
times as would have been the case if the deposit and related covenant defeasance had not
occurred.
Covenant Defeasance and Events of Default.   In the event we exercise our option to effect
covenant defeasance with respect to any series of debt securities, and the debt securities of that
series are declared due and payable because of the occurrence of any event of default, the
amount of money and/or United States government obligations or foreign government obligations
on deposit with the trustee will be sufficient to pay amounts due on the debt securities of that
series at the time of their stated maturity but may not be sufficient to pay amounts due on the debt
securities of that series at the time of the acceleration resulting from the event of default.
However, we shall remain liable for those payments.
For purposes of this discussion, "foreign government obligations" means, with respect to
debt securities of any series that are denominated in a currency other than United States dollars:
• direct obligations of the government that issued or caused to be issued such currency for the
payment of which obligations its full faith and credit is pledged which are not callable or
redeemable at the option of the issuer thereof; or
• obligations of a person controlled or supervised by or acting as an agency or instrumentality of
that government the timely payment of which is unconditionally guaranteed as a full faith and
credit obligation by that government which are not callable or redeemable at the option of the
issuer thereof.
Federal Income Tax Consequences and Other Special Considerations
We will provide you with information on the federal income tax and other special
considerations applicable to any of these debt securities in the applicable prospectus
supplement.
DESCRIPTION OF RIGHTS
We may issue rights to our shareholders for the purchase of debt securities or common
stock. These rights may be issued independently or together with any other security offered
hereby and may or may not be transferable by the shareholder receiving the rights in such
offering. In connection with any offering of such rights, we may enter into a standby arrangement
with one or more underwriters or other purchasers pursuant to which the underwriters or other
purchasers may be required to purchase any securities remaining unsubscribed for after such
offering.
Each series of rights will be issued under a separate rights agreement which we will enter
into with a bank or trust company, as rights agent, all as set forth in the applicable prospectus
supplement. The rights agent will act solely as our agent in connection with the certificates
relating to the rights and will not assume any obligation or relationship of agency or trust with any
holders of rights certificates or beneficial owners of rights. We will file the rights agreement and
the rights certificates relating to each series of rights with the SEC, and incorporate them by
reference as an exhibit to the registration statement of which this prospectus is a part on or before
the time we issue a series of rights.
The applicable prospectus supplement will describe the specific terms of any offering of
rights for which this prospectus is being delivered, including the following:
•
the date of determining the shareholders entitled to the rights distribution;
•
the number of rights issued or to be issued to each shareholder;
•
the exercise price payable for each share of debt securities, common stock or other securities
upon the exercise of the rights;
•
the number and terms of the shares of debt securities, common stock or other securities which
may be purchased per each right;
•
the extent to which the rights are transferable;
•
the date on which the holder's ability to exercise the rights shall commence, and the date on
which the rights shall expire;
•
the extent to which the rights may include an over-subscription privilege with respect to
unsubscribed securities;
•
if applicable, the material terms of any standby underwriting or purchase arrangement entered
into by us in connection with the offering of such rights; and,
•
any other terms of the rights, including the terms, procedures, conditions and limitations relating
to the exchange and exercise of the rights.
The description in the applicable prospectus supplement of any rights that we may offer will not
necessarily be complete and will be qualified in its entirety by reference to the applicable rights
certificate, which will be filed with the SEC.
DESCRIPTION OF UNITS
As specified in the applicable prospectus supplement, we may issue units consisting of one
or more debt securities, shares of common stock or warrants or any combination of such
securities. In addition, the prospectus supplement relating to units will describe the terms of any
units we issue, including as applicable:
•
the designation and terms of the units and the securities included in the units;
•
the description of the terms of any unit agreement governing the units;
•
any provision for the issuance, payment, settlement, transfer or exchange of the units;
•
the date, if any, on and after which the units may be transferable separately;
•
whether we will apply to have the units traded on a securities exchange or securities quotation
system;
•
any material United States federal income tax consequences; and
•
how, for United States federal income tax purposes, the purchase price paid for the units is to be
allocated among the component securities.
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the securities offered by this prospectus will be passed upon by Clifford L.
Neuman, PC., Niwot, Colorado.
EXPERTS
The consolidated financial statements of FieldPoint Petroleum Corporation as of December 31,
2015 and 2014 and for each of the years in the two-year period ended December 31, 2015 have
been audited by Hein & Associates LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, as
stated in their report thereon which report expresses an unqualified opinion and includes an
explanatory paragraph relating to the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern, and
incorporated by reference in this Prospectus and Registration Statement in reliance upon such
report and upon the authority of such firm as experts in accounting and auditing.






