
EX-99.1 4 d406271dex991.htm PRESS RELEASE, DATED SEPTEMBER 4, 2012 Press
release, dated September 4, 2012
Exhibit 99.1
Heckmann Corporation and Power Fuels to Merge Creating a
Leading Environmental Services Company Focused on Energy
and Industrial End-Markets
Pro-forma Combined Company Generated Trailing 12-month Revenues of $699.1 Million
and Adjusted EBITDA of $221.9 Million as of June 30, 20121,2,3,4
Strengthened Capital Structure and Strong Cash Flow Expected to Support Continued
Growth and Expansion – Pro-forma Leverage Reduced to 2.6x Trailing 12-month
Adjusted EBITDA
Substantial Value Creation Opportunities for Both Organizations’ Stakeholders,
Customers, and Employees through Transportation, Recycling, Reprocessing, Re-Use &
Disposal Capabilities
Pittsburgh, PA — September 4, 2012 — Heckmann Corporation (NYSE: HEK) (the “Company”) today announced
that it has entered into a definitive agreement (“the Agreement”) with Mark Johnsrud, founder and owner of Badlands
Energy, LLC, a North Dakota limited liability company doing business as Power Fuels (“Power Fuels”), to merge with
Power Fuels, a privately held North Dakota-based environmental services provider focused on the transportation,
treatment, recycling, and disposal of fluids at Power Fuels’ sites. Power Fuels is the largest environmental services
company in the Bakken Shale basin, a premier unconventional oil shale. The business combination accelerates
Heckmann’s strategy of providing a one-stop-shop for comprehensive environmental solutions. The merger is
expected to be highly accretive to Heckmann’s earnings per share and is expected to close in the fourth quarter of
2012. The Agreement, and completion of the merger, is subject to customary regulatory approvals, such as filings
under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976, and customary closing conditions including the
approval of Heckmann’s stockholders, which is required under NYSE listing standards to issue shares in connection
with this transaction.
Through June 30, 2012, Power Fuels generated trailing 12-month revenues of approximately $363.5 million and trailing
12-month adjusted EBITDA of approximately $154.7 million4. Under terms of the Agreement, Heckmann plans to pay
$125.0 million in cash and 95.0 million shares of the Company’s common stock5, subject to, among other things, a
two-year lockup agreement and a two-year standstill agreement. Heckmann will also assume/refinance approximately
$150 million in Power Fuels’ debt. The Company is in discussions with its current lending group to expand the size of
its credit facility to accommodate the transaction.
1
2
3
On September 30, 2011, Heckmann completed the divestiture of China Water & Drinks, Inc., which formed the
Company’s bottled water business segment. The Company reclassified its bottled water segment as discontinued
operations in 2011 and its comparable period results reflect this change.
For a reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to their comparable GAAP financial measures please
see the Appendix to our presentation filed as Exhibit 99.2 to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on
September 4, 2012, which presentation is also posted on the Company’s website at www.heckmanncorp.com.
Pro-forma financial results for the first quarter of 2012 include the effect of Heckmann Environmental Services
(HES – formerly Thermo Fluids Inc., or TFI) as if acquired on January 1, 2012. Heckmann completed the
acquisition of TFI on April 10, 2012.
Power Fuels’ unaudited LTM revenue and EBITDA reflect the removal of a related entity, Badlands Development
II, LLC, as it will not be a part of this transaction.
Upon closing, it is anticipated that Mr. Johnsrud will own approximately 38% of the combined Company.
4
5
Heckmann Corporation
Page 2 of 7
The transaction significantly expands Heckmann’s total environmental solutions operations. The business
combination is expected to double Heckmann’s annual revenue, extend its geographic reach and broaden
Heckmann’s customer base. The combined Company will continue to expand its environmental service offering by
leveraging the respective strengths of each organization, including the recently acquired Thermo Fluids Inc. business
with its environmental recycling expertise. The combination is expected to create value for the stockholders through:
•   Immediately and materially increasing earnings per share;
•   Providing immediate access to the fast growing and oil-focused Bakken Shale area and expanding the
Company’s leverage to oil – on a pro-forma combined basis, over 70% of current shale-related revenues are
derived from oil and liquids basins;
•   Continuing to expand the recurring-revenue base of the Company;
•   Establishing an industry-leading management team by combining the Power Fuels team and their extensive
operating expertise with the existing Heckmann team;
•   Creating a Company with a leading presence and nationwide customer support network in all major shale
areas including the Bakken, Haynesville, Marcellus, Eagle Ford, Permian and Utica;
•   Leveraging complementary and significant operating and tax benefits; and,
•   Providing additional cash flow generation to support future growth.
On a pro-forma basis, after giving effect to the cash and refinanced debt of the transaction, the combined Company’s
leverage ratio would have been reduced to approximately 2.6 times trailing 12-month adjusted EBITDA as of June 30,
2012.
“Just three years ago, in the Summer of 2009, we set out to build the largest environmental services company in the
United States, operating in a completely new market segment. We are well down that path, and one billion dollars in
revenue is within our reach,” said Mr. Richard J. Heckmann, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Heckmann
Corporation. “Producers in the U.S. shale basins are extremely focused on environmental solutions and looking for
what we offer – a large nationwide company with dedicated services to handle their environmental needs. Our multi-
basin presence allows us to migrate and expand with our customers as they further develop their shale assets. As
their results show, the Power Fuels team is comprised of top-tier operators, and they will significantly complement our
operating team. Together, we have constructed a nationwide footprint with approximately 3,000 employees and an
expanding environmental services offering. We are the only company that we know of offering all of the above. In
addition, our proprietary paperless tracking, billing and regulatory reporting capabilities, along with our access to the
latest treatment technologies, sets us apart from others entering this new segment.”
Mr. Heckmann continued, “In addition, our earlier acquisition of Thermo Fluids and its recycling expertise now
becomes a critical element in leveraging our comprehensive environmental solutions services. We will not only
manage all facets of water transport, re-use, treatment and disposal, but also provide recycling services including
closed-loop solid waste management, oil reclamation, antifreeze collection and re-manufacturing, oil filter collection
and recycling, and tank bottom and oily waste treatment for a diverse
Heckmann Corporation
Page 3 of 7
customer base that seeks to consolidate their supplier base. Our executives and managers are some of the most
experienced in the environmental business and understand the issues around the recycling, treatment, movement and
disposal of fluids connected with domestic energy. We believe we have built a truly unique and expansive full-service
environmental services business and have now added significant scale and operating experience.”
Governance and Management
Upon closing of the transaction, Mr. Heckmann will become Executive Chairman of the Board with full time
responsibilities including leading the Company’s Board and overall corporate strategy. Mr. Johnsrud will join the
Heckmann Board of Directors as Vice Chairman and become Chief Executive Officer of the Company. Mr. Johnsrud
has been the CEO of Power Fuels since he acquired the business in 2005 and is a former senior executive with
several financial services firms, most recently as a Managing Director and Senior Vice President at Bank of America.
He holds an M.S. degree in economics from Texas A&M University. In addition, Jay Parkinson will join the business
in the near term as Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer. Mr. Parkinson joins the Company from
Jefferies & Company, Inc., where he was a Managing Director in the firm’s Energy Investment Banking group. Chuck
Gordon will continue to direct the water business and serve as President of the newly created Fluids Management
Division, which will include Power Fuels. James Devlin, who joined the Company with the Thermo Fluids acquisition
last Spring, will be President of the newly created Recycling Division. Chris Chisholm will continue to serve the
Company as Executive Vice President and CFO of the Fluids Management Division. Damian Georgino will continue in
his role with the Company as Executive Vice President and Chief Legal Officer.
“I am extremely excited about this transaction. The merger will form a leading environmental services business
focused on providing a comprehensive, single source for environmental solutions,” said Mr. Johnsrud. “The
unconventional shale plays are a game-changer for the U.S. domestic energy equation, and the key issue for
producers is ensuring top-tier environmental management of their operations. The combined company is ideally suited
to provide professional and comprehensive environmental solutions to our customers, and for some time they have
asked us to consider expanding our services. As we merge our organizations, we are building a company that can
provide leading service and technology for our combined customer base. The expanding focus on domestic energy
development will also give our workforce an exciting platform for professional growth.”
Mr. Johnsrud continued, “I am also very excited about the opportunity to work with Dick as we build this Company.
Dick has decades of experience, having built three separate billion dollar plus companies listed on the NYSE, and his
experience will be invaluable working on overall corporate strategy and direction of the business.”
Power Fuels operates a fleet of nearly 500 water trucks and 19 disposal wells in the Bakken Shale area, as well as a
large water-related rental fleet of equipment. The merger of the Power Fuels and Heckmann operations will bring the
Company’s fleet to approximately 1,300 heavy-duty trucks, 3,800 frac tanks, 2,000 other fluid handling and solid-
waste tanks and other environmental services equipment, 200 rail cars and more than 45 disposal wells, with
additional wells in the permitting process. Upon completion of the acquisition, Heckmann will have over 300 miles of
permanent and temporary piping and operate 70 locations across 26 states with 3,000 employees and more than
20,000 customers.
Heckmann Corporation
Page 4 of 7
With the addition of Power Fuels, Heckmann customers will include all of the country’s major oil and gas producers,
as well as a host of Fortune 500 companies.
Jefferies & Company, Inc. served as the exclusive financial advisor to Heckmann in conjunction with the transaction,
and Reed Smith LLP served as the Company’s legal counsel. Wells Fargo Securities, LLC served as the exclusive
financial advisor to Power Fuels, and Jenner & Block LLP served as legal counsel.
Conference Call and Webcast
The Company will host a conference call on Tuesday, September 4, 2012 at 1:00 p.m. ET (10:00 a.m. PT) to discuss
the proposed acquisition. To participate on the conference call, please dial 1-877-941-1427 or 1-480-629-9664 and
reference conference ID 4562538. An audio replay of the conference call will be available approximately one hour after
the conclusion of the call. The audio replay can be accessed by dialing 1-800-406-7325 or 1-303-590-3030 and
entering access code 4562538.
The Company has posted to its website a presentation discussing the merger, which will serve as a guide to the
discussion on the Company hosted conference call.
The call will be webcast live and the replay will be available for 12 months. Both will be available in the “For Investors”
section of the Heckmann Corporation website at www.heckmanncorp.com.
About Heckmann Corporation
Heckmann Corporation (NYSE:HEK) is an environmental services company. Heckmann is dedicated to the
movement, treatment and disposal of water generated by energy companies involved in the discovery and production
of oil, natural gas liquids and natural gas. Heckmann is also a one-stop-shop for collection and recycling services for
oily waste products, including used motor oil, oily wastewater, spent antifreeze, used oil filters and parts washers.
Heckmann is building a national footprint across its environmental service offerings and has more than 1,500
employees and operates in 52 locations in the United States.
Interested parties can access additional information about Heckmann at http://www.heckmanncorp.com, and in
documents filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission at http://www.sec.gov.
About Power Fuels
Badlands Energy, LLC (“Power Fuels”) is a privately held North Dakota-based environmental services provider
focused on the transportation, treatment, recycling, and disposal of fluids at the company’s sites. Power Fuels is the
largest environmental services company in the Bakken Shale area in North Dakota, a premier U.S. unconventional
shale oil basin. Power Fuels also provides rental equipment and operates 19 company-owned disposal wells. Power
Fuels serves the leading exploration & production companies in its market under the “Power Fuels” and “Landtech”
brands, which have been operating in the Bakken Shale area for a combined 40 years, and through its network of 8
district offices and roughly 1,500 employees.
Heckmann Corporation
Page 5 of 7
Forward-Looking Statements
This press release may contain “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the safe harbor provisions of the
United States Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Words such as “expect,” “estimate,” “project,”
“budget,” “forecast,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “plan,” “may,” “will,” “could,” “should,” “believes,” “predicts,” “potential,”
“continue,” and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Forward-looking
statements in the press release include, without limitation forecasts of growth, revenues, adjusted EBITDA and
pipeline expansion, and other matters that involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may
cause results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to differ materially from results expressed or implied by
this press release. Such risk factors include, among others: difficulties encountered in acquiring and integrating
businesses, including Power Fuels; whether certain markets grow as anticipated; and the competitive and regulatory
environment. Additional risks and uncertainties are set forth in the Heckmann’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
fiscal year ended December 31, 2011, the Current Report on Form 8-K filed on April 10, 2012, as well as Heckmann’s
other reports filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission and are available at
http://www.sec.gov/ as well as the Heckmann’s website at http://heckmanncorp.com/. You are cautioned not to place
undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of this presentation. All forward-
looking statements are qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement. Heckmann undertakes no obligation to
publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or
otherwise.
With respect to the proposed merger, important factors could cause actual results to differ materially from those
indicated by forward-looking statements included herein, including, but not limited to, the ability of Heckmann and
Power Fuels to consummate the transaction on the terms set forth in the merger agreement; the risk that anticipated
cost savings, growth opportunities and other financial and operating benefits as a result of the transaction may not be
realized or may take longer to realize than expected; the risk that benefits from the transaction may be significantly
offset by costs incurred in integrating the companies; potential adverse impacts or delay in completing the transaction
as a result of obtaining consents from lenders to Heckmann or Power Fuels; failure to receive the approval of the
stockholders of Heckmann for the issuance of stock for the transaction; and difficulties in connection with the process
of integrating Heckmann and Power Fuels, including: coordinating geographically separate organizations; integrating
business cultures, which could prove to be incompatible; difficulties and costs of integrating information technology
systems; and the potential difficulty in retaining key officers and personnel. These risks, as well as other risks
associated with the merger, will be more fully discussed in the proxy statement that Heckmann intends to file with the
SEC in connection with the proposed transaction.
Annualized, pro forma, projected and estimated numbers are used for illustrative purpose only, are not forecasts and
may not reflect actual results.
Neither Heckmann, Power Fuels nor the combined company are responsible for updating the information contained in
this document beyond the publication date.
Heckmann Corporation
Page 6 of 7
Additional Information
This communication does not constitute a solicitation of any vote or approval. The proposed merger transaction
between Heckmann and Power Fuels will be submitted to the stockholders of Heckmann in order to obtain approval
for the issuance of stock as required by the listing standards of the New York Stock Exchange. In connection with the
proposed merger Heckmann will file with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) a proxy
statement to be used to solicit the required approval of its stockholders. INVESTORS AND STOCKHOLDERS OF
HECKMANN ARE ADVISED TO CAREFULLY READ THE PROXY STATEMENT (INCLUDING ALL AMENDMENTS
AND SUPPLEMENTS) AND OTHER RELEVANT DOCUMENTS FILED WITH THE SEC WHEN THEY BECOME
AVAILABLE BECAUSE THEY WILL CONTAIN IMPORTANT INFORMATION ABOUT THE TRANSACTION, THE
PARTIES TO THE TRANSACTION AND THE RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH THE TRANSACTION. A definitive proxy
statement will be sent to stockholders of Heckmann seeking their approval of the proposed transaction. Investors and
stockholders may obtain a free copy of the proxy statement (when available) and other relevant documents filed by
Heckmann with the SEC from the SEC’s website at http://www.sec.gov. In addition, investors may obtain free copies
of the documents filed with the SEC by contacting Heckmann’s Investor Relations at (212) 481-2050 or by accessing
Heckmann’s investor relations website at www.heckmanncorp.com.
Heckmann and its respective directors, executive officers and certain other members of management may be deemed
to be participants in the solicitation of proxies from Heckmann’s stockholders with respect to the transaction.
Information about these persons is set forth in Heckmann’s proxy statement relating to its 2012 Annual Meeting of
Stockholders as filed with the SEC on March 27, 2012, and subsequent statements of changes in beneficial
ownership on file with the SEC. These documents can be obtained free of charge from the sources described above.
Stockholders and investors may obtain additional information regarding the interests of such persons, which may be
different than those of the Heckmann’s stockholders generally, by reading the proxy statement and other relevant
documents regarding the transaction (when available), which will be filed with the SEC.
About Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This press release contains non-GAAP financial measures as defined by the rules and regulations of the SEC. A non-
GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company’s historical or future financial performance, financial
position or cash flows that excludes amounts, or is subject to adjustments that have the effect of excluding amounts,
that are included in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP in the
statements of operations, balance sheets, or statements of cash flows of Heckmann; or includes amounts, or is
subject to adjustments that have the effect of including amounts, that are excluded from the most directly comparable
measure so calculated and presented. For a reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to their comparable
GAAP financial measures please see the Appendix to our presentation filed as Exhibit 99.2 to our Current Report on
Form 8-K filed on September 4, 2012.
These non-GAAP financial measures are provided because management of Heckmann uses these financial measures
in maintaining and evaluating Heckmann’s ongoing financial results and trends. Management uses this non-GAAP
information as an indicator of business performance, and evaluates overall management with respect to such
indicators. Management believes that excluding items such as acquisition expenses, amortization of intangible assets
and stock-based compensation, among other items that are inconsistent in amount and frequency (as with acquisition
expenses), or determined
Heckmann Corporation
Page 7 of 7
pursuant to complex formulas that incorporate factors, such as market volatility, that are beyond our control (as with
stock-based compensation), for purposes of calculating these non-GAAP financial measures facilitates a more
meaningful evaluation of Heckmann’s current operating performance and comparisons to the past and future operating
performance. Heckmann believes that providing non-GAAP financial measures such as EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA,
adjusted net income (loss), and adjusted net income (loss) per share, in addition to related GAAP financial measures,
provides investors with greater transparency to the information used by Heckmann’s management in its financial and
operational decision-making. These non-GAAP measures should be considered in addition to, but not as a substitute
for, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Investor Relations Contact:
Brandi Piacente
The Piacente Group, Inc.
Tel. +1 212-481-2050
heckmann@tpg-ir.com
# # #