
DEF 14A 1 timberline_def14a.htm timberline_def14a.htm
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
Proxy Statement Pursuant to Section 14(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
SCHEDULE 14A
(Rule 14a-101)
SCHEDULE 14A INFORMATION
Filed by the Registrant ý
Filed by a Party other than the Registrant ¨
Check the appropriate box:
 
¨ Preliminary Proxy Statement
 
¨Confidential, for Use of the Commission Only (as permitted by Rule 14a-6(e)(2))
 
ý Definitive Proxy Statement
 
¨ Definitive Additional Materials
 
¨ Soliciting Material Pursuant to Rule 14a-12
 
TIMBERLINE RESOURCES CORPORATION
(Exact Name of Registrant as Specified in its Charter)
(Name of Person(a) Filing Proxy Statement, if other than the Registrant)
No fee required
Payment of Filing Fee (Check the appropriate box):
 
ý
 
¨Fee computed on table below per Exchange Act Rules 14a-6(i)(1) and 0-11.
 
 (1) Title of each class of securities to which transaction applies:
 
 (2) Aggregate number of securities to which transaction applies:
 
 (3)Per unit price or other underlying value of transaction computed pursuant to Exchange Act Rule 0-11
(set forth the amount on which the filing fee is calculated and state how it was determined):
(4) Proposed maximum aggregate value of transaction:
Total fee paid:
(5)
¨ Fee paid previously with preliminary materials.
 
¨Check box if any part of the fee is offset as provided by Exchange Act Rule 0-11(a)(2) and identify the filing
for  which  the  offsetting  fee  was  paid  previously.  Identify  the  previous  filing  by  registration  statement
number, or the Form or Schedule and the date of its filing.
(1)
(2)
Amount Previously Paid:
Form, Schedule or Registration Statement No.:
(3)
(4)
Filing Party:
Date Filed:
TIMBERLINE RESOURCES CORPORATION
101 East Lakeside Avenue
Coeur d’Alene, Idaho 83814
Notice of Annual Meeting of Stockholders
September 24, 2015
To all Stockholders of Timberline Resources Corporation:
 
You are invited to attend the Annual Meeting (the “Meeting”) of Stockholders (“Stockholders”) of Timberline
Resources Corporation (the “Company” or “Timberline”).  The Meeting will be held at 10:00 a.m. local time
on September 24, 2015, at Timberline’s corporate office, 101 East Lakeside Avenue, Coeur d’Alene, Idaho,
83814.  The purposes of the Meeting are:
 
1.To elect the nominees to Timberline’s board of directors (the “Board”) to serve until Timberline’s 2016
annual meeting of Stockholders or until successors are duly elected and qualified;
2. To approve the adoption of the Company’s 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan;
 
3.To ratify the appointment of Timberline’s independent registered public accounting firm for the fiscal year
ended September 30, 2015; and
4. Any other business that may properly come before the Meeting.
 
The Board has fixed August 18, 2015 as the record date for the Meeting.  Only Stockholders of record at the
close of business on that date will be entitled to notice of, and to vote at, the Meeting.  A list of Stockholders
as of August 18, 2015, will be available at the Meeting for inspection by any Stockholder.  Stockholders will
need  to  register  at  the  Meeting  to  attend  the  Meeting.    If  your  shares  of  Timberline  common  stock
(“Timberline Shares”) are not registered in your name, you will need to bring proof of your ownership of
those Timberline Shares to the meeting in order to register to attend and vote.  You should ask the broker,
bank or other institution that holds your Timberline Shares to provide you with proper proxy documentation
that  shows  your  ownership  of  Timberline  Shares  as  of  August  18,  2015  and  your  right  to  vote  such
Timberline Shares at the Meeting.  Please bring that documentation to the Meeting.
IMPORTANT
Whether or not you expect to attend the Meeting, please sign and return the enclosed proxy promptly.  If you
decide to attend the meeting, you may, if you wish, revoke the proxy and vote your Timberline Shares in
person.
 
By Order of the Board of Directors
/s/ Randal Hardy
Randal Hardy, Chief Financial Officer
Dated: August 25, 2015
i
TIMBERLINE RESOURCES CORPORATION
101 East Lakeside Avenue
Coeur d’Alene, Idaho 83814
Proxy Statement
for
Annual Meeting of Stockholders
To Be Held September 24, 2015, 10:00 A.M. Local Time
Timberline Resources Corporate Office
101 East Lakeside Avenue, Coeur d’Alene, Idaho 83814
Unless  the  context  requires  otherwise,  references  in  this  Proxy  Statement  to  “Timberline  Resources,”
“Timberline,” “we,” “us,” “Company” or “our” refers to Timberline Resources Corporation.
 
The  Annual  and  Special  Meeting  (the  “Meeting”)  of  Stockholders  of  Timberline  Resources  (the
“Stockholders” or “stockholders”) will be held on September 24, 2015, at Timberline’s corporate office, 101
East Lakeside Avenue, Coeur d’Alene, Idaho, 83814, at 10:00 a.m. local time.  The purposes of the Meeting
are:
 
1.To  elect  the  following  nominees  to  the  Board  to  serve  until  Timberline’s  2016  annual  meeting  of
Stockholders  or  until  successors  are  duly  elected  and  qualified:  William  Sheriff,  Kiran  Patankar,  Paul
Dircksen, Robert Martinez and Leigh Freeman;
2.To approve the adoption of Timberline’s 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan (the “2015 Stock and Incentive
Plan”);
3.To ratify the appointment of Timberline’s independent registered public accounting firm for the fiscal year
of 2015; and
4. Any other business that may properly come before the Meeting.
 
We are providing the enclosed proxy materials and form of proxy in connection with the solicitation by the
Board of Directors of proxies for the Meeting.  Timberline anticipates that this Proxy Statement and the form
of proxy, attached to this Proxy Statement as Appendix A, will first be mailed to holders of shares of the
Timberline common stock (“Timberline Shares”) on or before August 28, 2015.
 
You are invited to attend the Meeting at the above stated time and location.  If you plan to attend and your
Timberline Shares are held in “street name” – in an account with a bank, broker, or other nominee – you
must obtain a proxy issued in your name from such broker, bank or other nominee.
 
You can vote your Timberline Shares by completing a proxy card online, completing and returning a proxy
card provided to you by mail or e-mail or, if you hold shares in “street name,” by completing the voting form
provided by the broker, bank or other nominee.
 
The Timberline Shares are the only type of security entitled to vote at the Meeting.  Our corporate bylaws
define  a  quorum  as  the  presence  in  person  or  by  proxy  of  one-third  of  the  issued  and  outstanding
Timberline Shares.  The approval of a majority of the votes actually cast for each matter at the Meeting,
whether in person or by proxy, is required to approve the adoption of the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan and
to ratify the appointment of Timberline’s independent registered public accounting firm.   With respect to the
election of directors, a plurality of the votes cast is required to elect a nominee.
ii
Proxy Solicitation
 
The  proxy  solicitation  is  being  made  primarily  by  mail,  although  proxies  may  be  solicited  by  personal
interview,  telephone,  internet,  letter,  e-mail  or  otherwise.  Certain  of  our  directors,  officers  and  other
employees, without additional compensation, may participate in the solicitation of proxies. We will pay the
cost of this solicitation, including the reasonable charges and expenses of brokerage firms and others who
forward solicitation materials to beneficial owners of Timberline Shares.
Important  Notice  Regarding  the  Availability  of  Proxy  Materials  for  the  Shareholder  Meeting  to  Be  Held
at  101 East Lakeside Avenue, Coeur d’Alene, Idaho, 83814 on September 24, 2015
Our  proxy  statement  for  the  Meeting,  form  of  proxy  card  and  2014  Annual  Report  is  available  at
http://www.timberline-resources.com/main.php?page=119.
iii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INFORMATION CONTAINED IN THIS PROXY STATEMENT
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ABOUT PROXY MATERIALS AND VOTING
PROPOSAL 1 — ELECTION OF DIRECTORS
INFORMATION ON THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS, AND KEY
EMPLOYEES
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
DIRECTOR COMPENSATION
OTHER GOVERNANCE MATTERS
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND
RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS
PROPOSAL 2 — APPROVAL OF THE ADOPTION OF THE TIMBERLINE 2015 STOCK AND
INCENTIVE PLAN
PROPOSAL 3 — RATIFICATION OF THE APPOINTMENT OF THE INDEPENDENT
REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
OTHER MATTERS
APPENDICES
 
 
 
 
iv
1 
2 
6 
7
10 
14 
17 
18 
19
21 
22
31
33 
33
INFORMATION CONTAINED IN THIS PROXY STATEMENT
The information contained in this Proxy Statement, unless otherwise indicated, is given as of August 20,
2015.
No person has been authorized to give any information or to make any representation in connection with
the  matters  being  considered  herein  on  behalf  of  Timberline  other  than  those  contained  in  this  Proxy
Statement  and,  if  given  or  made,  such  information  or  representation  should  not  be  considered  or  relied
upon as having been authorized.  This proxy statement does not constitute an offer to sell, or a solicitation
of an offer to acquire, any securities, or the solicitation of a proxy, by any person in any jurisdiction in which
such  an  offer  or  solicitation  is  not  authorized  or  permitted  or  in  which  the  person  making  such  offer  or
solicitation is not qualified to do so or to any person to whom it is unlawful to make such an offer or proxy
solicitation.  Neither the delivery of this Proxy Statement nor any distribution of securities referred to herein
should, under any circumstances, create any implication that there has been no change in the information
set forth herein since the date of this Proxy Statement.
Information contained in this Proxy Statement should not be construed as legal, tax or financial advice and
Stockholders  are  urged  to  consult  their  own  professional  advisors  in  connection  with  the  matters
considered in this Proxy Statement.
1
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ABOUT PROXY MATERIALS AND VOTING
 
Why am I receiving this Proxy Statement and proxy card?
 
You are receiving this Proxy Statement and proxy card because you were a Stockholder of record at the
close  of  business  on  August  18,  2015  and  are  entitled  to  vote  at  the  Meeting.    This  Proxy  Statement
describes issues on which Timberline would like you, as a Stockholder, to vote.  It provides information on
these issues so that you can make an informed decision.  You do not need to attend the Meeting to vote
your Timberline Shares.
 
When you sign the proxy card you appoint each of Kiran Patankar, President and Chief Executive Officer to
Timberline  and  Randal  Hardy,  Chief  Financial  Officer  to  Timberline,  as  your  representatives  at  the
Meeting.    As  your  representatives,  they  will  vote  your  Timberline  Shares  at  the  Meeting  (or  any
adjournments  or  postponements)  as  you  have  instructed  on  your  proxy  card.    With  proxy  voting,  your
Timberline  Shares  will  be  voted  whether  or  not  you  attend  the  Meeting.    Even  if  you  plan  to  attend  the
Meeting, it is a good idea to complete, sign and return your proxy card in advance of the Meeting, just in
case your plans change.
 
If an issue comes up for vote at the Meeting (or any adjournments or postponements) that is not described
in this Proxy Statement, your representatives will vote your Timberline Shares, under your proxy, at their
discretion, subject to any limitations imposed by law.
 
When is the record date?
 
The Board has fixed August 18, 2015 as the record date for the Meeting.  Only holders of Timberline Shares
as of the close of business on that date will be entitled to vote at the Meeting.
 
How many Timberline Shares are outstanding?
 
As of August 18, 2015, Timberline had 12,000,084 Timberline Shares issued and outstanding.
 
What am I voting on?
 
You are being asked to vote on the following:
 
1.The  election  of  the  nominees  to  the  Board  to  serve  until  Timberline’s  2016  annual  meeting  of
stockholders or until successors are duly elected and qualified;
2. The approval of the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan;
 
3.The ratification of the appointment of Timberline’s independent registered public accounting firm for the
fiscal year of 2015; and
4. Any other business that may properly come before the Meeting.
 
How many votes do I get?
 
Each Timberline Share is entitled to one vote.  Dissenters’ rights are not applicable to any of the matters
being voted upon.
 
The  Board  recommends  a  vote FOR each  of  the  nominees  to  the  Board, FOR the approval of the 2015
Stock and Incentive Plan and FOR the ratification of the appointment of our independent registered public
accounting firm.
 
How do I vote?
 
You have several voting options. You may vote by:
 
●
 
●
Completing your proxy card over the internet at the following website: www.proxyvote.com;
 
Downloading or requesting a proxy card (as detailed below), signing your proxy card and mailing it to
the attention of: Vote processing, c/o Broadridge, 51 Mercedes Way, Englewood, New York 11717;
2
Signing and faxing your proxy card to the number provided on the proxy card; or
 
Attending the Meeting and voting in person.
●
 
●
 
If your Timberline Shares are held in an account with a brokerage firm, bank, dealer, or other similar
organization, then you are the beneficial owner of Timberline Shares held in a “street name” and these
proxy materials are being forwarded to you by that organization.  The organization holding your account is
considered the stockholder of record for purposes of voting at the Meeting.  As a beneficial owner, you have
the right to direct your broker, bank or other nominee on how to vote the Timberline Shares in your
account.  You are also invited to attend the Meeting.  However, since you are not the stockholder of record,
you may not vote your Timberline Shares in person at the Meeting unless you request and obtain a valid
proxy card from your broker, bank, or other nominee.
 
Can Stockholders vote in person at the Meeting?
 
Timberline  will  pass  out  written  ballots  to  anyone  who  wants  to  vote  at  the  Meeting.    If  you  hold  your
Timberline  Shares  through  a  brokerage  account  but  do  not  have  a  physical  share  certificate,  or  the
Timberline  Shares  are  registered  in  someone  else’s  name,  you  must  request  a  legal  proxy  from  your
stockbroker or the registered owner to vote at the Meeting.
 
What if I want a paper copy of these proxy materials?
 
Please  send  a  written  request  to  our  offices  at  the  address  below,  email  us  at  proxy@timberline-
resources.com or call us toll free at (866) 513-4859 to request a copy of the proxy materials.
 
Send requests to:
Timberline Resources Corporation
101 East Lakeside Avenue
Coeur d’Alene, Idaho 83814
Attention:  Randal Hardy
Chief Financial Officer
What if I change my mind after I return my proxy?
 
You may revoke your proxy and change your vote at any time before the polls close at the Meeting.  You
may do this by:
 
●
●
Signing another proxy with a later date and mailing it to the attention of: Randal Hardy, Chief Financial
Officer, at 101 E. Lakeside Avenue, Coeur d’Alene, ID 83814, so long as it is received prior to 2:00PM
Pacific daylight time on September 23, 2015;
 
Delivering  a  written  notice  of  the  revocation  of  your  proxy  to  the  attention  of:  Randal  Hardy,  Chief
Financial Officer, at 101 E. Lakeside Avenue, Coeur d’Alene, ID 83814, so long as it is received prior
to 2:00PM Pacific daylight time on September 23, 2015; or
 
Voting in person at the Meeting.
●
 
Beneficial  stockholders  should  refer  to  the  instructions  received  from  their  stockbroker  or  the  registered
holder of the Timberline Shares if they wish to change their vote.
 
How many votes do you need to hold the Meeting?
 
To conduct the Meeting, Timberline must have a quorum, which means one-third of the outstanding voting
shares of Timberline as of the record date must be present at the Meeting.  Timberline Shares are the only
type of security entitled to vote at the Meeting.  Based on 12,000,084 voting shares outstanding as of the
record date of August 18, 2015, 4,000,028 Timberline Shares must be present at the Meeting, in person or
by proxy, for there to be a quorum.  Your Timberline Shares will be counted as present at the Meeting if you:
3
Submit a properly executed proxy card (even if you do not provide voting instructions); or
 
Attend the Meeting and vote in person.
●
 
●
 
What if I abstain from voting?
 
Abstentions with respect to a proposal are counted for the purposes of establishing a quorum. Timberline’s
bylaws  state  that  abstentions  are  not  considered  as  votes  cast  for  or  against  a  proposal  or  as  a  vote
withheld for any director nominee.
 
What effect does a broker non-vote have?
 
Brokers  and  other  intermediaries,  holding  Timberline  Shares  in  street  name  for  their  customers,  are
generally  required  to  vote  the  Timberline  Shares  in  the  manner  directed  by  their  customers.  If  their
customers do not give any direction, brokers may vote the Timberline Shares on routine matters but not on
non-routine  matters.    The  election  of  directors  to  the  Board  and  the  approval  of  the  2015  Stock  and
Incentive Plan are both non-routine matters.  Consequently, if customers do not give any direction, brokers
will  not  be  permitted  to  vote  such  Timberline  Shares  at  the  Meeting  in  relation  to  these  matters.  The
ratification of the appointment of Timberline’s independent registered public accounting firm for the fiscal
year of 2015 is considered a routine matter and brokers will be permitted to vote shares held in street name
for their customers.
 
The absence of a vote on a non-routine matter is referred to as a broker non-vote.  Any Timberline Shares
represented  at  the  Meeting  but  not  voted  (whether  by  abstention,  broker  non-vote  or  otherwise)  are  not
considered votes cast for or against a proposal or as a vote withheld for any director nominee and will not
affect the outcome of any proposal.
 
How many votes are needed to elect directors?
 
The nominees for election as directors at the Meeting will be elected by a plurality of the votes cast at the
Meeting.    The  nominees  with  the  most  votes  will  be  elected.    A  properly  executed  proxy  card  marked
WITHHELD with respect to the election of directors will not be voted and will not count FOR  or AGAINST
any of the nominees for which the vote was withheld.
 
How many votes are needed to approve the adoption of 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan?
 
The adoption of the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan will be approved if a majority of the votes actually cast at
the Meeting on this proposal vote FOR the proposal.  A properly executed proxy card marked ABSTAIN
with respect to this proposal will not count as a vote cast for or against this proposal.  We encourage you to
vote FOR this proposal.
 
How many votes are needed to ratify the appointment of the independent registered public accountant?
 
The ratification of the appointment of the independent registered public accountant will be approved if a
majority  of  the  votes  actually  cast  at  the  Meeting  on  this  proposal  vote FOR  the  proposal.    A  properly
executed proxy card marked ABSTAIN will not count as a vote cast for or against this proposal.
 
Will my Timberline Shares be voted if I do not sign and return my Proxy Card?
 
If  your  Timberline  Shares  are  held  through  a  brokerage  account,  your  brokerage  firm,  under  certain
circumstances,  may  vote  your  shares;  otherwise  your  Timberline  Shares  will  not  be  voted  at  the
meeting.  See “What effect does a broker non-vote have?” above for a discussion of the matters on which
your brokerage firm may vote your Timberline Shares.
 
If your Timberline Shares are registered in your name, and you do not complete your proxy card over the
internet or sign and return your proxy card, your Timberline Shares will not be voted at the Meeting unless
you attend the Meeting and vote your Timberline Shares in person.
4
Where can I find the voting results of the Meeting?
 
Timberline  will  publish  the  final  results  in  a  Current  Report  on  Form  8-K  with  the  SEC  within  four  (4)
business days of the Meeting.
 
Who will pay for the costs of soliciting proxies?
 
Timberline  will  bear  the  cost  of  soliciting  proxies.    In  an  effort  to  have  as  large  a  representation  at  the
meeting as possible, Timberline’s directors, officers and employees may solicit proxies by telephone or in
person  in  certain  circumstances.    These  individuals  will  receive  no  additional  compensation  for  their
services other than their regular salaries.  Upon request, Timberline will reimburse brokers, dealers, banks,
voting trustees and their nominees who are holders of record of Timberline Shares on the record date for
the reasonable expenses incurred for mailing copies of the proxy materials to the beneficial owners of such
Timberline Shares.
 
When are stockholder proposals due for the 2016 annual meeting of Stockholders?
 
In  order  to  be  considered  for  inclusion  in  next  year’s  proxy  statement,  stockholder  proposals  must  be
submitted in writing to Timberline’s Secretary, Randal Hardy, at Timberline Resources Corporation, 101
East Lakeside Avenue, Coeur d’Alene, Idaho 83814, and received no later than April 28, 2016, provided
that this date may be changed in the event that the date of the annual meeting of stockholders to be held in
calendar year 2016 is changed by more than 30 days from the date of the annual meeting of stockholders to
be held in calendar year 2015. Such proposals must also comply with the requirements as to form and
substance established by the SEC if such proposals are to be included in our proxy statement and form of
proxy.
 
Similarly, stockholder proposals not submitted for inclusion in the proxy statement and received after July
12, 2016 will be considered untimely pursuant to Rule 14a-5(e)(2) of the U.S. Exchange Act provided that
this  date  may  be  changed  in  the  event  that  the  date  of  the  annual  meeting  of  stockholders  to  be  held
calendar year 2016 is changed by more than 30 days from the date of the annual meeting of stockholders to
be held in calendar year 2015.
 
How can I obtain a copy of the 2014 Annual Report on Form 10-K?
 
Timberline’s 2014 Annual Report on Form 10-K, including amendments thereto and financial statements, is
available  on  the  internet  with  this  Proxy  Statement  at  http://www.timberline-resources.com/main.php?
page=119. The Form is also available through the SEC’s website at http://www.sec.gov.
 
At the written request of any stockholder who owns Timberline Shares on the record date, Timberline will
provide to such stockholder, without charge, a paper copy of Timberline’s 2014 Annual Report on Form 10-
K as filed with the SEC, including the financial statements, but not including exhibits.
If requested, Timberline will provide copies of the exhibits for a reasonable fee.
 
Requests for additional paper copies of the 2014 Annual Report on Form 10-K should be mailed to:
Timberline Resources Corporation
101 East Lakeside Avenue
Coeur d’Alene, Idaho 83814
Attention: Randal Hardy
Corporate Secretary
 
What materials accompany or are attached to this Proxy Statement?
 
The following materials accompany or are attached to this Proxy Statement:
APPENDIX A                                Form of Proxy Card
APPENDIX B                                Timberline 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan
5
PROPOSAL 1 — ELECTION OF DIRECTORS
GENERAL QUESTIONS
 
What is the current composition of the Board?
 
Timberline’s current bylaws require the Board to have three or more persons, and may be increased or
decreased from time to time, exclusively by resolution approved by the affirmative vote of a majority of the
Board.  The current Board is composed of six (6) directors.
 
Is the Board divided into classes?  How long is the term?
 
No,  the  Board  is  not  divided  into  classes.    All  directors  serve  one-year  terms  until  their  successors  are
elected and qualified at the next annual meeting.
 
Who is standing for election this year?
 
The  Board  of  Directors  has  nominated  the  following  five  (5),  current  Board  Members  for  election  at  the
Meeting, to hold office until the 2016 annual meeting:
 
● William Sheriff
●
Kiran Patankar
●
Paul Dircksen
●
Robert Martinez
●
Leigh Freeman
 
John Watson, who is currently a member of the Board of Directors, has indicated to the Board his desire not
to stand for re-election at the Meeting. Therefore, immediately following the Meeting, the size of the Board of
Directors will be reduced to five (5) directors. Although the size of the Board will be six (6) directors at the
time of Meeting and only five (5) directors have been nominated, Stockholders may not vote their proxies for
a greater number of persons than the nominees named above.
 
What if a nominee is unable or unwilling to serve?
 
Should any one or more of these nominees become unable or unwilling to serve, which is not anticipated,
the Board may designate substitute nominees, in which event the proxy representatives will vote proxies
that  otherwise  would  be  voted  for  the  named  nominees  for  the  election  of  such  substitute  nominee  or
nominees.
 
How are nominees elected?
 
Directors are elected by a plurality of the votes cast in person or represented by proxy and entitled to vote at
the meeting.
THE BOARD RECOMMENDS A VOTE “FOR” EACH OF THE NOMINEES.
6
INFORMATION ON THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS, AND KEY EMPLOYEES
The  following  table  sets  forth  certain  information  with  respect  to  our  current  directors  and  nominees,
executive officers and key employees.  The term for each director expires at our next annual meeting or
until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.  The ages of the directors and officers are shown as of
January 27, 2015.
 
Name
Principal Occupation
Current Office
Director/Officer
Since
January 1, 2015
Age
38
September 22, 200669
Kiran Patankar
Paul Dircksen(1)
President & Chief
Executive Officer
Vice-President of
Business Development
and 
Technical Services,
Director
Chief Financial Officer
President & Chief Executive
Officer
Vice-President of Business
Development 
and Technical Services
Randal Hardy(2)
Steven Osterberg Vice-President,
William M. Sheriff(3)Chairman of the Board of
Exploration
Directors
Robert Martinez(3) Director
John Watson(3)
Director
Leigh Freeman(3) Director
Chief Financial Officer
Vice-President, Exploration
August 27, 2007
February 1, 2012
Chief Executive Officer, Till
Capital Ltd.
Management Consultant
Chief Executive Officer, NV Gold
Corporation
Principal, Leigh Freeman
Consultancy
August 15, 2014
January 22, 2010
August 15, 2014
January 18, 2013
54
54
56
68
65
65
(1)Mr. Dircksen was Executive Chairman of the Board of Directors until August 15, 2014 when Mr. Sheriff
was appointed as Chairman of the Board of Directors.  Mr. Dircksen was President & Chief Executive
Officer until his resignation from those offices effective on December 31, 2014 when he was appointed
Vice-President of Business Development and Technical Services.
(2) Mr. Hardy was a director until his resignation from the Board effective on August 15, 2014.
 
(3)“Independent” in accordance with Rules 121 and 803A of the NYSE MKT Company Guide.
 
The  following  is  a  description  of  the  business  background  of  the  Directors  and  executive  officers  of
Timberline Resources Corporation:
 
 
Board of Directors and Executive Officers
 
William M. Sheriff – Chairman of the Board of Directors
 
Mr. Sheriff (56) is an entrepreneur with over 30 years of mineral exploration experience.  He has been a
director and Chairman of the Board since August 2014.  He also serves as Chairman and Chief Executive
Officer of Till Capital Ltd.  Prior to founding Till Capital Ltd. and its predecessor Golden Predator Corp., Mr.
Sheriff  was  a  co-founder  and  Chairman  of  Energy  Metals  Corp.    He  also  serves  as  Chairman  of  Silver
Predator  Corp,  enCore  Energy  Corp.,  and  is  a  Director  of  Western  Lithium  USA  Corporation  and  Co-
Chairman  of  Golden  Predator  Mining  Corp.    Mr.  Sheriff  has  served  as  a  director  for  numerous  mineral
exploration companies, and he holds a BSc degree (Geology) from Fort Lewis College, Colorado and an
MSc in Mining Geology from the University of Texas-El Paso.
 
For the following reasons the Board of Directors (the “Board”) concluded that Mr. Sheriff should serve as a
director (a “Director”) and Chairman of the Board of the Company, in light of its business and structure. Mr.
Sheriff’s technical, financial and management experience in mining and mineral exploration enables him to
provide  financial,  market,  and  technical  insight  to  the  Board.    Further,  his  training  and  experience  as  a
geologist and mining executive
7
allow him to bring technical and managerial expertise to the Board as a director. These skills are valuable
to the Board at this time as the Company’s primary assets are exploration stage properties.
 
Paul Dircksen – Director, Vice-President of Business Development and Technical Services
 
Mr.  Dircksen  (69)  has  over  35  years  of  experience  in  the  mining  and  exploration  industry,  serving  in
executive, managerial, and technical roles at several companies.  He has been a director since January
2005 and our Vice President of Exploration from May 2006 to January 2012.  Mr. Dircksen was Executive
Chairman from September 2009 to August 2014 and was appointed President and Chief Executive Officer
in March 2011.  Working in the United States and internationally, he has a strong technical background,
serving as a team member on approximately nine gold discoveries, seven of which later became operating
mines.    From  January  2005  to  May  2006  he  was  self-employed  as  a  consulting  geologist  until  joining
Timberline Resources.  Mr. Dircksen was the president of Brett Resources from January 2004 to December
2004, and prior to that, from January 2003 to December 2003, he was President of Bravo Venture Group, a
junior  exploration  company.    During  2002  he  was  self-employed  as  an  independent  mineral  geologist.
 Between 1987 and 2001, Mr. Dircksen was Senior Vice-President of Exploration for Orvana Minerals Corp.
 He holds an M.S. in Geology from the University of Nevada.  Mr. Dircksen currently serves as a director of
Avrupa Minerals and Northair Silver.
 
For  the  following  reasons  the  Board  concluded  that  Mr.  Dircksen  should  serve  as  a  Director  of  the
Company,  in  light  of  its  business  and  structure.  Mr.  Dircksen’s  extensive  management  experience  in
mineral exploration companies and background in mineral projects enable him to provide operating and
leadership  insights  to  the  Board  as  the  Executive  Chairman.    Further,  his  training  and  experience  as  a
geologist allow him to bring technical expertise in regard to mineral exploration to the Company.   These
skills  are  valuable  to  the  Board  at  this  time  as  the  Company’s  primary  assets  are  exploration  stage
properties.
 
Robert Martinez – Director
 
Mr. Martinez (68) was appointed to the Board of Directors in January 2010.  He is a metallurgical engineer
with over 35 years of experience in the mining and exploration industry.  Since May 2005, Mr. Martinez has
been  an  independent  mine  management  and  metallurgical  consultant.    In  addition,  from  May  2005  until
September 2008, Mr. Martinez was a member of the Board of Directors of Metallica Resources Inc., and
from August 2005 until May 2009, he was a member of the Board of Directors of Zacoro Metals.  From
August  1988  until  December  2004,  Mr.  Martinez  held  various  management  and  executive  positions  at
NYSE-listed Coeur d’Alene Mines Corporation including serving as Vice President and General Manager
of  the  Rochester  Mine,  Vice  President  of  Engineering  and  Operations,    Senior  Vice  President  of
Operations,  and  President  and  Chief  Operating  Officer.    Mr.  Martinez  holds  a  B.S.  in  Metallurgical
Engineering from the University of Arizona and has completed graduate work in business at Western New
Mexico University and Dartmouth College.  Mr. Martinez currently serves as a director of True Gold Mining,
Inc.
 
For  the  following  reasons  the  Board  concluded  that  Mr.  Martinez  should  serve  as  a  Director  of  the
Company, in light of its business and structure. Mr. Martinez’s technical and management experience in
mining  and  metallurgy  enables  him  to  provide  operating  insight  to  the  Board.    Further,  his  training  and
experience as a metallurgical engineer allow him to bring technical expertise to the Board as a director.
These skills are valuable to the Board at this time as the Company’s primary assets are exploration stage
properties.
 
Leigh Freeman – Director
 
Mr.  Freeman  (65)  was  appointed  to  the  Board  of  Directors  in  January  2013.  He  has  over  40  years  of
experience in the mining industry.  At present, he is Principal with Leigh Freeman Consultancy and is also
the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Blue Sun Energy, Inc., a private, technology-based alternative
energy company.  Mr. Freeman has served in technical, managerial and executive positions with junior and
senior mining and service companies.  He was a co-founder, President and Director of Orvana Minerals
and also held several positions with Placer Dome.  Mr. Freeman also serves as a trustee of the Montana
Tech Foundation and on the industry advisory board for the mining programs at the University of Arizona,
Montana Tech and South Dakota School of Mines. In addition, he co-chaired the Education Sustainability
Committee for the Society of Mining Engineers.
8
For the following reasons the Board concluded that Mr. Freeman should serve as a Director of the
Company, in light of its business and structure. Mr. Freeman’s technical and management experience in
mining and mineral exploration enables him to provide operating insight to the Board.  Further, his training
and experience as a geological engineer allow him to bring technical expertise to the Board as a director.
These skills are valuable to the Board at this time as the Company’s primary assets are exploration stage
properties.
 
John Watson – Director
 
Mr.  Watson  (65)  was  appointed  to  the  Board  of  Directors  in  August  2014.    He  has  over  30  years  of
experience in the mineral resource industry.  Currently, he is the President, CEO, and Director of NV Gold
Corporation.  From 2002 to 2007, Mr. Watson was the President of Pan-Nevada Gold Corporation which,
prior to the completion of its plan of arrangement with Midway Gold Corp. in April, 2007, was a TSX Venture
Exchange listed company focused on the acquisition, exploration and expansion of advanced stage gold
projects  in  Nevada.    From  1979  to  1993,  Mr.  Watson  was  the  President  and  CEO  of  Horizon  Gold
Corporation,  which  was  listed  on  NASDAQ  from  1986  to  1993.  Horizon  Gold  Corporation  built  and
operated two open pit, heap leach mines in Nevada during the period from 1985 to 1992.  Currently, Mr.
Watson is a director of Prospero Silver Corp. which is a TSX-V listed company operating in Mexico.  Mr.
Watson holds a B.A. in Geology from the University of Texas and an M.Sc. in Mineral Economics from the
Colorado School of Mines.  
 
For the following reasons the Board concluded that Mr. Watson should serve as a Director of the Company,
in light of its business and structure. Mr. Watson’s technical, operational and management experience in
mining and mineral exploration enables him to provide operating insight to the Board.  Further, his training
and experience as a geologist and mining executive allow him to bring technical and managerial expertise
to the Board as a director. These skills are valuable to the Board at this time as the Company’s primary
assets are exploration stage properties.
 
Kiran Patankar – Director, President and Chief Executive Officer
 
Mr.  Patankar  (38)  is  a  versatile  executive  and  leader  with  over  12  years  of  global  mining  industry
experience  spanning  investment  banking,  operations  management,  geology,  and  engineering.    Prior  to
joining Timberline in January 2015, he spent 7 years in the Canadian investment banking industry where
he focused on advising clients ranging from junior growth companies to senior mining companies on capital
raising  and  mergers  &  acquisitions.  He  was  recently  Managing  Director,  Mining  Investment  Banking  of
Mackie Research Capital Corporation from January 2012 until December 2014. Prior to that, he was Vice
President,  Metals  &  Mining  Investment  Banking  at  Macquarie  Capital  Markets  Canada  Ltd.  from  August
2007 until December 2011. Between 2000 and 2006, he worked in the mining industry for 4 years as a
geologist and engineer and in the construction materials industry for 2 years in operational and business
development roles. Mr. Patankar holds a B.S. in Geological Engineering from the Colorado School of Mines
and an MBA from the Yale School of Management.  Mr. Patankar is employed on a full-time basis with
Timberline Resources.
 
For  the  following  reasons  the  Board  concluded  that  Mr.  Patankar  should  serve  as  a  Director  of  the
Company,  in  light  of  its  business  and  structure.  Mr.  Patankar’s  metals  and  mining  investment  banking
background enables him to provide guidance to the Board on strategic and financial matters that are critical
at  this  stage  in  the  Company’s  development.    Further,  his  leadership  experience  and  training  as  a
geological engineer allow him to bring managerial and technical expertise to the Board as a director. These
skills  are  valuable  to  the  Board  at  this  time  as  the  Company’s  primary  assets  are  exploration  stage
properties.
 
Randal Hardy – Chief Financial Officer
 
Mr. Hardy (54) is an experienced financial executive with over 24 years of operations and corporate finance
experience in the precious metal mining, exploration, and manufacturing sectors.  He was appointed as our
Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer and to our board of directors in August 2007. In March 2011,
Paul  Dircksen  was  appointed  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  Mr.  Hardy  continued  as  the  Chief  Financial
Officer and a Director of the Company.  He was a director until August 2014.  Prior to his appointment by us,
since  September  2006,  Mr.  Hardy  was  the  President  of  HuntMountain  Resources,  a  publicly  held  U.S.-
based junior exploration
9
company.  Prior to that, from August 2005, he was HuntMountain’s Chief Financial Officer.  Previously,
from 1997  to 2005, he held positions as President and CEO of Sunshine Minting, Inc. a privately held,
precious metal custom minting and manufacturing firm.  Prior to his tenure at Sunshine Minting, Inc., Mr.
Hardy has served as Treasurer of the NYSE-listed Sunshine Mining and Refining Company.  Mr. Hardy has
a Business Administration degree from Boise State University and has attained certifications as a Certified
Management Accountant and a Certified Cash Manager.  Mr. Hardy currently serves as a director of Rae-
Wallace Mining Company and is employed on a full-time basis with Timberline Resources.
 
Steven Osterberg – Vice President, Exploration
 
Dr. Osterberg (54) was appointed as our Vice-President, Exploration on February 1, 2012.  Prior to his
appointment, since April 2009, Dr. Osterberg was a Senior Geologist with Tetra Tech, Inc., a mining-related
consulting firm.  From November 2004 through March 2009, Dr. Osterberg was an independent consulting
geologist.  During this period, Dr. Osterberg also co-founded Jack’s Fork Exploration, Inc., a privately held
mineral exploration company, where he continues to serve as a Director.  From 2002 to 2004, Dr. Osterberg
was a Senior Geologist at Tetra Tech-MFG, Inc.  Dr. Osterberg holds a Ph.D. in geology from the University
of Minnesota and is a licensed professional geologist (P.G.) and qualified person (QP) with the Society of
Mining and Metallurgy (SME). Mr. Osterberg is employed on a full-time basis with Timberline Resources.
 
Arrangements between Officers and Directors
 
To our knowledge, there is no arrangement or understanding between any of our officers and any other
person, including Directors, pursuant to which the officer was selected to serve as an officer.
 
Family Relationships
 
None of our Directors are related by blood, marriage, or adoption to any other Director, executive officer, or
other key employees.
 
Other Directorships
No directors of Timberline are also directors of issuers with a class of securities registered under Section 12
of the U.S. Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended(the “U.S. Exchange Act”) (or which otherwise are
required to file periodic reports under the U.S. Exchange Act).
 
Legal Proceedings
 
Timberline  is  not  aware  of  any  material  legal  proceedings  to  which  any  director,  officer  or  affiliate  of
Timberline, or any owner of record or beneficially of more than five percent of common stock of Timberline,
or  any  associate  of  any  director,  officer,  affiliate  of  Timberline,  or  security  holder  is  a  party  adverse  to
Timberline  or  any  of  its  subsidiaries  or  has  a  material  interest  adverse  to  Timberline  or  any  of  its
subsidiaries.
 
Timberline is not aware of any of its directors or officers being involved in any legal proceedings in the past
ten years relating to any matters in bankruptcy, insolvency, criminal proceedings (other than traffic and other
minor offenses) or being subject to any of the items set forth under Item 401(f) of Regulation S-K.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Board of Directors Structure
 
Our  current  bylaws  require  the  Board  to  have  three  (3)  or  more  persons,  and  may  be  increased  or
decreased from time to time, exclusively by resolution approved by the affirmative vote of a majority of the
Board.  The current Board is composed of six (6) Directors.
10
John Watson
Robert Martinez
Leigh Freeman
Director Independence
 
We have six directors as of August 21, 2015, including four independent directors, as follows:
 
● William Sheriff
●
●
●
 
An  “independent”  director  is  a  director  whom  the  Board  of  Directors  has  determined  satisfies  the
requirements for independence under Section 803A of the NYSE MKT LLC (the “NYSE-MKT”) Company
Guide.
 
Meetings of the Board and Board Member Attendance the Meeting
 
During the fiscal year ending September 30, 2014, the Board held nine (9) meetings of the Board.  None of
the incumbent Directors attended fewer than 75% of the board meetings.
Board members are not required to attend the Meeting.
 
Communications to the Board
 
Stockholders who are interested in communicating directly with members of the Board, or the Board as a
group, may do so by writing directly to the individual Board member c/o Chief Financial Officer, Randal
Hardy,  at  Timberline  Resources  Corporation,  101  East  Lakeside  Avenue,  Coeur  d’Alene,  Idaho
83814.    Our  Chief  Financial  Officer  will  forward  communications  directly  to  the  appropriate  Board
member.    If  the  correspondence  is  not  addressed  to  the  particular  member,  the  communication  will  be
forwarded to a Board member to bring to the attention of the Board.  Our Chief Financial Officer will review
all communications before forwarding them to the appropriate Board member.
 
Board Committees
 
Our  Board  of  Directors  has  established  three  board  committees:  an  Audit  Committee,  a  Compensation
Committee, and a Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee.
 
The information below sets out the current members of each of Timberline Resources’ board committees
and the advisory board and summarizes the functions of each of the committees in accordance with their
mandates.
 
Audit Committee and Audit Committee Financial Experts
 
We have a standing Audit Committee and audit committee charter, which complies with Rule 10A-3 of the
Exchange  Act,  and  the  requirements  of  the  NYSE  MKT  LLC.  Our  Audit  Committee  was  established  in
accordance  with  Section  3(a)(58)(A)  of  the  Exchange  Act.  Our  Audit  Committee  is  composed  of  two  (2)
directors each of whom, in the opinion of the Board, are independent (in accordance with Rule 10A-3 of the
Exchange Act and the requirements of Section 803A of the NYSE MKT Company Guide) and financially
literate (pursuant to the requirements of Section 803B of the NYSE MKT Company Guide): Leigh Freeman
(Chairman)  and  William  M.  Sheriff.    Leigh  Freeman  satisfies  the  requirement  of  a  “financial  expert”  as
defined  under  Item  407(d)(5)  of  Regulation  S-K  and  meets  the  requirements  for  financial  sophistication
under the requirements of Section 803B of the NYSE MKT Company Guide.
Our  Audit  Committee  meets  with  our  management  and  our  external  auditors  to  review  matters  affecting
financial reporting, the system of internal accounting and financial controls and procedures and the audit
procedures and audit plans. Our Audit Committee reviews our significant financial risks, is involved in the
appointment  of  senior  financial  executives  and  annually  reviews  our  insurance  coverage  and  any  off-
balance sheet transactions.
 
Our  Audit  Committee  monitors  our  audit  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  and  all  financial
disclosure contained in our SEC filings. Our Audit Committee appoints our external auditors, monitors their
qualifications and independence and determines the appropriate level of their remuneration. The external
auditors report directly to the
11
Audit Committee. Our Audit Committee has the authority to terminate our external auditors’ engagement
and approve in advance any services to be provided by the external auditors that are not related to the
audit.
 
During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2014, the Audit Committee met four (4) times. A copy of the
Audit Committee charter is available on our website at www.timberline-resources.com.
 
Audit Committee Report
 
Our Audit Committee oversees our financial reporting process on behalf of the Board.  The Audit Committee
has  two  (2)  members,  each  of  whom  is  “independent”  as  determined  under  Rule  10A-3  of  the  U.S.
Exchange  Act  and  the  rules  of  the  NYSE-MKT.  The  Audit  Committee  operates  under  a  written  charter
adopted by the Board.
 
The Audit Committee assists the Board by overseeing the (1) integrity of our financial reporting and internal
control,  (2)  independence  and  performance  of  our  independent  auditors,  (3)  and  provides  an  avenue  of
communication between management, the independent auditors and the Board.
 
In  the  course  of  providing  its  oversight  responsibilities  regarding  the  2014  financial  statements,  the
Committee reviewed the 2014 audited financial statements, which appear in the 2014 Annual Report to
Stockholders, with management and our independent auditors. The Audit Committee reviewed accounting
principles,  practices,  and  judgments  as  well  as  the  adequacy  and  clarity  of  the  notes  to  the  financial
statements.
 
The Audit Committee reviewed the independence and performance of the independent auditors who are
responsible  for  expressing  an  opinion  on  the  conformity  of  those  audited  financial  statements  with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, and such other matters as required to be
communicated  by  the  independent  auditors  in  accordance  with  Statement  of  Auditing  Standards  61,  as
superseded by Statement of Auditing Standard 114 – the Auditor’s Communication With Those Charged
With Governance, as modified or supplemented.
 
The Audit Committee meets with the independent auditors to discuss their audit plans, scope and timing on
a  regular  basis,  with  or  without  management  present.  The  Audit  Committee  has  received  the  written
disclosures and the letter from the independent auditors required by applicable requirements of the Public
Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  for  independent  auditor  communications  with  audit  committees
concerning independence, as may be modified or supplemented.
Leigh Freeman (Chairman)
In reliance on the reviews and discussions referred to above, the Committee recommended to the Board,
and  the  Board  has  approved,  that  the  audited  financial  statements  be  included  in  Timberline’s  Annual
Report to the SEC on Form 10-K for the year ended September 30, 2014. The Audit Committee and the
Board  have  also  recommended  the  selection  of  DeCoria,  Maichel  and  Teague  P.S.  as  independent
auditors for Timberline for the fiscal year 2015.
 
USubmitted by the Audit Committee Members
●
● William Sheriff
 
Compensation Committee
 
We  have  a  Compensation  Committee  composed  of  two  (2)  directors,  all  of  whom,  in  the  opinion  of  our
Board  of  Directors,  are  independent  (under  Section  803A  of  the  NYSE-MKT  Company  Guide):  Leigh
Freeman and John Watson.
 
We have a Compensation Committee charter that complies with the requirements of the NYSE-MKT.  Our
Compensation  Committee  is  responsible  for  considering  and  authorizing  terms  of  employment  and
compensation  of  executive  officers  and  providing  advice  on  compensation  structures  in  the  various
jurisdictions  in  which  we  operate.  Our  Chief  Executive  Officer  may  not  be  present  during  the  voting
determination or deliberations of his or her compensation; however, our Compensation Committee does
consult with our Chief Executive Officer in determining and recommending the compensation of directors
and other executive officers.
 
In  addition,  our  Compensation  Committee  reviews  both  our  overall  salary  objectives  and  significant
modifications  made  to  employee  benefit  plans,  including  those  applicable  to  executive  officers,  and
propose awards of stock options.  The Compensation Committee has determined that the Corporation’s
compensation  policies  and  practices  for  its  employees  generally,  not  just  executive  officers,  are  not
reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on the Corporation.
12
The  Compensation  Committee  does  not  and  cannot  delegate  its  authority  to  determine  director  and
executive  officer  compensation.    Our  management  has  not  engaged  the  services  of  an  external
compensation consultant during the fiscal year 2014.
 
During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2014, the Compensation Committee met one (1) time. A copy
of the Compensation Committee charter is available on our website at www.timberline-resources.com.
 
Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee
 
We have a Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee composed of two (2) directors, all of whom,
in the opinion of our Board of Directors, are independent (under Section 803A of the NYSE-MKT Company
Guide):  Robert  Martinez  (Chairman)  and  William  Sheriff.    We  have  a  Corporate  Governance  and
Nominating Committee charter that complies with the requirements of the NYSE-MKT.
 
Our  Corporate  Governance  and  Nominating  Committee  is  responsible  for  developing  our  approach  to
corporate  governance  issues.  The  Committee  evaluates  the  qualifications  of  potential  candidates  for
director and recommends to the Board nominees for election at the next annual meeting or any special
meeting  of  stockholders,  and  any  person  to  be  considered  to  fill  a  Board  vacancy  resulting  from  death,
disability,  removal,  resignation  or  an  increase  in  Board  size.  The  Committee  has  adopted  a  Director
Nominating Process and Policy which sets forth the criteria the Board will assess in connection with the
consideration  of  a  candidate,  including  the  candidate’s  integrity,  reputation,  judgment,  knowledge,
independence, experience, accomplishments, commitment and skills, all in the context of an assessment of
the perceived needs of the Board at that time.  A copy of the Director Nominating Process and Policy is
available on our website at www.timberline-resources.com.
 
We do not have a formal policy regarding diversity in the selection of nominees for directors.  The Corporate
Governance and Nominating Committee does, however, consider diversity as part of its overall selection
strategy.    In  considering  diversity  of  the  Board  as  a  criteria  for  selecting  nominees,  the  Corporate
Governance  and  Nominating  Committee  takes  into  account  various  factors  and  perspectives,  including
differences  of  viewpoint,  professional  experience,  education,  skills  and  other  individual  qualities  and
attributes that contribute to Board heterogeneity, as well as race, gender and national origin. The Corporate
Governance and Nominating Committee seeks persons with leadership experience in a variety of contexts.
The Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee believes that this conceptualization of diversity is
the  most  effective  means  to  implement  Board  diversity.  The  Corporate  Governance  and  Nominating
Committee will assess the effectiveness of this approach as part of its annual review of its charter.
 
The Committee will consider recommendations for director nominees made by stockholders and others if
these  individuals  meet  the  criteria  set  forth  in  the  Director  Nominating  Process  and  Policy.  For
consideration by the Committee, the nominating stockholder or other person must provide the Corporate
Secretary’s Office with information about the nominee, including the detailed background of the suggested
candidate  that  will  demonstrate  how  the  individual  meets  our  director  nomination  criteria.  If  a  candidate
proposed by a stockholder meets the criteria, the individual will be considered on the same basis as other
candidates. No stockholder or stockholders holding 5% or more of our outstanding stock, either individually
or in aggregate, recommended a nominee for election to the Board.
 
All of the nominees included on the proxy card accompanying this Proxy Statement were nominated by the
Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee and were recommended by our current Board.
 
During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2014, the Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee
met one (1) time. A copy of the Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee charter is available on
our website at www.timberline-resources.com.
13
Board Leadership Structure
 
The Board has reviewed our current Board leadership structure in light of the composition of the Board, our
size, the nature of our business, the regulatory framework under which we operate, our stockholder base,
our  peer  group  and  other  relevant  factors.    Considering  these  factors  we  have  determined  to  have  a
separate Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board.  We have determined that this structure is
currently the most appropriate Board leadership structure for us.  The Board noted the following factors in
reaching its determination:
 
●
The Board acts efficiently and effectively under its current structure.
●
●
A  structure  of  a  separate  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  Chairman  of  the  Board  allows  the  Board  to
provide independent oversight and guidance on the major issues facing the Company on a long-term
basis,  while  having  a  dedicated  executive  officer  that  oversees  the  day-to-day  operations  and
implementation of the long-term vision of the Company;
 
This structure allows us to best utilize our limited resources by enabling the skill sets and expertise of
our independent directors, and in particular, our Chairman, to the greatest extent and puts us in the
best position to identify key risks and developments facing us to be brought to the Board’s attention;
 
Companies within our peer group utilize similar Board structures.
●
 
The Board of Director’s Role in Risk Management Oversight
 
The  understanding,  identification  and  management  of  risk  are  essential  elements  for  the  successful
management  of  Timberline.  Risk  oversight  begins  with  the  Board  and  the  Audit  Committee.  The  Audit
Committee consists of Leigh Freeman (Chairman), and William Sheriff, each an independent director.
 
The  Audit  Committee  reviews  and  discusses  policies  with  respect  to  risk  assessment  and  risk
management.  The  Audit  Committee  also  has  oversight  responsibility  with  respect  to  the  integrity  of  our
financial reporting process and systems of internal control regarding finance and accounting, as well as its
financial statements.
 
At  the  management  level,  an  internal  audit  provides  reliable  and  timely  information  to  the  Board  and
management  regarding  our  effectiveness  in  identifying  and  appropriately  controlling  risks.  Annually,
management  presents  to  the  Audit  Committee  a  report  summarizing  the  review  of  our  methods  for
identifying and managing risks.
 
Additionally, our Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee reviews the risks related to succession
planning and the independence of the Board.  The Compensation Committee reviews the risks related to
our various compensation plans.
 
In the event that a committee is allocated responsibility for examining and analyzing a specific risk, such
committee reports on the relevant risk exposure during its regular reports to the entire Board to facilitate
proper risk oversight by the entire Board.
 
Based on a review of the nature of operations, we do not believe that any areas of Timberline are incented
to take excessive risks that would likely have a material adverse effect on our operations.
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
 
The  following  summary  compensation  tables  set  forth  information  concerning  the  annual  and  long-term
compensation for services in all capacities to the Company for the year ended September 30, 2014 of those
persons  who  were,  at  September  30,  2014  (i)  the  chief  executive  officer  (Paul  Dircksen)  (ii)  the  chief
financial  officer  (Randal  Hardy)  and  (iii)  the  two  other  most  highly  compensated  executive  officer  of  the
Company,  whose  annual  base  salary  and  bonus  compensation  was  in  excess  of  $100,000  (Steven
Osterberg---Vice-President, Exploration and Craig Crowell – Chief Accounting Officer):
 
14
SUMMARY COMPENSATION TABLE
Salary
Bonus
Option
Awards
All Other
Compensation
($)
Total
($)
2014
($)
($)
0
($)
0
Year
2014
175,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
288,934
220,500
55,527(2)
68,434(2)
220,500
272,027
216,500
220,500
216,500
216,500
Name and principal Position
Paul Dircksen, President, Chief
Executive Officer(1)
 
2013
Randal Hardy, Chief Financial Officer 2014
 
2013
Steven Osterberg, Vice-President,
Exploration
 
Craig Crowell, Chief Accounting
Officer and Corporate Secretary(3)
 
 
(1)  Mr. Dircksen was President & Chief Executive Officer until his resignation from those offices effective on
December 31, 2014 when he was appointed Vice-President of Business Development and Technical
Services.
(2)   Reimbursement of taxes related to transfer of SERP plan value to employee in fiscal year 2012 (See
Retirement, Resignation or Termination Plans, below).
(3)  Mr. Crowell resigned effective December 31, 2013.
(4)  Payment for earned but unused vacation time.
2,223(4)
0
0
0
0
0
0
175,000
2013
175,000
2013
144,500
0
0
0
0
0
175,000
144,500
2014
42,146
0
0
44,369
Executive Compensation Agreements and Summary of Executive Compensation
 
Report on Executive Compensation
 
During the year ended September 30, 2014, our Board and our Compensation Committee, was responsible
for  establishing  a  compensation  policy  and  administering  the  compensation  programs  of  our  executive
officers.
 
Salary
 
The  amount  of  compensation  that  we  paid  to  each  of  our  officers  and  the  terms  of  those  persons’
employment is determined by the Compensation Committee. The Compensation Committee evaluates past
performance and considers future incentive and retention in considering the appropriate compensation for
our officers.  Our management did not engage the services of an external compensation consultant during
fiscal year 2014.
 
Stock Incentive Awards
Our  Compensation  Committee  believes  that  the  use  of  direct  stock  awards  is  at  times  appropriate  for
employees, and in the future intends to use direct stock awards to reward outstanding service or to attract
and retain individuals with exceptional talent and credentials. The use of stock options and other awards is
intended to strengthen the alignment of interests of executive officers and other key employees with those
of our stockholders.  During the year ended September 30, 2013, in this regard, on January 18, 2013, our
Compensation  Committee  and  the  Board  of  Directors  authorized  the  issuance  of  100,000  stock  option
awards.  The following stock option issuances were made in the ordinary course of business:  100,000
options to Leigh Freeman upon his appointment as a director.  All options issued are exercisable at $0.22
until January 18, 2018, with all options vesting immediately on the grant date. 
 
Executive Compensation Agreements
Dircksen Employment Agreement
 
Mr. Dircksen entered into a three (3) year employment agreement with annual renewals with us, effective
May 1, 2006, to become our Vice President of Exploration.  Pursuant to the terms of this agreement, he will
function as and
15
perform the customary duties of Vice President of Exploration and will be a member of the Board. On March
21, 2011, Mr. Dircksen was appointed as our Chief Executive Officer and President.  Mr. Dircksen and the
Company agreed to continue his compensation arrangement pursuant to the same agreement.  His
compensation includes an annual salary of $220,500, fringe benefits including payment of medical and
dental insurance coverage premiums, and other performance benefits and incentives. In the event of a
change of control, if Mr. Dircksen’s employment is terminated by the Company without Manifest Cause (as
defined below) or by Mr. Dircksen for Good Reason (as defined below), he will be entitled to receive a lump
sum payment equaling three (3) times his annual base salary and the continuation of medical and dental
insurance benefits as we are then obligated to pay.  Mr. Dircksen is permitted to engage in other business
activities.  Good Reason is defined in the Dircksen employment agreement to mean a reduction in his
compensation, title or level of responsibility, a forced relocation or other change to the terms of his
employment, or a change of control of the Company.  Manifest Cause is defined as a felony conviction, a
gross and willful failure to perform his duties, or dishonest conduct which is intentional and materially
injurious to the Company.  
 
Hardy Employment Agreement
 
In connection with his appointment, Mr. Hardy entered into an employment agreement with us, effective
August 27, 2007.  A brief description of the material terms of this agreement are as follows:  the term is three
(3) years, with annual renewals. The agreement can be terminated by us for cause (without notice), without
cause  (with  three  (3)  months’  notice)  or  upon  a  takeover,  acquisition  or  change  in  control.    Under  the
agreement Mr. Hardy was to act as both Chief Executive and Financial Officer until such time as a new
Chief Financial Officer was appointed. Thereafter, he was to remain as Chief Executive Officer during the
term of his employment.  On March 21, 2011, we appointed Paul Dircksen as our Chief Executive Officer
and President with Mr. Hardy continuing as Chief Financial Officer.  His compensation under the agreement
includes:  an  annual  salary  of  $216,500,  payment  or  reimbursement  of  premiums  for  health  insurance
coverage for him and his family, and other performance benefits and incentives.  In the event of a change of
control,  if  Mr.  Hardy’s  employment  is  terminated  by  the  Company  without  Manifest  Cause  (as  defined
below)  or  by  Mr.  Hardy  for  Good  Reason  (as  defined  below),  he  will  be  entitled  to  receive  a  lump  sum
payment  equaling  three  (3)  times  his  annual  base  salary  and  the  continuation  of  medical  and  dental
insurance benefits as we are then obligated to pay.  Good Reason is defined in the Hardy employment
agreement to mean a reduction in his compensation, title or level of responsibility, a forced relocation or
other change to the terms of his employment, or a change of control of the Company.  Manifest Cause is
defined as a felony conviction, a gross and willful failure to perform his duties, or dishonest conduct which
is intentional and materially injurious to the Company. 
 
Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year-End
The following table sets forth the stock options granted to our named executive officers as of September 30,
2014. No stock appreciation rights were awarded.
Name
Paul Dircksen
Randal Hardy
Steven Osterberg
Craig Crowell(1)
Number of Securities
Underlying Unexercised
Options  (#) Exercisable(2)
16,667
12,501
12,500
16,667
8,334
12,500
8,334
8,334
4,167
4,167
6,250
Option
Exercise
Price ($)(2)
$9.84
$11.64
$5.88
$9.84
$11.64
$5.88
$6.48
$5.88
$9.84
$12.60
$5.88
Option
Expiration
Date
7/22/2015
3/31/2016
4/11/2017
7/22/2015
3/31/2016
4/11/2017
2/1/2017
4/11/2017
7/22/2015
3/21/2016
4/11/2017
(1) Mr. Crowell resigned effective December 31, 2013.
16
(2) Subsequent to September 30, 2014 our board of directors and stockholders approved a one-for-twelve
reverse stock split of our common stock.  After the reverse stock split, effective October 31, 2014, each
holder of record held one share of common stock for every 12 shares held immediately prior to the
effective date.  As a result of the reverse stock split, the number of shares underlying outstanding stock
options and warrants and the related exercise prices were adjusted to reflect the change in the share
price and outstanding shares on the date of the reverse stock split.  The effect of fractional shares was
not material.  All share and per-share amounts and related disclosures have been retroactively
adjusted for all periods to reflect the on-for-twelve reverse stock split.
Retirement, Resignation or Termination Plans
 
We sponsor no plan, whether written or verbal, that would provide compensation or benefits of any type to
an  executive  upon  retirement,  or  any  plan  that  would  provide  payment  for  retirement,  resignation,  or
termination as a result of a change in control of Timberline or as a result of a change in the responsibilities
of an executive following a change in control of Timberline.  Specific executive employment agreements
described  above  do,  however,  provide  that  in  the  event  of  a  change  of  control,  if  the  executive’s
employment is terminated by Timberline without Manifest Cause or by the executive for Good Reason, as
such terms are defined in their respective employment agreements, the executive will be entitled to receive
a  lump  sum  payment  equaling  three  (3)  times  annual  base  salary  and  the  continuation  of  medical  and
dental insurance benefits as Timberline is then obligated to pay.
 
Prior to September 30, 2012, we maintained a Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan (SERP), which is
funded  by  insurance  and  covers  Paul  Dircksen.    We  were  party  to  a  Supplemental  Income  Agreement
(“Agreement”  for  purposes  of  this  paragraph)  with  Paul  Dircksen,  which  provided  for  the  payment  of
deferred compensation to Mr. Dircksen upon his death, Disability, Retirement or Early Retirement, or upon
a Change in Control as defined in Regulations issued by the Internal Revenue Service under IRC Section
409A.  Under the terms of the Agreement, if Mr. Dircksen remained actively and continuously employed on
a  full  time  basis  until  his  Retirement  (defined  as  his  voluntary  termination  of  employment  on  or  after
attaining age 65) or his death, Mr. Dircksen would be paid $100,000 pursuant to the Agreement.   If Mr.
Dircksen  remained  actively  and  continuously  employed  on  a  full  time  basis  until  his  Early  Retirement
(defined as his voluntary termination of employment after attaining age 60 and before attaining age 65) or
his Disability (as defined in the Agreement) he would be paid each year for ten years an amount equal to
5% of the cash surrender value of the life insurance policy funding the Agreement (the “Policy’).  Upon a
Change in Control, the Policy would be distributed to Mr. Dircksen and the Agreement would be terminated,
with no further obligations on the part of Timberline.
 
During the year ended September 30, 2012, we determined that we no longer wished to maintain SERPs
for our management or employees.  The Policy was distributed to Mr. Dircksen and the Agreement was
terminated, with no further obligation on the part of Timberline.  In addition, a SERP in a form substantially
the  same  as  that  provided  to  Mr.  Dircksen  that  was  maintained  for  a  former  non-executive  employee  of
Timberline was transferred to Randal Hardy during the year ended September 30, 2012.  Upon transfer, the
Policy was distributed to Mr. Hardy and the Agreement was terminated, with no further obligation on the part
of Timberline.
DIRECTOR COMPENSATION
The  following  table  sets  forth  the  compensation  granted  to  our  directors  during  the  fiscal  year  ended
September 30, 2014.  Compensation to directors that are also executive officers is detailed above and is
not included on this table.
Fees
Earned or
Paid in
Cash(2)
Non-Equity
Stock
Awards
Option
Awards
Incentive Plan
Compensation
Non-Qualified
Compensation
All Other
Earnings
Compensation
($)
0
0
($)
0
0
0
0
($)
0
0
0
($)
0
0
0
($)
0
0
0
10,875
9,750
Name
Leigh Freeman
Robert Martinez
William M.
Sheriff(1)
John Watson(1)
 
(1)   Appointed to the Board of Directors effective on August 15, 2014.
(2)   See Compensation of Directors, below, for a description of cash compensation earned by Directors.
 
 
17
($)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Total
($)
10,875
9,750
0
0
Compensation of Directors
 
During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2104, we terminated our cash compensation program for our
Directors.  Prior to the termination, our Directors who were not also executive officers were to receive cash
compensation of $7,500 per year, prorated if the individual did not serve as a Director for the entire fiscal
year, along with $1,000 for each Board meeting attended.  Committee members were to receive $1,000 per
fiscal year, with the chairperson of each committee receiving an additional $500 per fiscal year, prorated if
the individual did not serve as a committee member or chairperson for the entire fiscal year.  Directors that
were also executive officers received no monetary compensation for serving as a Director.  Directors are
also  granted  non-qualified  stock  options  and  stock  awards  as  compensation;  although  no  such
compensation was received during the year ended September 30, 2014.
 
OTHER GOVERNANCE MATTERS
 
Code of Business and Ethical Conduct
 
We have adopted a corporate Code of Business and Ethical Conduct administered by our President and
Chief  Executive  Officer,  Kiran  Patankar.  We  believe  our  Code  of  Business  and  Ethical  Conduct  is
reasonably  designed  to  deter  wrongdoing  and  promote  honest  and  ethical  conduct,  to  provide  full,  fair,
accurate, timely and understandable disclosure in public reports, to comply with applicable laws, to ensure
prompt internal reporting of code violations, and to provide accountability for adherence to the code. Our
Code of Business and Ethical Conduct provides written standards that are reasonably designed to deter
wrongdoing and to promote:
 
●
●
●
●
Honest  and  ethical  conduct,  including  the  ethical  handling  of  actual  or  apparent  conflicts  of
interest between personal and professional relationships;
Full, fair, accurate, timely and understandable disclosure in reports and documents that are filed
with, or submitted to, the Commission and in other public communications made by an issuer;
Compliance with applicable governmental laws, rules and regulations; and
The  prompt  internal  reporting  of  violations  of  the  code  to  an  appropriate  person  or  persons
identified in the code; and
Accountability for adherence to the code.
●
 
Our  Code  of  Business  and  Ethical  Conduct  is  available  on  our  web  site  at  www.timberline-
resources.com.  A copy of the Code of Business and Ethical Conduct will be provided to any person without
charge upon written request to us at our executive offices: Timberline Resources Corporation, 101 East
Lakeside Avenue, Coeur d’Alene, Idaho 83814.  We intend to disclose any waiver from a provision of our
code  of  ethics  that  applies  to  any  of  our  principal  executive  officer,  principal  financial  officer,  principal
accounting officer or controller or persons performing similar functions that relates to any element of our
code of ethics on our website. No waivers were granted from the requirements of our Code of Business and
Ethical Conduct during the year ended September 30, 2012, or during the subsequent period from October
1, 2012 through the date of this Proxy Statement.
 
Compensation Interlocks and Insider Participation
 
There were no compensation committee or board interlocks among the members of our Board.
 
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance
 
Section 16(a) of the U.S. Exchange Act, requires our officers, directors, and persons who beneficially own
more  than  10%  of  our  common  stock  (“10%  Stockholders”),  to  file  reports  of  ownership  and  changes  in
ownership with the SEC. Such officers, directors and 10% Stockholders are also required by SEC rules to
furnish us with copies of all Section 16(a) forms that they file.
 
Based  solely  on  our  review  of  the  copies  of  such  forms  received  by  us,  or  written  representations  from
certain  reporting  persons,  we  believe  that  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  September  30,  2014  all  filing
requirements applicable to our officers, directors and greater-than-10%-beneficial owners were complied
with.
 
18
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED
STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
The following tables set forth information as of August 21, 2015, regarding the ownership of our common
stock by:
 
●
each named executive officer, each director and all of our directors and executive officers as a
group; and
each person who is known by us to own more than 5% of our shares of common stock.
●
 
The number of shares beneficially owned and the percentage of shares beneficially owned are based on
12,000,084 shares of common stock outstanding as of August 21, 2015. Beneficial ownership is determined
in accordance with the rules and regulations of the SEC. Shares subject to options that are exercisable
within 60 days following August 21, 2015 are deemed to be outstanding and beneficially owned by the
optionee  for  the  purpose  of  computing  share  and  percentage  ownership  of  that  optionee  but  are  not
deemed to be outstanding for the purpose  of  computing  the  percentage  ownership  of  any  other  person.
Except as indicated in the footnotes to this table, and as affected by applicable community property laws, all
persons listed have sole voting and investment power for all shares shown as beneficially owned by them.
 
DIRECTORS AND EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
 
 
 
Title of Class
Number of Shares of
Common
Stock/Common Shares
Underlying Derivative
Securities Beneficially
Owned
Percentage of
Common
Shares**
323,750 / 55,000
3.14%
107,500 / 34,189
1.18%
44,225 / 70,001
10,751 / 70,834
2,493 / 56,668
- / 57,500
- / 53,334
- / 35,000
*
*
*
*
*
*
488,719 / 532,526
7.41%
Common Stock
 
Common Stock
Common Stock
Common Stock
Common Stock
 
Common Stock
Common Stock
Common Stock
 
 
Common Stock
Name of Beneficial Owner
William M. Sheriff (a)(1)
Chairman of the Board, Director
Kiran Patankar(b)(2)
President & Chief Executive
Officer
Paul Dircksen(b)(3)
Vice President of Business
Development and Technical
Services, Director
Randal Hardy(4)
Chief Financial Officer
Steven Osterberg (5)
Vice-President, Exploration
Robert Martinez (a)(6)
Director
Leigh Freeman (a)(7)
Director
John Watson (a)(8)
Director
 
Total Directors and Executive
Officers as a
group (8 persons)
5% STOCKHOLDERS
Title of Class
Common Stock
Name and Address of
Beneficial Owner
 
Resource Re Ltd. (9)
Continental Building
25 Church Street
Hamilton HM 12
Bermuda
Number of Shares of
Common
Stock/Common Shares
Underlying Derivative 
Securities Beneficially
Owned
Percentage of
Common Shares**
701,250 / -
5.84%
19
Common Stock
Gunpoint Exploration
Suite 201, 1512 Yew Street
Vancouver, BC V6K 3E4
Canada
2,000,000
16.67%
less than 1%.
*
 
**The percentages listed for each stockholder are based on 12,000,084 shares outstanding as of August
21, 2015 and assume the exercise by that stockholder only of his entire option exercisable within 60 days
of August 21, 2015.
Director only
Officer and Director
(a)
 
(b)
 
(1)A vested option to purchase 55,000 shares was granted to this stockholder on December 17, 2014 with
an exercise price of $0.48 per share and an expiration date of December 17, 2019. This stockholder is
the  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  Till  Capital,  the  parent  company  of  Resource  Re  Ltd.    He  disclaims
beneficial  ownership  of  the  securities  held  by  Resource  Re  Ltd.  and  shall  not  be  deemed  to  be  the
beneficial owner of the securities held by Resource Re Ltd. for any purpose. As a result of the reverse
stock  split  effected  by  the  Issuer  on  October  31,  2014,  Resource  Re  Ltd.  currently  holds  701,250
common shares of the Issuer.
(2)A vested option to purchase 34,189 shares was granted to this stockholder on January 14, 2015 with an
exercise price of $0.74 per share and an expiration date of January 14, 2020.
(3)A vested option to purchase 12,501 shares was granted to this stockholder on March 31, 2011 with an
exercise  price  of  $11.64  per  share  and  an  expiration  date  of  March  31,  2016.    A  vested  option  to
purchase 12,500 shares was granted to this stockholder on April 11, 2012 with an exercise price of $5.88
per share and an expiration date of April 11, 2017.  A vested option to purchase 45,000 shares was
granted  to  this  stockholder  on  December  17,  2014  with  an  exercise  price  of  $0.48  per  share  and  an
expiration date of December 17, 2019.
(4)1,667 shares are held in an IRA account.   A vested option to purchase 8,334 shares was granted to this
stockholder  on  March  31,  2011  with  an  exercise  price  of  $11.64  per  share  and  an  expiration  date  of
March 31, 2016. A vested option to purchase 12,500 shares was granted to this stockholder on April 11,
2012 with an exercise price of $5.88 per share and an expiration date of April 11, 2017.  A vested option
to purchase 50,000 shares was granted to this stockholder on December 17, 2014 with an exercise price
of $0.48 per share and an expiration date of December 17, 2019.
(5)A vested option to purchase 8,334 shares was granted to this stockholder on February 1, 2012 with an
exercise  price  of  $6.48  per  share  and  an  expiration  date  of  February  1,  2017.    A  vested  option  to
purchase 8,334 shares was granted to this stockholder on April 11, 2012 with an exercise price of $5.88
per share and an expiration date of April 11, 2017.  A vested option to purchase 40,000 shares was
granted  to  this  stockholder  on  December  17,  2014  with  an  exercise  price  of  $0.48  per  share  and  an
expiration date of December 17, 2019.
(6)A vested option to purchase 6,250 shares was granted to this stockholder on March 21, 2011 with an
exercise  price  of  $12.60  per  share  and  an  expiration  date  of  March  21,  2016.    A  vested  option  to
purchase 6,250 shares was granted to this stockholder on April 11, 2012 with an exercise price of $5.88
per share and an expiration date of April 11, 2017.  A vested option to purchase 45,000 shares was
granted  to  this  stockholder  on  December  17,  2014  with  an  exercise  price  of  $0.48  per  share  and  an
expiration date of December 17, 2019.
(7)A vested option to purchase 8,334 shares was granted to this stockholder on January 18, 2013 with an
exercise  price  of  $2.64  per  share  and  an  expiration  date  of  January  18,  2018.    A  vested  option  to
purchase 45,000 shares was granted to this stockholder on December 17, 2014 with an exercise price of
$0.48 per share and an expiration date of December 17, 2019.
(8)A vested option to purchase 35,000 shares was granted to this stockholder on December 17, 2014 with
an exercise price of $0.48 per share and an expiration date of December 17, 2019.
It is believed by us that all persons named have full voting and investment power with respect to the shares
indicated,  unless  otherwise  noted  in  the  table  and  the  footnotes  thereto.  Under  the  rules  of  the  SEC,  a
person (or group of persons) is deemed to be  a  “beneficial  owner”  of  a  security  if  he  or  she,  directly  or
indirectly, has or shares the power to vote or to direct the voting of such security, or the power to dispose of
or to direct the disposition of such security. Accordingly, more than one person may be deemed to be a
beneficial owner of the same security. A person is also deemed to be a beneficial owner of any security,
which  that  person  has  the  right  to  acquire  within  60  days,  such  as  options  or  warrants  to  purchase  our
common stock.
 
We are not, to the best of our knowledge, directly or indirectly owned or controlled by another corporation or
foreign government.
 
 
20
Change in Control
 
We are not aware of any arrangement that might result in a change in control in the future. We have no
knowledge of any arrangements, including any pledge  by  any  person  of  our  securities,  the  operation  of
which may at a subsequent date result in a change in our control.
 
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS
 
Transactions with Related Persons
 
There were no reportable transactions with related parties, including 5% or greater security holders, during
the two fiscal years ended September 30, 2014 and 2013.
 
 
Except as indicated herein, no officer, director, promoter, or affiliate of Timberline has or proposes to have
any  direct  or  indirect  material  interest  in  any  asset  acquired  or  proposed  to  be  acquired  by  Timberline
through  security  holdings,  contracts,  options,  or  otherwise.    In  cases  where  we  have  entered  into  such
related party transactions, we believe that we have negotiated consideration or compensation that would
have been reasonable if the party or parties were not affiliated or related.
 
 
Policy for Review of Related Party Transactions
 
We have a policy for the review of transactions with related persons as set forth in our Audit Committee
Charter  and  internal  practices.  The  policy  requires  review,  approval  or  ratification  of  all  transactions  in
which we are a participant and in which any of our directors, executive officers, significant stockholders or
an  immediate  family  member  of  any  of  the  foregoing  persons  has  a  direct  or  indirect  material  interest,
subject to certain categories of transactions that are deemed to be pre-approved under the policy - including
employment of executive officers, director compensation (in general, where such transactions are required
to be reported in our proxy statement pursuant to SEC compensation disclosure requirements), as well as
certain  transactions  where  the  amounts  involved  do  not  exceed  specified  thresholds.    All  related  party
transactions must be reported for review by the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors pursuant to the
Audit Committee’s charter and the rules of the NYSE MKT.
 
Following its review, the Audit Committee determines whether these transactions are in, or not inconsistent
with, the best interests of the Company and its stockholders, taking into consideration whether they are on
terms no less favorable to the Company than those available with other parties and the related person's
interest in the transaction. If a related party transaction is to be ongoing, the Audit Committee may establish
guidelines for the Company's management to follow in its ongoing dealings with the related person.
 
Our policy for review of transactions with related persons was followed in all of the transactions set forth
above and all such transactions were reviewed and approved in accordance with our policy for review of
transactions with related persons. 
 
.
21
PROPOSAL 2 — APPROVAL OF THE ADOPTION OF THE
TIMBERLINE 2015 STOCK AND INCENTIVE PLAN
 
What am I voting on?
Background
 
On August 24, 2015, the Board approved the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan, subject to our Stockholders’
approval at the Meeting.  The purpose of the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan is to promote our interests and
our Stockholders interests by aiding us in attracting and retaining employees, officers, consultants, advisors
and non-employee directors capable of assuring the future success of our Company, to offer such persons
incentives to put forth maximum efforts for the success of our business and to compensate such persons
through various stock-based arrangements and provide them with opportunities for stock ownership in our
Company, thereby aligning the interests of such persons with our Shareholders.
 
If approved, the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan is intended to replace our 2005 Equity Incentive Plan.  As of
August  21,  2015,  there  were  542,112  Timberline  Shares  (or  5%  of  the  total  number  of  issued  and
outstanding  Timberline  Shares)  issuable  under  issued  and  outstanding  options  under  our  2005  Equity
Incentive Plan The 2005 Equity Incentive Plan, as amended, expired on May 28, 2015, for the issuance of
new options and equity incentives, therefore no further options or equity incentives may be granted under
our 2005 Equity Incentive Plan.
 
The Board believes that the following factors should be considered in connection with the adoption of the
2015 Stock and Incentive Plan:
 
●Equity compensation remains a key component of a competitive compensation package of our industry
and we believe it effectively rewards employees for the success of our Company over time.
●The 2005 Equity Incentive Plan has expired and new stock options and equity incentives can no longer
be granted under its terms.
●The 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan would enable us in addition to granting stock options, the flexibility to
grant other forms of equity incentives, such as restricted stock, restricted stock units and other stock-based
awards.
●The Compensation Committee is designated as the body responsible for the administration of the 2015
Stock and Incentive Plan and generally has broad authority to determine the recipients of awards and the
terms and conditions of such awards.
● Approval of 4,000,000 Timberline Shares.
 
Participation and Current Reservation of Awards
 
The 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan will be available to our directors, executive officers and employees on
the same basis of participation – the discretion of our Compensation Committee in determining the grant of
Awards  under  the  plan  on  the  basis  of  their  judgment  as  to  the  best  interests  of  the  Company  and  the
Stockholders.
 
There are currently no Awards reserved or otherwise set aside to be granted, including any Awards to be
granted  to  any  executive  officer  (including  any  named  executive  officer),  director,  nominee  for  director,
employee or any associate of any of the foregoing.  Since Awards are to be granted at the discretion of the
Compensation Committee it is not possible to determine at this time the number of Awards that would have
been granted had the Awards Plan been in effect during the prior fiscal year, except for the following:
 
●In relation to the appointment of Mr. Patankar as the Company’s Chief Executive Officer on December 19,
2014, the Company agreed to issue Mr. Patankar 100,000 options in the Company; however due to a
conflict in the rules of the TSX-V and the NYSE MKT, the Company was only able to issue Mr. Patankar
34,189 options under the Company’s 2005 Incentive Plan.  Had the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan been
effective  and  sufficient  Timberline  Shares  available  for  issuance  thereunder,  Mr.  Patankar  would  have
received an additional 65,811 options. The Compensation Committee has the discretion to issue options
to Mr. Patankar upon approval of the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan to make Mr. Patankar whole pursuant
to the Company’s original agreement in relation to his employment.
22
The following is a brief summary of the material terms of the material of the 2015 Stock and Incentive
Plan.  This summary is qualified in its entirety by the full text of the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan which is
set out in Appendix “B”
 
Description of the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan
Administration
The  Compensation  Committee  administers  the  2015  Stock  and  Incentive  Plan  and  has  full  power  and
authority to determine when and to whom awards will be granted, and the type, amount and other terms and
conditions of each award, consistent with the provisions of the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan. Subject to
the provisions of the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan, the Compensation Committee may amend the terms
of, or accelerate the exercisability of, an outstanding award. The Compensation Committee has authority to
interpret the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan and establish rules and regulations for the administration of the
2015 Stock and Incentive Plan.
The Compensation Committee may delegate its powers under the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan to one or
more officers, except that such delegated officers will not be permitted to grant awards to any members of
the Board or executive officers who are subject to Section 16 of the Exchange Act or in a manner as would
cause the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan not to comply with Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code,
applicable exchange rules or applicable corporate law.
Eligibility
Any  employee,  officer,  non-employee  director,  consultant,  independent  contractor  or  advisor  providing
services to the Company or an affiliate, or any person to whom an offer of employment has been made, and
who is selected by the Compensation Committee to participate, is eligible to receive an award under the
2015 Stock and Incentive Plan. As of August 24, 2015, approximately 15 persons were eligible as a class
to  be  selected  by  the  Compensation  Committee  to  receive  awards  under  the  2015  Stock  and  Incentive
Plan.
Shares Available for Awards
The aggregate number of shares that may be issued under all stock-based awards made under the 2015
Stock  and  Incentive  Plan  will  be  4,000,000  Timberline  Shares.    In  addition,  for  stock  options  and  stock
appreciation  rights  (“SARs”),  the  aggregate  number  of  shares  with  respect  to  which  such  awards  are
exercised,  rather  than  the  number  of  shares  actually  issued  upon  exercise,  will  be  counted  against  the
number of shares available for awards under the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan. If awards under the 2015
Stock  and  Incentive  Plan  expire  or  otherwise  terminate  without  being  exercised,  the  shares  of  common
stock  not  acquired  pursuant  to  such  awards  shall  again  become  available  for  issuance  under  the  2015
Stock and Incentive Plan. However, under the following circumstances, shares will not again be available
for issuance under the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan: (i) shares unissued due to a “net exercise” of a stock
option, (ii) any shares withheld or shares tendered to satisfy tax withholding obligations with respect to a
stock  option  or  SAR,  (iii)  shares  covered  by  a  SAR  that  is  not  settled  in  shares  upon  exercise  and  (iv)
shares  repurchased  using  stock  option  exercise  proceeds.    In  addition,  awards  that  do  not  entitle  the
recipient to receive or purchase shares shall not be counted against the number of shares available for
issuance under the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan.
Certain  awards  under  the  2015  Stock  and  Incentive  Plan  are  subject  to  limitations.  No  person  may  be
granted awards under the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan for more than 1,000,000 shares of our common
stock in any calendar year.  The maximum amount payable to a participant within any taxable year under all
performance awards denominated in cash may not exceed $1,000,000.  Non-employee directors may not
be granted awards in any calendar year of more than 500,000 shares.
The  Compensation  Committee  will  adjust  (i)  the  number  of  shares  available  under  the  2015  Stock  and
Incentive Plan, (ii) the number and type of shares subject to outstanding awards and (iii) the share limits
described above in
23
the case of a dividend (other than a regular cash dividend), recapitalization, stock split, reverse stock split,
reorganization, merger, consolidation, split-off, repurchase or exchange of shares, or other similar corporate
transaction where such an adjustment is necessary to prevent dilution or enlargement of the benefits
available under the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan. Any adjustment determination made by the
Compensation Committee or the Board shall be final, binding and conclusive.
 
Dilution Discussion
 
In setting the amount of shares authorized under the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan for which stockholder
approval is being sought, the Compensation Committee and the Board considered, among other factors,
the historical amounts of equity awards granted by the Company, and the potential future grants over the
next several years. The Committee and the Board also consider recommendations by the CEO for the other
named executive officers. Neither the Committee nor the Board has authorized specific grants of awards to
be  made  under  the  2015  Stock  and  Incentive  Plan,  subject  to  stockholder  approval.  However,  the
Compensation Committee and the Board believe that the shares being requested should be sufficient for
awards under the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan for approximately the next three years.
To  reduce  the  dilutive  impact  of  our  equity  award  grants  on  our  stockholders’  interests,  we  actively
administer our equity grant program to make use of our resources as effective as possible.  Equity awards
are  generally  limited  to  (1)  those  positions  deemed  critical  to  our  future  success,  (2)  individuals  whose
personal performance makes them highly valuable to us, and (3) essential new hires.
 
Type of Awards and Terms and Conditions
 
The  2015  Stock  and  Incentive  Plan  provides  that  the  Compensation  Committee  may  grant  awards  to
eligible participants in any of the following forms, subject to such terms, conditions and provisions as the
Compensation Committee may determine to be necessary or desirable:
 
●stock  options,  including  both  incentive  stock  options  (“ISOs”)  and  non-qualified  stock  options  (together
with ISOs, “options”);
●
stock appreciation rights;
restricted stock;
restricted stock units;
performance awards;
dividend equivalents; and
other stock-based awards.
●
 
●
 
●
 
●
 
●
 
Options and SARs
 
The  holder  of  an  option  is  entitled  to  purchase  a  number  of  shares  of  our  common  stock  at  a  specified
exercise  price  during  a  specified  time  period,  all  as  determined  by  the  Compensation  Committee.  The
holder of a SAR is entitled to receive the excess of the fair market value (calculated as of the exercise date)
of a specified number of shares of our common stock over the grant price of the SAR.
 
Exercise Price. The Compensation Committee has the discretion to determine the exercise price and other
terms of options and SARs, except that the exercise price will in no event be less than 100% of the fair
market value per share of our common stock underlying the award on the date of grant, unless such option
or SAR is granted in substitution for an option or SAR previously granted by a merged or acquired entity.
Without the approval of stockholders, we will not amend or replace previously granted options or SARs in a
transaction that constitutes a “repricing” as discussed in the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan.
24
Vesting. The Compensation Committee has the discretion to determine when and under what
circumstances an option or SAR will vest.
 
Exercise. The Compensation Committee has the discretion to determine the method or methods by which
an option or SAR may be exercised, which methods may include a net exercise. The Compensation
Committee is not authorized under the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan to accept a promissory note as
consideration.
 
Expiration. Options and SARs will expire at such time as the Compensation Committee determines;
provided, however, that no option or SAR may be exercised more than ten years from the date of grant,
except that, in the case of an ISO held by a 10% stockholder, the option may not be exercised more than
five years from the date of grant.
 
Special Limitations on ISOs. In the case of a grant of an option intended to qualify as an ISO, no such
option may be granted to a participant who owns, at the time of the grant, stock representing more than 10%
of the total combined voting power of all classes of our stock or our subsidiaries unless the exercise price
per share of our common stock subject to such ISO is at least 110% of the fair market value per share of our
common stock on the date of grant, and such ISO award is not exercisable more than five years after its
date of grant. In addition, options designated as ISOs shall not be eligible for treatment under the Internal
Revenue Code as ISOs to the extent that either: (i) the aggregate fair market value of shares of common
stock (determined as of the time of grant) with respect to which such ISOs are exercisable for the first time
by the participant during any calendar year exceeds $100,000 or (ii) such ISOs otherwise remain
exercisable but are not exercised within three months after termination of employment (or such other period
of time provided in Section 422 of the Internal Revenue Code).
Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units
 
The holder of restricted stock will own shares of our common stock subject to restrictions imposed by the
Compensation  Committee  for  a  specified  time  period  determined  by  the  Compensation  Committee.  The
holder  of  restricted  stock  units  will  have  the  right,  subject  to  restrictions  imposed  by  the  Compensation
Committee, to receive shares of our common stock at some future date determined by the Compensation
Committee. The grant, issuance, retention, vesting and/or settlement of restricted stock and restricted stock
units will occur at such times and in such installments as determined by the Compensation Committee. The
Compensation Committee will have the right to make the timing of the grant and/or the issuance, ability to
retain,  vesting  and/or  settlement  of  restricted  stock  and  restricted  stock  units  subject  to  continued
employment,  passage  of  time  and/or  such  performance  conditions  as  are  deemed  appropriate  by  the
Compensation  Committee.    Unless  otherwise  specified  by  the  Compensation  Committee,  upon  a
participant ceasing to provide service as an employee or a non-employee director, all unvested shares of
restricted stock and restricted stock units shall be forfeited and reacquired by us.
Dividend Equivalents
 
The holder of a dividend equivalent will be entitled to receive payments (in cash, shares of our common
stock,  other  securities  or  other  property)  equivalent  to  the  amount  of  cash  dividends  paid  by  us  to  our
stockholders, with respect to the number of shares determined by the Compensation Committee. Dividend
equivalents will be subject to other terms and conditions determined by the Compensation Committee, but
the Compensation Committee may not (i) grant dividend equivalents in connection with options or SARs or
(ii) pay a dividend equivalent with respect to an award prior to the date on which all performance-based
conditions or restrictions on such award have been satisfied, waived or lapsed.
 
Performance Awards
 
Option  and  SAR  awards  under  the  2015  Stock  and  Incentive  Plan  qualify  as  “performance-based
compensation” within the meaning of Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code (“Section 162(m)”). In
addition, the Compensation Committee may grant performance awards denominated or payable in cash,
shares (including restricted stock and restricted stock unit awards),  other securities, other awards or other
property  under  the  2015  Stock  and  Incentive  Plan  that  are  intended  to  qualify  as  “performance-based
compensation” within the meaning of Section 162(m) (“performance awards”). A performance award will be
conditioned solely upon the achievement of one or more objective performance goals established by the
Compensation Committee in compliance with
25
Section 162(m). The Compensation Committee must determine the length of the performance period,
establish the performance goals for the performance period, and determine the amounts of the performance
awards for each participant no later than 90 days after the beginning of each performance period according
to the requirements of Section 162(m).
 
Performance goals must be based solely on one or more of the following, either individually, alternatively or
in any combination, applied on a corporate, subsidiary, business unit, channel, merchandise category or
line of business basis: economic value added (EVA); sales or revenue; costs or expenses; net profit after
tax; gross profit; income; cash flow; earnings; earnings per share (EPS); earnings per share from continuing
operations; returns; margins; ratios; budget comparisons; unit volume; stock price; net working capital;
value creation; market share; market capitalization; workforce satisfaction and diversity goals; employee
retention; production metrics; development; implementation or completion of key projects; or strategic plan
development and implementation. Such goals may reflect absolute results of individual performance or that
of the Company or a subsidiary, division, business segment or business unit performance.  When
establishing performance criteria, the Compensation Committee may allow the exclusion of charges related
to an event or occurrence that the Compensation Committee determines should properly be excluded.
Under  the  2015  Stock  and  Incentive  Plan,  following  the  close  of  each  performance  period,  the
Compensation Committee is required to certify that the applicable performance goals have been met prior
to payment of any performance awards to participants.
Other Stock-Based Awards
The Compensation Committee is also authorized to grant other types of awards that are denominated or
payable in, valued in whole or in part by reference to, or otherwise based on or related to shares of our
common  stock,  subject  to  terms  and  conditions  determined  by  the  Compensation  Committee  and  the
limitations in the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan. No other stock-based awards shall contain a purchase
right or option-like exercise feature.
Duration, Termination and Amendment
The  2015  Stock  and  Incentive  Plan  has  a  term  of  ten  years  expiring  on  September  24,  2025,  unless
terminated earlier by the Board. The Board may at any time and from time to time and in any respect amend
or modify the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan. The Board shall require the approval of any amendment or
modification of the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan that would:  (i) be required under the listing requirements
of the NYSE MKT or another exchange or securities market on which our shares are then listed for trading,
(ii) increase the number of shares authorized under the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan, (iii) increase the
annual participant share limits or annual cash award limits, (iv) permit a repricing of options or SARs, (v)
permit the award of options or SARs with an exercise price less than 100% of the fair market value of a
share  on  the  date  of  grant,  or  (vi)  increase  the  maximum  term  of  options  or  SARs.  No  amendment  or
modification  of  the  2015  Stock  and  Incentive  Plan  may  be  made  that  would  adversely  affect  any
outstanding award without the consent of the participant or the current holder of the award.
Effect of Corporate Transaction
Awards  under  the  2015  Stock  and  Incentive  Plan  are  generally  subject  to  special  provisions  upon  the
occurrence  of  any  reorganization,  merger,  consolidation,  split-up,  spin-off,  combination,  plan  of
arrangement,  take-over  bid  or  tender  offer,  repurchase  or  exchange  of  Shares,  or  any  other  similar
corporate transaction with respect to us. In the event of such a corporate transaction, the Compensation
Committee or the Board may provide for one or more of the following to occur upon the occurrence of the
event (or immediately prior to such event, provided the event is consummated):
●termination of any award, whether vested or not, in exchange for an amount of cash and/or other property
equal to the amount that would have been received upon exercise of the award or the realization of the
participant’s  rights  under  the  award.  Awards  may  be  terminated  without  payment  if  the  Compensation
Committee  or  Board  determines  that  no  amount  is  realizable  under  the  award  as  of  the  time  of  the
transaction;
26
●replacement of any award with other rights or property selected by the Compensation Committee or the
Board;
●the assumption of any award by the successor entity (or its parent or subsidiary) or the arrangement for the
substitution for similar awards covering the stock of such successor entity;
●acceleration of the exercisability or vesting of any award, notwithstanding the language in the participant’s
award agreement; or
●require that the award cannot vest, be exercised or become payable until after a future date, which may be
the effective date of the corporate transaction.
Clawback or Recoupment
All awards under the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan will be subject to forfeiture or other penalties pursuant
to any clawback policy we may adopt or amend from time to time, as determined by the Compensation
Committee.
Income Tax Withholding
In order to comply with all applicable income tax laws and regulations, we may take appropriate action to
ensure that all applicable taxes, which are the sole responsibility of the participant, are withheld or
collected.  The Compensation Committee may allow the participant to satisfy any tax obligation by (a)
electing to have a portion of the shares withheld that otherwise would be delivered upon exercise, receipt or
the lapse of restrictions with respect to the award, or (b) electing to deliver to us shares of the Company
other than shares received pursuant to the award with a fair market value equal to the amount of the tax
obligation.  Any election, if allowed, must be made on or before the date that the amount of tax to be
withheld is determined.
Limited Transferability of Awards
Except as otherwise provided by the Compensation Committee, no award or other right or interest of a
participant under the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan (other than fully vested and unrestricted shares issued
pursuant to an award) shall be transferable by a participant other than by will or by the laws of descent and
distribution, and no right or award may be pledged, alienated, attached or otherwise encumbered, and any
purported pledge, alienation, attachment or encumbrance shall be void and unenforceable. If a transfer is
allowed by the Compensation Committee (other than for fully vested and unrestricted shares), the transfer
will be for no value and shall comply with the Form S-8 rules. The Compensation Committee may establish
procedures to allow a named beneficiary to exercise the rights of the participant and receive any property
distributable with respect to any award upon the participant’s death.
CERTAIN U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES APPLICABLE TO THE 2015 STOCK AND
INCENTIVE PLAN
 
The following is a summary of the principal U.S. federal income tax consequences generally applicable to
awards under the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan
 
Grant of Options and SARs.  The grant of a stock option (either an incentive stock option or a non-qualified
stock option) or SAR is not expected to result in any taxable income for the recipient.
Exercise of Incentive Stock Options.  Upon the exercise of an incentive stock option, no taxable income is
realized  by  the  optionee  for  purposes  of  regular  federal  income  tax.    However,  the  optionee  may  be
required to recognize income for purposes of the alternative minimum tax (“AMT”).  If stock is issued to the
optionee pursuant to the exercise of an incentive stock option, and if no disqualifying disposition of such
shares is made by such optionee within two years after the date of grant or within one year after the transfer
of such shares to such optionee, then (1) upon the sale of such shares, any amount realized in excess of
the option price will be taxed to such optionee as a long-term capital gain and any loss sustained will be a
long-term  capital  loss,  and  (2)  the  Company  will  not  be  entitled  to  a  deduction  for  federal  income  tax
purposes.
 
 
27
If the stock acquired upon the exercise of an incentive stock option is disposed of prior to the expiration of
either holding period described above, generally (1) the optionee will realize ordinary income in the year of
disposition in an amount equal to the excess (if any) of the fair market value of such shares at exercise (or, if
less, the amount realized on the disposition of such shares) over the option price paid for such shares, and
(2)  the  Company  will  be  entitled  to  deduct  such  amount  for  federal  income  tax  purposes  if  the  amount
represents  an  ordinary  and  necessary  business  expense.    Any  further  gain  (or  loss)  realized  by  the
optionee will be taxed as short-term or long-term capital gain (or loss), as the case may be, and will not
result in any deduction by the Company.
 
Exercise  of  Non-Qualified  Stock  Options  and  SARs.    Upon  exercising  a  non-qualified  stock  option,  the
optionee  must  recognize  ordinary  income  equal  to  the  excess  of  the  fair  market  value  of  the  shares  of
common stock acquired on the date of exercise over the exercise price, and the Company generally will be
entitled at that time to an income tax deduction for the same amount.  Upon exercising a SAR, the amount
of  any  cash  received  and  the  fair  market  value  on  the  exercise  date  of  any  shares  of  common  stock
received are taxable to the recipient as ordinary income and generally are deductible by the Company.
 
The tax consequence upon a disposition of shares acquired through the exercise of a non-qualified stock
option  or  SAR  will  depend  on  how  long  the  shares  have  been  held.    Generally,  there  will  be  no  tax
consequence to the Company in connection with the disposition of shares acquired under a non-qualified
stock option or SAR.
 
Restricted Stock.  Recipients of grants of restricted stock generally will be required to include as taxable
ordinary income the fair market value of the restricted stock at the time it is no longer subject to a substantial
risk of forfeiture.  However, an award holder who makes an 83(b) election within 30 days of the date of grant
of the restricted stock will incur taxable ordinary income on the date of grant equal to the fair market value of
such shares of restricted stock (determined without regard to forfeiture restrictions).  With respect to the sale
of shares after the forfeiture restrictions have expired, the holding period to determine whether the award
recipient has long-term or short-term capital gain or loss generally begins when the restrictions expire, and
the  tax  basis  for  such  shares  will  generally  be  based  on  the  fair  market  value  of  the  shares  on  that
date.    However,  if  the  award  holder  made  an  83(b)  election  as  described  above,  the  holding  period
commences on the date of such election, and the tax basis will be equal to the fair market value of the
shares  on  the  date  of  the  election  (determined  without  regard  to  the  forfeiture  restrictions  on  the
shares).  Dividends, if any, that are paid or accrued while the restricted stock is subject to a substantial risk
of  forfeiture  will  also  be  taxed  as  ordinary  income.    The  Company  will  be  entitled  to  an  income  tax
deduction  equal  to  amounts  the  award  holder  includes  in  ordinary  income  at  the  time  of  such  income
inclusion.
Restricted Stock Units, Performance Awards and Dividend Equivalents.  Recipients of grants of restricted
stock units, performance awards or dividend equivalents (collectively, “deferred awards”) will not incur any
federal  income  tax  liability  at  the  time  the  deferred  awards  are  granted.    Deferred  award  holders  will
recognize ordinary income equal to (a) the amount of cash received under the terms of the deferred award
or,  as  applicable,  (b)  the  fair  market  value  of  the  shares  received  (determined  as  of  the  date  of  receipt)
under the terms of the deferred award.  Dividend equivalents received with respect to any deferred award
will  also  be  taxed  as  ordinary  income.    Cash  or  shares  to  be  received  pursuant  to  a  deferred  award
generally become payable when applicable forfeiture restrictions lapse; provided, however, that, if the terms
of the deferred award so provide, payment may be delayed until a later date to the extent permitted under
applicable tax laws.  The Company will be entitled to an income tax deduction for any amounts included by
the  deferred  award  holder  as  ordinary  income.    For  deferred  awards  that  are  payable  in  shares,  the
participant’s tax basis in the shares received pursuant thereto will be equal to the fair market value of the
shares at the time the shares become payable.  Upon the sale of the shares, appreciation (or depreciation)
after the shares are paid is treated as either short-term or long-term capital gain (or loss) depending on how
long the shares have been held.
 
Income  Tax  Deduction.    Subject  to  the  usual  rules  concerning  reasonable  compensation,  including  our
obligation  to  withhold  or  otherwise  collect  certain  income  and  payroll  taxes,  and  assuming  that,  as
expected, stock options, SARs and other performance awards paid under the 2015 Stock and Incentive
Plan are “qualified performance-based compensation” within the meaning of Section 162(m) of the Internal
Revenue Code, our Company generally will be entitled to a corresponding income tax deduction at the time
a  participant  recognizes  ordinary  income  from  awards  made  under  the  2015  Stock  and  Incentive
Plan.      Section  162(m)  of  the  Code  generally  limits  to  $1,000,000  the  amount  that  a  publicly-held
corporation is allowed each year to deduct for the compensation paid to each of the corporation’s chief
executive officer and the corporation’s other three most highly compensated executive officers (excluding
the chief financial officer). However, “qualified performance-based compensation” is not subject to the
 
 
28
$1,000,000 deduction limit.  In general, to qualify as performance-based compensation, the following
requirements need to be satisfied: (1) payments must be computed on the basis of an objective,
performance-based compensation standard determined by a committee consisting solely of two or more
“outside directors,” (2) the material terms under which the compensation is to be paid, including the
business criteria upon which the performance goals are based, and a limit on the maximum bonus amount
which may be paid to any participant pursuant to any performance period, must be approved by a majority
of the corporation’s shareholders and (3) the committee must certify that the applicable performance goals
were satisfied before payment of any performance-based compensation.
 
Delivery of Shares for Tax Obligation.  Under the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan, the Committee may permit
participants receiving or exercising awards, subject to the discretion of the Committee and upon such terms
and  conditions  as  it  may  impose,  to  deliver  shares  of  common  stock  (either  shares  received  upon  the
receipt or exercise of the award or shares previously owned by the participant) to the Company to satisfy
federal and state tax obligations.
 
Section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code.  The Committee will administer and interpret the 2015 Stock
and  Incentive  Plan  and  all  award  agreements  in  a  manner  consistent  with  the  intent  to  satisfy  the
requirements of Section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code to avoid any adverse tax results thereunder to
a holder of an award.  If any provision of the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan or any award agreement would
result in such adverse consequences, the Committee may amend that provision or take other necessary
action to avoid any adverse tax results, and no such action will be deemed to impair or otherwise adversely
affect the rights of any holder of an award under the 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan.
Special Rules for Executive Officers and Directors Subject to Section 16 of the Exchange Act.    Special
rules may apply to individuals subject to Section 16 of the Exchange Act. In particular, shares received
through exercise or payout of a non-qualified option, an incentive stock option (for purposes of the AMT
only),  an  SAR  or  a  restricted  stock  unit,  and  any  shares  of  restricted  stock  that  vest,  may  be  treated  as
restricted property for purposes of Section 83 of the Internal Revenue Code if the recipient has had a non-
exempt  acquisition  of  shares  of  Company  stock  within  the  six  months  prior  to  the  exercise,  payout  or
vesting.  Accordingly,  the  amount  of  any  ordinary  income  recognized  and  the  amount  of  the  Company’s
income tax deduction will be determined as of the end of that period unless a special election is made by
the recipient pursuant to Section 83(b) of the Internal Revenue Code to recognize income as of the date the
shares are received.
 
Equity Compensation Plans
 
The following summary information is presented for the 2005 Equity Incentive Plan as of September 30,
2014.
Number of securities to
be issued upon exercise
Weighted-average
exercise price of
of
outstanding options,
warrants, and rights(2)
(a)
228,334(1)
outstanding options,
warrants, and
rights(2)
(b)
$9.09
Number of securities
remaining available for
future issuance under
equity
compensation plans
(excluding securities
reflected
in column (a)) (2)
(c)
399,189
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Equity compensation plans
approved by security holders
Equity compensation plans not
approved by security holders
TOTAL
228,334(1)
$9.09
399,189
(1)In  February  2005,  our  Board  adopted  the  2005  Equity  Incentive  Plan  which  was  approved  by
stockholders on September 23, 2005.  This plan authorizes the granting of up to 750,000 non-qualified
10  year  stock  options  to  Officers,  Directors  and  consultants.  In  August  2006,  the  Board  adopted  the
Amended  2005  Equity  Incentive  Plan  which  was  approved  by  stockholders  on  September  22,  2006.
This amended plan increases the number of non-qualified 10 year stock options that are authorized to
be  issued  to  Officers,  Directors  and  consultants  to  2,750,000.  On  August  22,  2008,  our  stockholders
approved a proposal for the increase in the total number of shares of common stock that may be issued
pursuant  to  awards  granted  under  the  original  2005  Plan  as  previously  amended.    Following  the
increase, the plan provides for 7,000,000 shares of common stock for awards under the plan.  On May
28,  2010,  our  stockholders  approved  a  proposal  for  the  increase  in  the  total  number  of  shares  of
common  stock  that  may  be  issued  pursuant  to  awards  granted  under  the  original  2005  Plan  as
previously amended.  Following the increase, the plan provides for 10,000,000 shares of common stock
for awards under the plan.
29
(2)Subsequent to September 30, 2014 our board of directors and stockholders approved a one-for-twelve
reverse stock split of our common stock.  After the reverse stock split, effective October 31, 2014, each
holder  of  record  held  one  share  of  common  stock  for  every  12  shares  held  immediately  prior  to  the
effective date.  As a result of the reverse stock split, the number of shares underlying outstanding stock
options and warrants and the related exercise prices were adjusted to reflect the change in the share
price and outstanding shares on the date of the reverse stock split.  The effect of fractional shares was
not material.  All share and per-share amounts and related disclosures have been retroactively adjusted
for all periods to reflect the one-for-twelve reverse stock split.
As to the options granted to date, there were no options exercised during the fiscal year ended September
30, 2014. Subsequent to the year ended September 30, 2014, we granted 228,334 options under the 2005
Equity Incentive Plan and 60,411 options became available due to the expiration of unexercised
outstanding options.  The 2005 Equity Incentive Plan, as amended, expired on May 28, 2015, therefore no
further options may be granted under the plan.
THE BOARD RECOMMENDS A VOTE “FOR” THE ADOPTION OF THE 2015 STOCK AND INCENTIVE
PLAN.
30
PROPOSAL 3 — RATIFICATION OF THE APPOINTMENT OF THE
INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
What am I voting on?
 
The  Audit  Committee  has  selected  DeCoria,  Maichel  &  Teague  P.S.  to  be  our  Independent  Registered
Public Accounting Firm for the current fiscal year ending September 30, 2015.
 
This proposal seeks stockholder ratification of the appointment of DeCoria, Maichel & Teague P.S.
 
Will a representative of DeCoria, Maichel & Teague P.S. be present at the Meeting?
 
We do not expect that a representative of DeCoria, Maichel & Teague P.S. will be present at the Meeting.
Information of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
 
DeCoria, Maichel & Teague P.S. was the Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm for Timberline in
the fiscal year ended September 30, 2014.
 
Our financial statements have been audited by DeCoria, Maichel & Teague P.S., independent registered
public accounting firm, for the years ended September 30, 2006 through September 30, 2014.
 
The  following  table  sets  forth  information  regarding  the  amount  billed  to  us  by  our  independent  auditor,
DeCoria,  Maichel  &  Teague  P.S.  for  our  two  fiscal  years  ended  September  30,  2014  and  2013,
respectively:
Years Ended September 30,
Audit Fees
Audit Related Fees
Tax Fees
All Other Fees
Total
2014
$49,619
$16,985
$4,275
$0
$70,879
2013
$62,265
$15,283
$16,300
$0
$93,848
Audit Fees
 
Consist of fees billed for professional services rendered for the audit of our financial statements and review
of  interim  consolidated  financial  statements  included  in  quarterly  reports  and  services  that  are  normally
provided by the principal accountants in connection with statutory and regulatory filings or engagements.
 
Audit Related Fees
 
Consist of fees billed for assurance and related services that are reasonably related to the performance of
the audit or review of our consolidated financial statements and are not reported under “Audit Fees”.
 
Tax Fees
 
Consist  of  fees  billed  for  professional  services  for  tax  compliance,  tax  advice  and  tax  planning.  These
services include preparation of federal and state income tax returns.  
 
All Other Fees
 
Consist of fees for product and services other than the services reported above.
31
Policy on Pre-Approval by Audit Committee of Services Performed by Independent Auditors
 
The  Audit  Committee  has  adopted  procedures  requiring  the  Audit  Committee  to  review  and  approve  in
advance,  all  particular  engagements  for  services  provided  by  the  Company’s  independent  auditor.
Consistent with applicable laws, the procedures permit limited amounts of services, other than audit, review
or attest services, to be approved by one or more members of the Audit Committee pursuant to authority
delegated by the Audit Committee, provided the Audit Committee is informed of each particular service. All
of the engagements and fees for 2014 were pre-approved by the Audit Committee. The Audit Committee
reviews  with  DeCoria,  Maichel  &  Teague  P.S.  whether  the  non-audit  services  to  be  provided  are
compatible with maintaining the auditor's independence.  
 
 
THE BOARD RECOMMENDS A VOTE “FOR” THE RATIFICATION OF THE APPOINTMENT OF THE
INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM.
32
OTHER MATTERS
As of the date of this Proxy Statement, management does not know of any other matter that will come before
the meeting.
APPENDIX A                                Form of Proxy Card
APPENDIX B                                Timberline 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan
APPENDICES
Timberline Resources Corporation
101 East Lakeside Avenue
Coeur d’Alene, Idaho 83814
August 24, 2015
By Order of the Board of Directors,
 
/s/ Randal Hardy
 
Randal Hardy
Chief Financial Officer
Please sign and return the enclosed form of proxy promptly.  If you decide to attend the meeting, you may, if
you wish, revoke the proxy and vote your shares in person.
33
APPENDIX A
ANNUAL AND SPECIAL MEETING OF STOCKHOLDERS OF
TIMBERLINE RESOURCES CORPORATION
The  undersigned  appoints Kiran  Patankar,  Chief  Executive  Officer,  and Randal  Hardy,  Chief  Financial
Officer, of Timberline Resources Corporation with full power of substitution, the attorney and proxy of the
undersigned,  to  attend  the  annual  and  special  meeting  of  shareholders  of  Timberline  Resources
Corporation, to be held September 24, 2015 beginning at 10:00 A.M., Pacific Daylight Time, at 101 East
Lakeside Avenue, Coeur d’Alene, Idaho 83814, and at any adjournment thereof, and to vote the stock the
undersigned would be entitled to vote if personally present, on all matters set forth in the proxy statement
sent to stockholders, a copy of which has been received by the undersigned, as follows:
PROXY SOLICITED BY THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
MAIL – Sign, date and mail your proxy
card
in the envelope provided as soon as
possible
 
INTERNET – Cast your vote at
www.proxyvote.com
COMPANY NUMBER
ACCOUNT NUMBER
  CUSIP NUMBER
8871331205
PLEASE SIGN, DATE AND RETURN PROMPTLY IN THE ENCLOSED ENVELOPE.
PLEASE MARK YOUR VOTE IN BLUE OR BLACK INK AS SHOWN HERE x
The Board of Directors Recommends
a Vote “FOR ALL NOMINEES” in Item 1.
The Board of Directors Recommends
a Vote “FOR” Items 2 and 3.
o FOR ALL NOMINEES
o WITHHOLD AUTHORITY
FOR ALL NOMINEES*
NOMINEES
™ William Sheriff
™ Kiran Patankar
™ Paul Dircksen
™ Robert Martinez
™ Leigh Freeman
Vote FOR an individual nominee by filling in the
appropriate circle above
INSTRUCTION: By marking “Withhold Authority for All
Nominees” your shares will not be voted FOR or
AGAINST any Nominee. However, your shares will still be
counted for the purposes of establishing quorum at the
annual meeting.
 
INSTRUCTION: To withhold authority to vote for any
individual nominee(s), strike through the name of the
individual nominee(s).
 
______________________________________________
To change the address on your account, please check this
box o and indicate your new address in the space below.
Please note that changes to the registered name(s) on the
account may not be submitted via this method.
FOR
 
o
 
o
AGAINST
 
o
 
o
ABSTAIN
 
o
 
o
Item 2. To Approve
the Adoption of the
2015 Stock and
Incentive Pla
 
Item 3.  To ratify the
appointment  of  the
Company’s
Independent
Registered  Public
Accounting Firm
If this proxy is properly executed and returned,
the shares represented hereby will be voted in
accordance with the votes marked hereon.
A vote to ABSTAIN will be counted for the
purposes of establishing a quorum at the
annual meeting but is not considered a vote
cast for or aga
inst a proposal or as a vote withheld for any
director nominee and will not affect the
outcome of any proposal.
 
If votes are not specified on a returned proxy,
a vote FOR ALL NOMINEES in Item 1, FOR
Items 2 and 3 will be voted at the annual
meeting.
______________________________________________
______________________________________________
______________________________________________
Cumulative voting rights are not authorized for
the election of directors.
 
MARK HERE IF YOU PLAN TO ATTEND
THE ANNUAL MEETING: o
OUR RECORDS STATE THAT YOUR NAME AND SHAREHOLDINGS ARE AS FOLLOWS:
A-1
[PASTE LABEL HERE]
 
 
 
 
 
PLEASE SIGN YOUR PROXY BELOW (JOINT HOLDERS MUST BOTH SIGN):
 
Signature of Stockholder:
_____________________________________________________________________ Date: ________
Print Name:
________________________________________________________________________________
Title:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
Signature of Stockholder:
_____________________________________________________________________ Date: ________
Print Name:
________________________________________________________________________________
Title: ___________________________________________________________________________
Note: Please sign exactly as your name or names appear on this Proxy. When shares are held jointly, each
holder should sign. When signing as executor, administrator, attorney, trustee or guardian, please give full
title as such. If the signer is a corporation, please sign full corporate name by duly authorized officer, giving
full title as such. If signer is a partnership, please sign in partnership name by authorized person.
A-2
TIMBERLINE RESOURCES CORPORATION
2015 STOCK AND INCENTIVE PLAN
Section 1.     Purpose
 
The purpose of the Plan is to promote the interests of the Company and its stockholders by aiding the
Company in attracting and retaining employees, officers, consultants, advisors and non-employee Directors
capable of assuring the future success of the Company, to offer such persons incentives to put forth
maximum efforts for the success of the Company’s business and to compensate such persons through
various stock and cash -based arrangements and provide them with opportunities for stock ownership in the
Company, thereby aligning the interests of such persons with the Company’s stockholders.
 
Section 2.                  Definitions
 
As used in the Plan, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:
 
(a)           “Affiliate” shall mean any entity that, directly or indirectly through one or more intermediaries, is
controlled by the Company.
 
(b)           “Award” shall mean any Option, Stock Appreciation Right, Restricted Stock, Restricted Stock Unit,
Performance Award, Dividend Equivalent or Other Stock-Based Award granted under the Plan.
 
(c)           “Award Agreement” shall mean any written agreement, contract or other instrument or document
evidencing an Award granted under the Plan (including a document in an electronic medium) executed in
accordance with the requirements of Section 9(b).
 
(d)           “Board” shall mean the Board of Directors of the Company.
 
(e)           “Code” shall mean the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time, and any
regulations promulgated thereunder.
 
(f)           “Committee” shall mean the Compensation Committee of the Board or such other committee
designated by the Board to administer the Plan.  The Committee shall be comprised of not less than such
number of Directors as shall be required to permit Awards granted under the Plan to qualify under Rule
16b-3, and each member of the Committee shall be a “non-employee director” within the meaning of
Rule 16b-3 and an “outside director” within the meaning of Section 162(m).
 
(g)           “Company” shall mean Timberline Resources Corporation and any successor corporation.
 
(h)            “Director” shall mean a member of the Board.
(i)           “Dividend Equivalent” shall mean any right granted under Section 6(e) of the Plan.
B-1
(j)           “Eligible Person” shall mean any employee, officer, non-employee Director, consultant,
independent contractor or advisor providing services to the Company or any Affiliate, or any such person to
whom an offer of employment or engagement with the Company or any Affiliate is extended.
 
(k)           “Exchange Act” shall mean the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
 
(l)           “Fair Market Value” with respect to of one Share as of any date shall mean (a) if the Share is listed
on any established stock exchange, the price of one Share at the close of the regular trading session of
such market or exchange on such date, as reported by The Wall Street Journal or a comparable reporting
service, or, if no sale of Shares shall have occurred on such date, on the next preceding date on which
there was a sale of Shares; (b) if the Shares are not so listed on any established stock exchange, the
average of the closing “bid” and “asked” prices quoted by the OTC Bulletin Board, the National Quotation
Bureau, or any comparable reporting service on such date or, if there are no quoted “bid” and “asked” prices
on such date, on the next preceding date for which there are such quotes for a Share; or (c) if the Shares
are not publicly traded as of such date, the per share value of a Share, as determined by the Board, or any
duly authorized Committee of the Board, in its sole discretion, by applying principles of valuation with
respect thereto.
 
(m)           “Full Value Award” shall mean any Award other than an Option, Stock Appreciation Right or
similar Award, the value of which is based solely on an increase in the value of the Shares after the date of
grant of such Award.1
 
(n)           “Incentive Stock Option” shall mean an option granted under Section 6(a) of the Plan that is
intended to meet the requirements of Section 422 of the Code or any successor provision.
 
(o)            “Non-Qualified Stock Option” shall mean an option granted under Section 6(a) of the Plan that is
not intended to be an Incentive Stock Option.
 
(p)           “Option” shall mean an Incentive Stock Option or a Non-Qualified Stock Option to purchase shares
of the Company.
 
(q)            “Other Stock-Based Award” shall mean any right granted under Section 6(f) of the Plan.
 
(r)           “Participant” shall mean an Eligible Person designated to be granted an Award under the Plan.
 
(s)           “Performance Award” shall mean any right granted under Section 6(d) of the Plan.
1The concept of a “full value award” is relevant for plans that either use the “fungible” ratio method for share
counting or that have separate limits for full value awards. See memo for discussion.
B-2
·
gross profit;
·
sales or revenue;
·
costs or expenses;
· net profit after tax;
(t)           “Performance Goal” shall mean one or more of the following performance goals, either individually,
alternatively or in any combination, applied on a corporate, subsidiary, division, business unit or line of
business basis:
 
  · economic value added (EVA);
 
 
 
 
 ·income (including without limitation operating income, pre-tax income and income attributable to the
Company);
 ·cash flow (including without limitation free cash flow and cash flow from operating, investing or financing
activities or any combination thereof);
 ·earnings (including without limitation earnings before or after taxes, earnings before interest and taxes
(EBIT), earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) and earnings (whether
before or after taxes), EBIT or EBITDA as a percentage of net sales;
  · earnings per share (EPS) (basic or diluted);
  · earnings per share from continuing operations;
 ·returns (including one or more of return on actual or pro forma assets, net assets, equity, investment,
revenue, sales, capital and net capital employed, total shareholder return (TSR) and total business return
(TBR));
 ·margins (including one or more of gross, operating and net income margin);
 ·ratios (including one or more of price-to-earnings, debt-to-assets, debt-to-net assets and ratios regarding
liquidity, solvency, fiscal capacity, productivity or risk);
·
·
· budget comparisons;
· market capitalization;
unit volume;
stock price;
· net working capital;
·
value creation;
· market share;
· workforce satisfaction and diversity goals;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  · implementation or completion of key projects;
  · strategic plan development and implementation.
·
· employee retention;
· production metrics;
· exploration programs;
· permitting milestones;
· commercial production;
·
financings;
safety metrics;
·
development;
B-3
Each such Performance Goal may be based (i) solely by reference to absolute results of individual
performance or organizational performance at various levels (e.g., the Company’s performance or the
performance of a subsidiary, division, business segment or business unit of the Company) or (ii) upon
organizational performance relative to the comparable performance of other companies selected by the
Committee.  To the extent consistent with Section 162(m), the Committee may, when it establishes
performance criteria, also provide for the exclusion of charges related to an event or occurrence which the
Committee determines should appropriately be excluded, including (X) asset-write downs, litigation or
claim judgments or settlements, reorganizations, the impact of acquisitions and divestitures, restructurings,
discontinued operations, extraordinary items, and other unusual or non-recurring charges, (Y) foreign
exchange gains and losses or an event either not directly related to the operations of the Company or not
within the reasonable control of the Company’s management, or (Z) the cumulative effects of tax or
accounting changes in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (or other accounting
principles which may then be in effect).  To the extent that Section 162(m) or applicable tax and/or
securities laws change to permit Committee discretion to alter the governing performance measures without
disclosing to stockholders and obtaining shareholder approval of such changes and without thereby
exposing the Company to potentially adverse tax or other legal consequences, the Committee shall have
the sole discretion to make such changes without obtaining shareholder approval.
 
(u)           “Person” shall mean any individual or entity, including a corporation, partnership, limited liability
company, association, joint venture or trust.
 
(v)           “Plan” shall mean the Timberline Resources Corporation 2015 Stock and Incentive Plan, as
amended from time to time.
 
(w)            “Prior Stock Plan” shall mean the Timberline Resources Corporation Amended 2005 Equity
Incentive Plan, as amended from time to time.
 
(x)           “Restricted Stock” shall mean any Share granted under Section 6(c) of the Plan.
 
(y)           “Restricted Stock Unit” shall mean any unit granted under Section 6(c) of the Plan evidencing the
right to receive a Share (or a cash payment equal to the Fair Market Value of a Share) at some future date.
 
(z)           “Rule 16b-3” shall mean Rule 16b-3 promulgated by the Securities and Exchange Commission
under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or any successor rule or regulation.
 
(aa)           “Section 162(m)” shall mean Section 162(m) of the Code, or any successor provision, and the
applicable Treasury Regulations promulgated thereunder.
 
(bb)           “Section 409A” shall mean Section 409A of the Code, or any successor provision, and applicable
Treasury Regulations and other applicable guidance thereunder.
 
(cc)           “Securities Act” shall mean the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
B-4
(dd)           “Share” or “Shares” shall mean common shares $0.001 par value in the capital of the Company
(or such other securities or property as may become subject to Awards pursuant to an adjustment made
under Section 4(c) of the Plan).
(ee)           “Specified Employee” shall mean a specified employee as defined in Section 409A(a)(2)(B) of
the Code or applicable proposed or final regulations under Section 409A, determined in accordance with
procedures established by the Company and applied uniformly with respect to all plans maintained by the
Company that are subject to Section 409A.
 
(ff)           “Stock Appreciation Right” shall mean any right granted under Section 6(b) of the Plan.
 
Section 3.                  Administration
 
(a)           Power and Authority of the Committee. The Plan shall be administered by the Committee.  Subject
to the express provisions of the Plan and to applicable law, the Committee shall have full power and
authority to:  (i) designate Participants; (ii) determine the type or types of Awards to be granted to each
Participant under the Plan; (iii) determine the number of Shares to be covered by (or the method by which
payments or other rights are to be calculated in connection with) each Award; (iv) determine the terms and
conditions of any Award or Award Agreement, including any terms relating to the forfeiture of any Award
and the forfeiture, recapture or disgorgement of any cash, Shares or other amounts payable with respect to
any Award; (v) amend the terms and conditions of any Award or Award Agreement, subject to the limitations
under Section 7; (vi) accelerate the exercisability of any Award or the lapse of any restrictions relating to
any Award, subject to the limitations in Section 7, (vii) determine whether, to what extent and under what
circumstances Awards may be exercised in cash, Shares, other securities, other Awards or other property
(excluding promissory notes), or canceled, forfeited or suspended, subject to the limitations in Section 7;
(viii) determine whether, to what extent and under what circumstances amounts payable with respect to an
Award under the Plan shall be deferred either automatically or at the election of the holder thereof or the
Committee, subject to the requirements of Section 409A; (ix)  interpret and administer the Plan and any
instrument or agreement, including an Award Agreement, relating to the Plan; (x) establish, amend,
suspend or waive such rules and regulations and appoint such agents as it shall deem appropriate for the
proper administration of the Plan; (xi) make any other determination and take any other action that the
Committee deems necessary or desirable for the administration of the Plan; and (xii) adopt such
modifications, rules, procedures and subplans as may be necessary or desirable to comply with provisions
of the laws of non-U.S. jurisdictions in which the Company or an Affiliate may operate, including, without
limitation, establishing any special rules for Affiliates, Eligible Persons or Participants located in any
particular country, in order to meet the objectives of the Plan and to ensure the viability of the intended
benefits of Awards granted to Participants located in such non-United States jurisdictions.  Unless
otherwise expressly provided in the Plan, all designations, determinations, interpretations and other
decisions under or with respect to the Plan or any Award or Award Agreement shall be within the sole
discretion of the Committee, may be made at any time and shall be final, conclusive and binding upon any
Participant, any holder or
B-5
beneficiary of any Award or Award Agreement, and any employee of the Company or any Affiliate.
 
(b)           Delegation.  The Committee may delegate to one or more officers or Directors of the Company,
subject to such terms, conditions and limitations as the Committee may establish in its sole discretion, the
authority to grant Awards; provided, however, that the Committee shall not delegate such authority (i) with
regard to grants of Awards to be made to officers of the Company or any Affiliate who are subject to
Section 16 of the Exchange Act or (ii) in such a manner as would cause the Plan not to comply with the
requirements of Section 162(m), applicable exchange rules or applicable corporate law.
 
(c)           Power and Authority of the Board. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, (i)
the Board may, at any time and from time to time, without any further action of the Committee, exercise the
powers and duties of the Committee under the Plan, unless the exercise of such powers and duties by the
Board would cause the Plan not to comply with the requirements of Rule 16b-3 or Section 162(m); and (ii)
only the Committee (or another committee of the Board comprised of directors who qualify as independent
directors within the meaning of the independence rules of any applicable securities exchange where the
Shares are then listed) may grant Awards to Directors who are not also employees of the Company or an
Affiliate
 
(d)           Indemnification.  To the full extent permitted by law, (i) no member of the Board, the Committee or
any person to whom the Committee delegates authority under the Plan shall be liable for any action or
determination taken or made in good faith with respect to the Plan or any Award made under the Plan, and
(ii) the members of the Board, the Committee and each person to whom the Committee delegates authority
under the Plan shall be entitled to indemnification by the Company with regard to such actions and
determinations.  The provisions of this paragraph shall be in addition to such other rights of indemnification
as a member of the Board, the Committee or any other person may have by virtue of such person’s position
with the Company.
 
Section 4.                  Shares Available for Awards
 
(a)           Shares Available.  Subject to adjustment as provided in Section 4(c) of the Plan, the aggregate
number of Shares that may be issued under all Awards under the Plan shall equal:
 
 
 
The aggregate number of Shares that may be issued under all Awards under the Plan shall be reduced by
Shares subject to Awards issued under the Plan in accordance with the Share counting rules described in
Section 4(b) below.
 
(b)           Counting Shares.  For purposes of this Section 4, if an Award entitles the holder thereof to receive
or purchase Shares or if an Award is a Full Value Award, the number of Shares covered by such Award or
to which such Award relates shall be counted on the date of grant of such Award against the aggregate
number of Shares available for granting Awards under the Plan.
4,000,000 Shares.
(i)
B-6
(i)Shares Added Back to Reserve.  Subject to the limitations in (ii) below, if any Shares covered by an
Award or to which an Award relates are not purchased or are forfeited or are reacquired by the Company
(including any Shares withheld by the Company or Shares tendered to satisfy any tax withholding
obligation on Full Value Awards or Shares covered by an Award that are settled in cash, or if an Award
otherwise terminates or is cancelled without delivery of any Shares, then the number of Shares counted
against the aggregate number of Shares available under the Plan with respect to such Award, to the
extent of any such forfeiture, reacquisition by the Company, termination or cancellation, shall again be
available for granting Awards under the Plan.
(ii)Shares Not Added Back to Reserve.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in (i) above, the following
Shares will not again become available for issuance under the Plan: (A) any Shares which would have
been issued upon any exercise of an Option but for the fact that the exercise price was paid by a “net
exercise” pursuant to Section 6(a)(iii)(B) or any Shares tendered in payment of the exercise price of an
Option; (B) any Shares withheld by the Company or Shares tendered to satisfy any tax withholding
obligation with respect to an Option or Stock Appreciation Right; (C) Shares covered by a stock-settled
Stock Appreciation Right issued under the Plan that are not issued in connection with settlement in
Shares upon exercise; or (D) Shares that are repurchased by the Company using Option exercise
proceeds.
(iii)Cash-Only Awards.  Awards that do not entitle the holder thereof to receive or purchase Shares shall
not be counted against the aggregate number of Shares available for Awards under the Plan.
(iv)Substitute Awards Relating to Acquired Entities.  Shares issued under Awards granted in in substitution
for awards previously granted by an entity that is acquired by or merged with the Company or an
Affiliate shall not be counted against the aggregate number of Shares available for Awards under the
Plan.
(c)           Adjustments.  In the event that any dividend (other than a regular cash dividend) or other
distribution (whether in the form of cash, Shares, other securities or other property), recapitalization, stock
split, reverse stock split, reorganization, merger, consolidation, split-up, spin-off, combination, repurchase or
exchange of Shares or other securities of the Company, issuance of warrants or other rights to purchase
Shares or other securities of the Company or other similar corporate transaction or event affects the Shares
such that an adjustment is necessary in order to prevent dilution or enlargement of the benefits or potential
benefits intended to be made available under the Plan, then the Committee shall, in such manner as it may
deem equitable, adjust any or all of (i) the number and type of Shares (or other securities or other property)
that thereafter may be made the subject of Awards, (ii) the number and type of Shares (or other securities or
other property) subject to outstanding Awards, (iii) the purchase price or exercise price with respect to any
Award and (iv) the limitations contained in
B-7
Section 4(d)(i) below; provided, however, that the number of Shares covered by any Award or to which
such Award relates shall always be a whole number.  Such adjustment shall be made by the Committee or
the Board, whose determination in that respect shall be final, binding and conclusive.
 
(d)           Award Limitations Under the Plan.  The limitation contained in this Section 4(d) shall apply only
with respect to any Award or Awards granted under this Plan, and limitations on awards granted under any
other shareholder-approved incentive plan maintained by the Company will be governed solely by the
terms of such other plan.
 
 (i)Section 162(m) Limitation for Awards Denominated in Shares.  No Eligible Person may be granted any
Stock Options, Stock Appreciation Rights or Performance Awards denominated in Shares, for more than
1,000,000 Shares (subject to adjustment as provided for in Section 4(c) of the Plan), in the aggregate in
any calendar year.
(ii)Section 162(m) Limitation for Performance Awards Denominated in Cash.  The maximum amount
payable pursuant to all Performance Awards denominated in cash to any Eligible Person in the
aggregate in any calendar year shall be $1,000,000 in value. This limitation contained in this Section
4(d)(ii) does not apply to any Award or Awards subject to the limitation contained in Section 4(d)(i).
(iii)Limitation Awards Granted to Non-Employee Directors.  No Director who is not also an employee of the
Company or an Affiliate may be granted any Award or Awards denominated in Shares that exceed in
the aggregate 500,000 Shares (subject to adjustment as provided for in Section 4(c) of the Plan), in the
aggregate in any calendar year.  The foregoing limit shall not apply to any Award made pursuant to any
election by the Director to receive an Award in lieu of all or a portion of annual and committee retainers
and annual meeting fees.
Section 5.                  Eligibility
 
Any Eligible Person shall be eligible to be designated as a Participant.  In determining which Eligible
Persons shall receive an Award and the terms of any Award, the Committee may take into account the
nature of the services rendered by the respective Eligible Persons, their present and potential contributions
to the success of the Company or such other factors as the Committee, in its discretion, shall deem
relevant.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, an Incentive Stock Option may only be granted to full-time or part-
time employees (which term as used herein includes, without limitation, officers and Directors who are also
employees), and an Incentive Stock Option shall not be granted to an employee of an Affiliate unless such
Affiliate is also a “subsidiary corporation” of the Company within the meaning of Section 424(f) of the Code
or any successor provision.
B-8
Section 6.                  Awards
 
(a)           Options.  The Committee is hereby authorized to grant Options to Eligible Persons with the
following terms and conditions and with such additional terms and conditions not inconsistent with the
provisions of the Plan as the Committee shall determine:
 
 (i)Exercise Price.  The purchase price per Share purchasable under an Option shall be determined by the
Committee and shall not be less than 100% of the Fair Market Value of a Share on the date of grant of
such Option; provided, however, that the Committee may designate a purchase price below Fair Market
Value on the date of grant if the Option is granted in substitution for a stock option previously granted by
an entity that is acquired by or merged with the Company or an Affiliate.
(ii)Option Term.  The term of each Option shall be fixed by the Committee at the date of grant but shall not
be longer than 10 years from the date of grant.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Committee may
provide in the terms of an Option (either at grant or by subsequent modification) that, to the extent
consistent with Section 409A, in the event that on the last business day of the term of an Option (other
than an Incentive Stock Option) (i) the exercise of the Option is prohibited by applicable law or (ii)
Shares may not be purchased or sold by certain employees or directors of the Company due to the
“black-out period” of a Company policy or a “lock-up” agreement undertaken in connection with an
issuance of securities by the Company, the term of the Option shall be extended for a period of not more
than thirty (30) days following the end of the legal prohibition, black-out period or lock-up agreement.
(iii)Time and Method of Exercise.  The Committee shall determine the time or times at which an Option may
be exercised in whole or in part and the method or methods by which, and the form or forms, including,
but not limited to, cash, Shares (actually or by attestation), other securities, other Awards or other
property, or any combination thereof, having a Fair Market Value on the exercise date equal to the
applicable exercise price, in which, payment of the exercise price with respect thereto may be made or
deemed to have been made.
(A)Promissory Notes.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Committee may not accept a promissory note as
consideration.
(B)Net Exercises.  The Committee may, in its discretion, permit an Option to be exercised by delivering to
the Participant a number of Shares having an aggregate Fair Market Value (determined as of the date of
exercise) equal to the excess, if positive, of the Fair Market Value of the Shares underlying the Option
being exercised on the date of exercise, over the exercise price of the Option for such Shares.
B-9
(iv)Incentive Stock Options.  Notwithstanding anything in the Plan to the contrary, the following additional
provisions shall apply to the grant of stock options which are intended to qualify as Incentive Stock
Options:
(A)The aggregate number of Shares that may be issued under all Incentive Stock Options under the Plan
shall be 4,000,000 Shares.
(B)The Committee will not grant Incentive Stock Options in which the aggregate Fair Market Value
(determined as of the time the Option is granted) of the Shares with respect to which Incentive Stock
Options are exercisable for the first time by any Participant during any calendar year (under this Plan
and all other plans of the Company and its Affiliates) shall exceed $100,000.
(C)All Incentive Stock Options must be granted within ten years from the earlier of the date on which this
Plan was adopted by the Board or the date this Plan was approved by the stockholders of the
Company.
(D)Unless sooner exercised, all Incentive Stock Options shall expire and no longer be exercisable no later
than 10 years after the date of grant; provided, however, that in the case of a grant of an Incentive Stock
Option to a Participant who, at the time such Option is granted, owns (within the meaning of Section 422
of the Code) stock possessing more than 10% of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock
of the Company or of its Affiliates, such Incentive Stock Option shall expire and no longer be
exercisable no later than five years from the date of grant.
(E)The purchase price per Share for an Incentive Stock Option shall be not less than 100% of the Fair
Market Value of a Share on the date of grant of the Incentive Stock Option; provided, however, that, in
the case of the grant of an Incentive Stock Option to a Participant who, at the time such Option is
granted, owns (within the meaning of Section 422 of the Code) stock possessing more than 10% of the
total combined voting power of all classes of stock of the Company or of its Affiliates, the purchase price
per Share purchasable under an Incentive Stock Option shall be not less than 110% of the Fair Market
Value of a Share on the date of grant of the Incentive Stock Option.
(F)Any Incentive Stock Option authorized under the Plan shall contain such other provisions as the
Committee shall deem advisable, but shall in all events be consistent with and contain all provisions
required in order to qualify the Option as an Incentive Stock Option.
B-10
(b)           Stock Appreciation Rights.  The Committee is hereby authorized to grant Stock Appreciation
Rights to Eligible Persons subject to the terms of the Plan and any applicable Award Agreement.  A Stock
Appreciation Right granted under the Plan shall confer on the holder thereof a right to receive upon
exercise thereof the excess of (i) the Fair Market Value of one Share on the date of exercise over (ii) the
grant price of the Stock Appreciation Right as specified by the Committee, which price shall not be less
than 100% of the Fair Market Value of one Share on the date of grant of the Stock Appreciation Right;
provided, however, that the Committee may designate a grant price below Fair Market Value on the date of
grant if the Stock Appreciation Right is granted in substitution for a stock appreciation right previously
granted by an entity that is acquired by or merged with the Company or an Affiliate.  Subject to the terms of
the Plan and any applicable Award Agreement, the grant price, term, methods of exercise, dates of
exercise, methods of settlement and any other terms and conditions of any Stock Appreciation Right shall
be as determined by the Committee (except that the term of each Stock Appreciation Right shall be subject
to the same limitations in Section 6(a)(ii) applicable to Options).  The Committee may impose such
conditions or restrictions on the exercise of any Stock Appreciation Right as it may deem appropriate.
 
(c)           Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units.  The Committee is hereby authorized to grant an
Award of Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units to Eligible Persons with the following terms and
conditions and with such additional terms and conditions not inconsistent with the provisions of the Plan as
the Committee shall determine:
 
 (i)Restrictions.  Shares of Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units shall be subject to such restrictions
as the Committee may impose (including, without limitation, any limitation on the right to vote a Share of
Restricted Stock or the right to receive any dividend or other right or property with respect thereto), which
restrictions may lapse separately or in combination at such time or times, in such installments or
otherwise as the Committee may deem appropriate.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, rights to dividend or
Dividend Equivalent payments shall be subject to the limitations described in Section 6(e).
(ii)Issuance and Delivery of Shares.  Any Restricted Stock granted under the Plan shall be issued at the
time such Awards are granted and may be evidenced in such manner as the Committee may deem
appropriate, including book-entry registration or issuance of a stock certificate or certificates, which
certificate or certificates shall be held by the Company or held in nominee name by the stock transfer
agent or brokerage service selected by the Company to provide such services for the Plan.  Such
certificate or certificates shall be registered in the name of the Participant and shall bear an appropriate
legend referring to the restrictions applicable to such Restricted Stock.  Shares representing Restricted
Stock that are no longer subject to restrictions shall be delivered (including by updating the book-entry
registration) to the Participant promptly after the applicable restrictions lapse or are waived.  In the case
of Restricted Stock Units, no Shares shall be issued at the time such Awards are granted.  Upon the
lapse or waiver of restrictions and the restricted period relating to
B-11
Restricted Stock Units evidencing the right to receive Shares, such Shares shall be issued and delivered
to the holder of the Restricted Stock Units.
(iii)Forfeiture.  Except as otherwise determined by the Committee or as provided in an Award Agreement,
upon a Participant’s termination of employment or resignation or removal as a Director (in either case,
as determined under criteria established by the Committee) during the applicable restriction period, all
Shares of Restricted Stock and all Restricted Stock Units held by such Participant at such time shall be
forfeited and reacquired by the Company; provided, however, that the Committee may waive in whole or
in part any or all remaining restrictions with respect to Shares of Restricted Stock or Restricted Stock
Units.
(d)           Performance Awards.  The Committee is hereby authorized to grant to Eligible Persons
Performance Awards that are intended to be “qualified performance-based compensation” within the
meaning of Section 162(m).  A Performance Award granted under the Plan (i) may be denominated or
payable in cash, Shares (including, without limitation, Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Units), other
securities, other Awards or other property and (ii) shall confer on the holder thereof the right to receive
payments, in whole or in part, upon the achievement of one or more objective Performance Goals during
such performance periods as the Committee shall establish.  Subject to the terms of the Plan, the
Performance Goals to be achieved during any performance period, the length of any performance period,
the amount of any Performance Award granted, the amount of any payment or transfer to be made pursuant
to any Performance Award and any other terms and conditions of any Performance Award shall be
determined by the Committee.  Performance Awards shall be conditioned solely on the achievement of one
or more objective Performance Goals established by the Committee within the time prescribed by Section
162(m), and shall otherwise comply with the requirements of Section 162(m), as described below.
 
 (i)Timing of Designations; Duration of Performance Periods.  For each Performance Award, the Committee
shall, not later than 90 days after the beginning of each performance period, (i) designate all Participants
for such performance period and (ii) establish the objective performance factors for each Participant for
that performance period on the basis of one or more of the Performance Goals, the outcome of which is
substantially uncertain at the time the Committee actually establishes the Performance Goal.  The
Committee shall have sole discretion to determine the applicable performance period, provided that in
the case of a performance period less than 12 months, in no event shall a performance goal be
considered to be pre-established if it is established after 25 percent of the performance period (as
scheduled in good faith at the time the Performance Goal is established) has elapsed.  To the extent
required under Section 162(m), the terms of the objective performance factors must preclude discretion to
increase an amount paid in connection with an Award, but may permit discretion to reduce such amount.
B-12
(ii)Certification.  Following the close of each performance period and prior to payment of any amount to a
Participant with respect to a Performance Award, the Committee shall certify in writing as to the
attainment of all factors (including the performance factors for a Participant) upon which any payments to
a Participant for that performance period are to be based.
(e)           Dividend Equivalents.  The Committee is hereby authorized to grant Dividend Equivalents to
Eligible Persons under which the Participant shall be entitled to receive payments (in cash, Shares, other
securities, other Awards or other property as determined in the discretion of the Committee) equivalent to
the amount of cash dividends paid by the Company to holders of Shares with respect to a number of Shares
determined by the Committee.  Subject to the terms of the Plan and any applicable Award Agreement, such
Dividend Equivalents may have such terms and conditions as the Committee shall
determine.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, (i) the Committee may not grant Dividend Equivalents to Eligible
Persons in connection with grants of Options, Stock Appreciation Rights or other Awards the value of which
is based solely on an increase in the value of the Shares after the date of grant of such Award, and (ii) no
dividend or Dividend Equivalent payments shall be made to a Participant with respect to any Performance
Award or other Award subject to performance-based vesting conditions prior to the date on which all
conditions or restrictions relating to such Award (or portion thereof to which the dividend or Dividend
Equivalent relates) have been satisfied, waived or lapsed.
 
(f)           Other Stock-Based Awards.  The Committee is hereby authorized to grant to Eligible Persons such
other Awards that are denominated or payable in, valued in whole or in part by reference to, or otherwise
based on or related to, Shares (including, without limitation, securities convertible into Shares), as are
deemed by the Committee to be consistent with the purpose of the Plan.  The Committee shall determine
the terms and conditions of such Awards, subject to the terms of the Plan and any applicable Award
Agreement.  No Award issued under this Section 6(f) shall contain a purchase right or an option-like
exercise feature.
 
(g)           General.
 
 (i)Consideration for Awards.  Awards may be granted for no cash consideration or for any cash or other
consideration as may be determined by the Committee or required by applicable law.
(ii)Awards May Be Granted Separately or Together.  Awards may, in the discretion of the Committee, be
granted either alone or in addition to, in tandem with or in substitution for any other Award or any award
granted under any other plan of the Company or any Affiliate.  Awards granted in addition to or in
tandem with other Awards or in addition to or in tandem with awards granted under any other plan of the
Company or any Affiliate may be granted either at the same time as or at a different time from the grant of
such other Awards or awards.
(iii)Forms of Payment under Awards.  Subject to the terms of the Plan and of any applicable Award
Agreement, payments or transfers to be made by the
B-13
Company or an Affiliate upon the grant, exercise or payment of an Award may be made in such form or
forms as the Committee shall determine (including, without limitation, cash, Shares, other securities (but
excluding promissory notes), other Awards or other property or any combination thereof), and may be
made in a single payment or transfer, in installments or on a deferred basis, in each case in accordance
with rules and procedures established by the Committee.  Such rules and procedures may include, without
limitation, provisions for the payment or crediting of reasonable interest on installment or deferred
payments or the grant or crediting of Dividend Equivalents with respect to installment or deferred
payments.
(iv)Limits on Transfer of Awards.  Except as otherwise provided by the Committee in its discretion and
subject to such additional terms and conditions as it determines, no Award (other than fully vested and
unrestricted Shares issued pursuant to any Award) and no right under any such Award shall be
transferable by a Participant other than by will or by the laws of descent and distribution, and no Award
(other than fully vested and unrestricted Shares issued pursuant to any Award) or right under any such
Award may be pledged, alienated, attached or otherwise encumbered, and any purported pledge,
alienation, attachment or encumbrance thereof shall be void and unenforceable against the Company
or any Affiliate.  Where the Committee does permit the transfer of an Award other than a fully vested and
unrestricted Share, such permitted transfer shall be for no value and in accordance with the rules of
Form S-8.  The Committee may also establish procedures as it deems appropriate for a Participant to
designate a person or persons, as beneficiary or beneficiaries, to exercise the rights of the Participant
and receive any property distributable with respect to any Award in the event of the Participant’s death.
(v)Restrictions; Securities Exchange Listing.  All Shares or other securities delivered under the Plan
pursuant to any Award or the exercise thereof shall be subject to such restrictions as the Committee may
deem advisable under the Plan, applicable federal or state securities laws and regulatory requirements,
and the Committee may cause appropriate entries to be made with respect to, or legends to be placed
on the certificates for, such Shares or other securities to reflect such restrictions.  The Company shall not
be required to deliver any Shares or other securities covered by an Award unless and until the
requirements of any federal or state securities or other laws, rules or regulations (including the rules of
any securities exchange) as may be determined by the Company to be applicable are satisfied.
(vi)Prohibition on Option and Stock Appreciation Right Repricing. Except as provided in Section 4(c)
hereof, the Committee may not, without prior approval of the Company’s stockholders, seek to effect any
re-pricing of any previously granted, “underwater” Option or Stock Appreciation Right
B-14
by:  (i) amending or modifying the terms of the Option or Stock Appreciation Right to lower the exercise
price; (ii) canceling the underwater Option or Stock Appreciation Right and granting either (A) replacement
Options or Stock Appreciation Rights having a lower exercise price; or (B) Restricted Stock, Restricted
Stock Units, Performance Award or Other Stock-Based Award in exchange; or (iii) cancelling or
repurchasing the underwater Option or Stock Appreciation Right for cash or other securities.  An Option or
Stock Appreciation Right will be deemed to be “underwater” at any time when the Fair Market Value of the
Shares covered by such Award is less than the exercise price of the Award.
(vii)Section 409A Provisions.  Notwithstanding anything in the Plan or any Award Agreement to the
contrary, to the extent that any amount or benefit that constitutes “deferred compensation” to a
Participant under Section 409A and applicable guidance thereunder is otherwise payable or
distributable to a Participant under the Plan or any Award Agreement solely by reason of the
occurrence of a change in control or due to the Participant’s disability or “separation from service” (as
such term is defined under Section 409A), such amount or benefit will not be payable or distributable to
the Participant by reason of such circumstance unless the Committee determines in good faith that (i)
the circumstances giving rise to such change in control event, disability or separation from service meet
the definition of a change in control event, disability, or separation from service, as the case may be, in
Section 409A(a)(2)(A) of the Code and applicable proposed or final regulations, or (ii) the payment or
distribution of such amount or benefit would be exempt from the application of Section 409A by reason
of the short-term deferral exemption or otherwise.  Any payment or distribution that otherwise would be
made to a Participant who is a Specified Employee (as determined by the Committee in good faith) on
account of separation from service may not be made before the date which is six months after the date
of the Specified Employee’s separation from service (or if earlier, upon the Specified Employee’s
death) unless the payment or distribution is exempt from the application of Section 409A by reason of
the short-term deferral exemption or otherwise.
(viii)Acceleration of Vesting or Exercisability.  No Award Agreement shall accelerate the exercisability of
any Award or the lapse of restrictions relating to any Award in connection with a change-in-control
event unless such acceleration occurs upon the consummation of (or effective immediately prior to the
consummation of, provided that the consummation subsequently occurs) such change-in-control event.
B-15
Section 7.                  Amendment and Termination; Corrections
 
(a)           Amendments to the Plan and Awards.  The Board may from time to time amend, suspend or
terminate this Plan, and the Committee may amend the terms of any previously granted Award, provided
that no amendment to the terms of any previously granted Award may, (except as expressly provided in the
Plan) materially and adversely alter or impair the terms or conditions of the Award previously granted to a
Participant under this Plan without the written consent of the Participant or holder thereof.  Any amendment
to this Plan, or to the terms of any Award previously granted, is subject to compliance with all applicable
laws, rules, regulations and policies of any applicable governmental entity or securities exchange,
including receipt of any required approval from the governmental entity or stock exchange.  For greater
certainty and without limiting the foregoing, the Board may amend, suspend, terminate or discontinue the
Plan, and the Committee may amend or alter any previously granted Award, as applicable, without
obtaining the approval of stockholders of the Company in order to:
 
 (i)amend the eligibility for, and limitations or conditions imposed upon, participation in the Plan;
 
 (ii)amend any terms relating to the granting or exercise of Awards, including but not limited to terms relating
to the amount and payment of the exercise price, or the vesting, expiry, assignment or adjustment of
Awards, or otherwise waive any conditions of or rights of the Company under any outstanding Award,
prospectively or retroactively;
(iii)make changes that are necessary or desirable to comply with applicable laws, rules, regulations and
policies of any applicable governmental entity or stock exchange (including amendments to Awards
necessary or desirable to avoid any adverse tax results under Section 409A, and no action taken to
comply with Section 409A shall be deemed to impair or otherwise adversely alter or impair the rights of
any holder of an Award or beneficiary thereof); or
(iv)amend any terms relating to the administration of the Plan, including the terms of any administrative
guidelines or other rules related to the Plan.
For greater certainty, prior approval of the stockholders of the Company shall be required for any
amendment to the Plan or an Award that would:
 
 (i)require stockholder approval under the rules or regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission,
the New York Stock Exchange or any other securities exchange that are applicable to the Company;
(ii)increase the number of shares authorized under the Plan as specified in Section 4(a) of the Plan;
(iii)increase the number of shares or value subject to the limitations contained in Section 4(d) of the Plan or
otherwise cause the Section 162(m)
B-16
exemption for qualified performance-based compensation to become unavailable with respect to the Plan;
 
 (iv)permit repricing of Options or Stock Appreciation Rights, which is currently prohibited by Section 6(g)(vi)
of the Plan;
(v)permit the award of Options or Stock Appreciation Rights at a price less than 100% of the Fair Market
Value of a Share on the date of grant of such Option or Stock Appreciation Right, contrary to the
provisions of Section 6(a)(i) and Section 6(b) of the Plan; or
(vi)increase the maximum term permitted for Options and Stock Appreciation Rights as specified in Section
6(a)(ii) and Section 6(b).
(b)           Corporate Transactions.  In the event of any reorganization, merger, consolidation, split-up, spin-
off, combination, plan of arrangement, take-over bid or tender offer, repurchase or exchange of Shares or
other securities of the Company or any other similar corporate transaction or event involving the Company
(or the Company shall enter into a written agreement to undergo such a transaction or event), the
Committee or the Board may, in its sole discretion, provide for any of the following to be effective upon the
consummation of the event (or effective immediately prior to the consummation of the event, provided that
the consummation of the event subsequently occurs), and no action taken under this Section 7(b) shall be
deemed to impair or otherwise adversely alter the rights of any holder of an Award or beneficiary thereof:
 
 (i)either (A) termination of the Award, whether or not vested, in exchange for an amount of cash and/or
other property, if any, equal to the amount that would have been attained upon the exercise of the Award
or realization of the Participant’s rights (and, for the avoidance of doubt, if, as of the date of the
occurrence of the transaction or event described in this Section 7(b)(i)(A), the Committee or the Board
determines in good faith that no amount would have been attained upon the exercise of the Award or
realization of the Participant’s rights, then the Award may be terminated by the Company without any
payment) or (B) the replacement of the Award with other rights or property selected by the Committee or
the Board, in its sole discretion;
(ii)that the Award be assumed by the successor or survivor corporation, or a parent or subsidiary thereof, or
shall be substituted for by similar options, rights or awards covering the stock of the successor or
survivor corporation, or a parent or subsidiary thereof, with appropriate adjustments as to the number
and kind of shares and prices;
(iii)that, subject to Section 6(g)(viii), the Award shall be exercisable or payable or fully vested with respect
to all Shares covered thereby, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the applicable Award
Agreement; or
B-17
(iv)that the Award cannot vest, be exercised or become payable after a date certain in the future, which
may be the effective date of the event.
(c)           Correction of Defects, Omissions and Inconsistencies.  The Committee may, without prior approval
of the stockholders of the Company,  correct any defect, supply any omission or reconcile any inconsistency
in the Plan or in any Award or Award Agreement in the manner and to the extent it shall deem desirable to
implement or maintain the effectiveness of the Plan.
 
Section 8.                  Income Tax Withholding
 
In order to comply with all applicable federal, state, local or foreign income tax laws or regulations, the
Company may take such action as it deems appropriate to ensure that all applicable federal, state, local or
foreign payroll, withholding, income or other taxes, which are the sole and absolute responsibility of a
Participant, are withheld or collected from such Participant.  In order to assist a Participant in paying all or a
portion of the applicable taxes to be withheld or collected upon exercise or receipt of (or the lapse of
restrictions relating to) an Award, the Committee, in its discretion and subject to such additional terms and
conditions as it may adopt, may permit the Participant to satisfy such tax obligation by (a) electing to have
the Company withhold a portion of the Shares otherwise to be delivered upon exercise or receipt of (or the
lapse of restrictions relating to) such Award with a Fair Market Value equal to the amount of such taxes (but
only to the extent necessary to satisfy minimum statutory withholding requirements if required by ASC Topic
718 to avoid adverse accounting treatment) or (b) delivering to the Company Shares other than Shares
issuable upon exercise or receipt of (or the lapse of restrictions relating to) such Award with a Fair Market
Value equal to the amount of such taxes.  The election, if any, must be made on or before the date that the
amount of tax to be withheld is determined.
 
Section 9.                  General Provisions
 
(a)           No Rights to Awards.  No Eligible Person, Participant or other Person shall have any claim to be
granted any Award under the Plan, and there is no obligation for uniformity of treatment of Eligible Persons,
Participants or holders or beneficiaries of Awards under the Plan.  The terms and conditions of Awards
need not be the same with respect to any Participant or with respect to different Participants.
 
(b)           Award Agreements.  No Participant shall have rights under an Award granted to such Participant
unless and until an Award Agreement shall have been signed by the Participant (if requested by the
Company), or until such Award Agreement is delivered and accepted through an electronic medium in
accordance with procedures established by the Company.  An Award Agreement need not be signed by a
representative of the Company unless required by the Committee.  Each Award Agreement shall be subject
to the applicable terms and conditions of the Plan and any other terms and conditions (not inconsistent with
the Plan) determined by the Committee.
B-18
(c)           Plan Provisions Control.  In the event that any provision of an Award Agreement conflicts with or is
inconsistent in any respect with the terms of the Plan as set forth herein or subsequently amended, the
terms of the Plan shall control.
 
(d)           No Rights of Stockholders.  Except with respect to Shares issued under Awards (and subject to
such conditions as the Committee may impose on such Awards pursuant to Section 6(c)(i) or Section 6(e)),
neither a Participant nor the Participant’s legal representative shall be, or have any of the rights and
privileges of, a shareholder of the Company with respect to any Shares issuable upon the exercise or
payment of any Award, in whole or in part, unless and until such Shares have been issued.
 
(e)           No Limit on Other Compensation Arrangements.  Nothing contained in the Plan shall prevent the
Company or any Affiliate from adopting or continuing in effect other or additional compensation plans or
arrangements, and such plans or arrangements may be either generally applicable or applicable only in
specific cases.
 
(f)           No Right to Employment.  The grant of an Award shall not be construed as giving a Participant the
right to be retained as an employee of the Company or any Affiliate, nor will it affect in any way the right of
the Company or an Affiliate to terminate a Participant’s employment at any time, with or without cause, in
accordance with applicable law.  In addition, the Company or an Affiliate may at any time dismiss a
Participant from employment free from any liability or any claim under the Plan or any Award, unless
otherwise expressly provided in the Plan or in any Award Agreement.  Nothing in this Plan shall confer on
any person any legal or equitable right against the Company or any Affiliate, directly or indirectly, or give
rise to any cause of action at law or in equity against the Company or an Affiliate.  Under no circumstances
shall any person ceasing to be an employee of the Company or any Affiliate be entitled to any
compensation for any loss of any right or benefit under the Plan which such employee might otherwise
have enjoyed but for termination of employment, whether such compensation is claimed by way of
damages for wrongful or unfair dismissal, breach of contract or otherwise.  By participating in the Plan, each
Participant shall be deemed to have accepted all the conditions of the Plan and the terms and conditions of
any rules and regulations adopted by the Committee and shall be fully bound thereby.
 
(g)           Governing Law.  The internal law, and not the law of conflicts, of the State of Idaho shall govern all
questions concerning the validity, construction and effect of the Plan or any Award, and any rules and
regulations relating to the Plan or any Award.
 
(h)           Severability.  If any provision of the Plan or any Award is or becomes or is deemed to be invalid,
illegal or unenforceable in any jurisdiction or would disqualify the Plan or any Award under any law
deemed applicable by the Committee, such provision shall be construed or deemed amended to conform to
applicable laws, or if it cannot be so construed or deemed amended without, in the determination of the
Committee, materially altering the purpose or intent of the Plan or the Award, such provision shall be
stricken as to such jurisdiction or Award, and the remainder of the Plan or any such Award shall remain in
full force and effect.
B-19
(i)           No Trust or Fund Created.  Neither the Plan nor any Award shall create or be construed to create a
trust or separate fund of any kind or a fiduciary relationship between the Company or any Affiliate and a
Participant or any other Person.  To the extent that any Person acquires a right to receive payments from
the Company or any Affiliate pursuant to an Award, such right shall be no greater than the right of any
unsecured general creditor of the Company or any Affiliate.
(j)           Other Benefits.  No compensation or benefit awarded to or realized by any Participant under the
Plan shall be included for the purpose of computing such Participant’s compensation or benefits under any
pension, retirement, savings, profit sharing, group insurance, disability, severance, termination pay, welfare
or other benefit plan of the Company, unless required by law or otherwise provided by such other plan.
 
(k)           No Fractional Shares.  No fractional Shares shall be issued or delivered pursuant to the Plan or
any Award, and the Committee shall determine whether cash shall be paid in lieu of any fractional Share or
whether such fractional Share or any rights thereto shall be canceled, terminated or otherwise eliminated.
 
(l)           Headings.  Headings are given to the sections and subsections of the Plan solely as a
convenience to facilitate reference.  Such headings shall not be deemed in any way material or relevant to
the construction or interpretation of the Plan or any provision thereof.
 
Section 10.                Clawback or Recoupment
 
           All Awards under this Plan shall be subject to forfeiture or other penalties pursuant to any Company
clawback policy, as may be adopted or amended from time to time, and such forfeiture and/or penalty
conditions or provisions as determined by the Committee.
 
Section 11.                Effective Date of the Plan
 
The Plan was adopted by the Board on August 24, 2015.  The Plan shall be subject to approval by the
stockholders of the Company at the annual meeting of stockholders of the Company to be held on
September 24, 2015, and the Plan shall be effective as of the date of such shareholder approval.  On and
after shareholder approval of the Plan, no awards shall be granted under the Prior Stock Plan, but all
outstanding awards previously granted under the Prior Stock Plan shall remain outstanding and subject to
the terms of the Prior Plan.
 
Section 12.                Term of the Plan
 
No Award shall be granted under the Plan, and the Plan shall terminate, on August 24, 2025 or any earlier
date of discontinuation or termination established pursuant to Section 7(a) of the Plan; provided, however,
that no Performance Award shall be granted under the Plan after the first stockholder meeting to occur in
the fifth year following the year in which stockholders approved the Performance Goals unless and until the
Performance Goals or the Plan is re-approved by the stockholders. Unless otherwise expressly provided in
the Plan or in an applicable Award Agreement, any Award theretofore granted may extend beyond such
dates, and the authority of the Committee provided for hereunder with respect to the Plan and any Awards,
and the authority of the Board to amend the Plan, shall extend beyond the termination of the Plan.
B-20