
Consolidated working copy including amendments conﬁrmed by

shareholders on July 11, 2016 effective as of the date of acceptance

by the TSXV on July 29, 2016

SHOSHONI GOLD LTD.
WRESHD.
(the “Company”)
The Company has as its articles the following articles.
Incorporation number: 291451
ARTICLES

1. 
2. Shares and Share 
3. Issue ofShares 
4. Share 
5. Share
6. Transmission ofShares
7. Purchase
8. Borrowing 
9. 
10. Meetings
11. Proceedings at Meetings of Shareholders 
12. Votes 
13. 
14. Election and Removal
15. Alternate 
16. Powers and Duties ofDirectors 
l7. Disclosure ofInterest  .
18. Proceedings
19. Executive and Other Committees
20. 
21. 
22. Dividends and 
23. Documents, Records and 
24. Notices
25. 
26. 


1. INTERPRETATION

1.1 Definitions

In these Articles, unless the context otherwise requires:

(1) “board of directors”, “directors” and “board” mean the directors or sole director of the Company
for the time being;

(2) “Business Corporations Act” means the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia) from time
to time in force and all amendments thereto and includes all regulations and amendments thereto
made pursuant to that Act;

(3) “legal personal representative” means the personal or other legal representatiye of the shareholder;

(4) “registered address” of a shareholder means the shareholder’s address as recorded in the central
securities register;

(5) “seal” means the seal of the Company, if any.

1.2 Business CorporationsAet and Interpretation Act Deﬁnitions Applicable

The deﬁnitions in the Business Corporations Act and the deﬁnitions and rules of construction in the

Interpretation Act, with the necessary changes, so far as applicable, and unless the context requires

otherwise, apply to these Articles as if they were an enactment. If there is a conﬂict between a deﬁnition

in the Business Corporations Act and a deﬁnition or rule in the Interpretation Act relating to a term used
in these Articles, the deﬁnition in the Business Corporations Act will prevail in relation to the use of the
term in these Articles. If there is a conﬂict between these Articles and the Business Corporations Act, the

Business Corporations Act will prevail.

2. SHARES AND SHARE CERTIFICATES

2.1 Authorized Share Structure

The authorized share structure of the Company consists of shares of the class or classes and series, if

any, described in the Notice of Articles of the Company.

2.2 Form of Share Certiﬁcate

Each share certiﬁcate issued by the Company must comply with, and be signed as required by, the

Business Corporations Act.

2.3 Shareholder Entitled to Certiﬁcate or Acknowledgment

Each shareholder is entitled, without charge, to (a) one share certiﬁcate representing the shares of each

class or series of shares registered in the shareholder’s name or (b) a non-transferable written

acknowledgment of the shareholder’s right to obtain such a share certiﬁcate, provided that in respect of a

share held jointly by several persons, the Company is not bound to issue more than one share certiﬁcate

and delivery of a share certiﬁcate for a share to one of several joint shareholders or to one of the
shareholders’ duly authorized agents will be sufﬁcient delivery to all.


2.4 Delivery by Mail

Any share certiﬁcate or non-transferable written acknowledgment of a shareholder’s right to obtain a

share certiﬁcate may be sent to the shareholder by mail at the shareholder’s registered address and

neither the Company nor any director, ofﬁcer or agent of the Company is liable for any loss to the

shareholder because the share certiﬁcate or acknowledgement is lost in the mail or stolen.

2.5 Replacement of Worn Out or Defaced Certiﬁcate or Acknowledgement

If the directors are satisﬁed that a share certiﬁcate or a non-transferable written acknowledgment of the

shareholder’s right to obtain a share certiﬁcate is worn out or defaced, they must, on production to them

of the share certiﬁcate or acknowledgment, as the case may be, and on such other terms, if any, as they

think ﬁt:

(1) order the share certiﬁcate or acknowledgment, as the case may be, to be cancelled; and

(2) issue a replacement share certiﬁcate or acknowledgment, as the case may be.

2.6 Replacement of Lost, Stolen or Destroyed Certiﬁcate or Acknowledgment

If a share certiﬁcate or a non-transferable written acknowledgment of a shareholder’s right to obtain a

share certiﬁcate is lost, stolen or destroyed, a replacement share certiﬁcate or acknowledgment, as the

case may he, must be issued to the person entitled to that share certiﬁcate or acknowledgment, as the

case may be, if the directors receive:

(1) proof satisfactory to them that the share certiﬁcate or acknowledgment is lost, stolen or destroyed;
and

(2) any indemnity the directors consider adequate.

2.7 Splitting Share Certiﬁcates

If a shareholder surrenders a share certiﬁcate to the Company with a written request that the Company

issue in the shareholder’s name two or more share certiﬁcates, each representing a speciﬁed number of

shares and in the aggregate representing the same number of shares as the share certiﬁcate so

surrendered, the Company must cancel the surrendered share certiﬁcate and issue replacement share

certiﬁcates in accordance with that request.

2.8 Certiﬁcate Fee

There must be paid to the Company, in relation to the issue of any share certiﬁcate under Articles 2.5, 2.6

or 2.7, the amount, if any and which must not exceed the amount prescribed under the Business

Corporation: Act, determined by the directors.

2.9 Recognition of Trusts

Except as required by law or statute or these Articles, no person will be recognized by the Company as

holding any share upon any trust, and the Company is not bound by or compelled in any way to

recognize (even when having notice thereof) any equitable, contingent, future or partial interest in any

share or fraction of a share or (except as by law or statute or these Articles provided or as ordered by a

court of competent jurisdiction) any other rights in respect of any share except an absolute right to the

entirety thereof in the shareholder,


3. ISSUE OF SHARES
3.1 Directors Authorized
Subject to the Business Corporations Act and the rights of the holders of issued shares of the Company,
the Company may issue, allot, sell or otherwise dispose of the unissued shares, and issued shares held by
the Company, at the times, to the persons, including directors, in the manner, on the terms and conditions
and for the issue prices (including any premium at which shares with par value may be issued) that the
directors may determine. The issue price for a share with par value must be equal to or greater than the
par value of the share.
3.2 Commissions and Discounts
The Company may at any time, pay a reasonable commission or allow a reasonable discount to any
person in consideration of that person purchasing or agreeing to purchase shares of the Company from
the Company or any other person or procuring or agreeing to procure purchasers for shares of the
Company.
3.3 Brokerage
The Company may pay such brokerage fee or other consideration as may be lawful for or in connection
with the sale or placement of its securities.
3.4 Conditions of Issue
Except as provided for by the Business Corporations Act, no share may be issued until it is fully paid. A
share is fully paid when:
(l) consideration is provided to the Company for the issue of the share by one or more of the
following:
(a) past services performed for the Company;
(b) property;
(0) money; and
(2) the value of the consideration received by the Company equals or exceeds the issue price Set for
the share under Article 3.1.
3.5 Share Purchase Warrants and Rights
Subject to the Business Corporations Act, the Company may issue share purchase warrants, options and
rights upon such terms and conditions as the directors determine, which share purchase warrants, options
and rights may be issued alone or in conjunction with debentures, debenture stock, bonds, shares or any
other securities issued or created by the Company from time to time.
4. SHARE REGISTERS
4.1 Central Securities Register
As required by and subject to the Business Corporations Act, the Company must maintain in British
Columbia a central securities register. The directors may, subject to the Business Corporations Act,


appoint an agent to maintain the central securities register. The directors may also appoint one or more

agents, including the agent which keeps the central securities register, as transfer agent for its shares or

any class or series of its shares, as the case may be, and the same or another agent as registrar for its

shares or such class or series of its shares, as the case may be. The directors may terminate such

appointment of any agent at any time and may appoint another agent in its place.

4.2 Closing Register

The Company must not at any time close its central securities register.

5. SHARE TRANSFERS

5.1 Registering Transfers

A transfer of a share of the Company must not be registered unless:

(I) a duly signed instrument of transfer in respect of the share has been received by the Company;

(2) if a share certiﬁcate has been issued by the Company in respect of the share to be transferred, that
share certiﬁcate has been surrendered to the Company; and

(3) if a non-transferable written acknowledgment of the shareholder’s right to obtain a share certiﬁcate
has been issued by the Company in respect of the share to be transferred, that acknowledgment has
been surrendered to the Company.

5.2 Form of Instrument of Transfer

The instrument of transfer in respect of any share of the Company must be either in the form, if any, on

the back of the Company’s share certiﬁcates or in any other form that may be approved by the directors

from time to time.

5.3 Transferor Remains Shareholder

Except to the extent that the Business Corporations Act otherwise provides, the transferor of shares is

deemed to remain the holder of the shares until the name of the transferee is entered in a securities

register of the Company in respect of the transfer.

5.4 Signing of Instrument of Transfer

If a shareholder, or his or her duly authorized attomey, signs an instrument of transfer in respect of shares

registered in the name of the shareholder, the signed instrument of transfer constitutes a complete and

sufﬁcient authority to the Company and its directors, ofﬁcers and agents to register the number of shares

speciﬁed in the instrument of transfer or speciﬁed in any other manner, or, if no number is speciﬁed, all

the shares represented by the share certiﬁcates or set out in the written acknowledgments deposited with

the instrument of transfer:

(1) in the name of the person named as transferee in that instmment of transfer; or

(2) if no person is named as transferee in that instrument of transfer, in the name of the person on
whose behalf the instrument is deposited for the purpose of having the transfer registered.


5.5 Enquiry as to Title Not Required

Neither the Company nor any director, oﬂicer or agent of the Company is bound to inquire into the title
of the person named in the instrument of transfer as transferee or, if no person is named as transferee in
the instrument of transfer, of the person on whose behalf the instrument is deposited for the purpose of
having the transfer registered or is liable for any claim related to registering the transfer by the
shareholder or by any intermediate owner or holder of the shares, of any interest in the shares, of any
share certiﬁcate representing such shares or of any written acknowledgment of a right to obtain a share
certiﬁcate for such shares.

5.6 Transfer Fee

There must be paid to the Company, in relation to the registration of any transfer, the amount, if any,
determined by the directors

6. TRANSMISSION or SHARES

6.1 Legal Personal Representative Recognized on Death

In case of the death of a shareholder, the legal personal representative, or if the shareholder was a joint
holder, the surviving joint holder, will be the only person recognized by the Company as having any title
to the shareholder’s interest in the shares. Before recognizing a person as a legal personal representative,
the directors may require proof of appointment by a court of competent jurisdiction, a grant of letters
probate, letters of administration or such other evidence or documents as the directors consider
appropriate.

6.2 Rights of Legal Personal Representative

The legal personal representative has the same rights, privileges and obligations that attach to the shares
held by the shareholder, including the right to transfer the shares in accordance with these Articles,
‘provided the documents required by the Business Corporations Act and the directors have been
deposited with the Company.

7. PURCHASE or SHARES

7.1 Company Authorized to Purchase Shares

Subject to Article 7.2, the special rights and restrictions attached to the shares of any class or series and
the Business Corporations Act, the Company may, if authorized by the directors, purchase or otherwise
acquire any of its shares at the price and upon the terms specified in such resolution.

7.2 Purchase When Insolvent

The Company must not make a payment or provide any other consideration to purchase or otherwise
acquire any of its shares if there are reasonable grounds for believing that:

(l) the Company is insolvent; or

(2) making the payment or providing the consideration would render the Company insolvent.


7.3 Sale and Voting of Purchased Shares

lfthe Company retains a share redeemed, purchased or otherwise acquired by it, the Company may sell,

gift or otherwise dispose of the share, but, while such share is held by the Company, it:

(1) is not entitled to vote the share at a meeting of its shareholders;

(2) must not pay a dividend in respect of the share; and

(3) must not make any other distribution in respect of the share.

8. Bomowma POWERS

The Company, if authorized by the directors, may:

(I) borrow money in the manner and amount, on the security, from the sources and on the terms and
conditions that they consider appropriate;

(2) issue bonds, debentures and other debt obligations either outright or as security for any liability or
obligation of the Company or any other person and at such discounts or premiums and on such
other terms as they consider appropriate;

(3) guarantee the repayment of money by any other person or the performance of any obligation of any
other person; and

(4) mortgage, charge, whether by way of speciﬁc or ﬂoating charge, grant a security interest in, or give
other security on, the whole or any part of the present and future assets and undertaking of the
Company.

9. Aarsmnous

9.! Alteration of Authorized Share Structure

Subject to Article 9.2 and the Business Camera/ions Act, the Company may by Directors resolution:

(I) create one or more classes or series of shares or, if none of the shares of a class or series of shares
are allotted or issued, eliminate that class or series of shares;

(2) increase, reduce or eliminate the maximum number of shares that the Company is authorized to
issue out of any class or series of shares or establish a maximum number of shares that the
Company is authorized to issue out of any class or series of shares for which no maximum is
established;

(3) subdivide or consolidate all or any of its unissued, or fully paid issued, shares;

(4) if the Company is authorized to issue shares of a class of shares with par value:

(a) decrease the par value of those shares; or
(b) if none of the shares of that class of shares are allotted or issued, increase the par value of
those shares;


(5) charge all or any of its unissued, or fully paid issued, shares with par value into sham without par
value or any of its unissued shares without par value into shares with par value;

(6) alter the identifying name of any of its shares; or

(7) otherwise alter its shares or authorized share structure when required or permitted to do so by the
Business Corporations Act.

9.2 Special Rights and Restrictions

Subject to the Business Corporations Act, the Company may byDirecmrs resolution:

(I) create special rights or restrictions for, and attach those special rights or restrictions to, the shares
of any class or series of shares, whether or not any or all of those shares have been issued; or

(2) vary or delete any special rights or restrictions attached to the shares of any elm or series of
shares, whether or not any or all of those shares have been issued.

9.3 Change of Name

The Company may by Directors resolution authorize an alteration of its Notice of Articles in order to

change its name.

9.4 Other Alterations

If the Business Corporations A or does not specify the type of resolution and these Articles do not specify

another type of resolution, the Company may by Directorsl‘esolullon alter these Articles.

10. MEETINGS or SHAREHOLDERS

10.] Annual General Meetings

Unless an annual general meeting is deferred or waived in accordance with the Business Corporations

Act, the Company must hold its ﬁrst annual general meeting within 18 months alter the date on which it

was incorporated or othenrvise recognized, and aﬁer that must hold an annual general meeting at least

once in each calendar year and not more than 15 months aﬂer the last annual reference date at such time

and place as may be determined by the directors.

10.2 Resolution Instead of Annual General Meeting

, If all the shareholders who are entitled to vote at an annual general meeting consent by a unanimous

resolution under the Business Corporations Ac! to all of the business that is required to be transacted at

that annual general meeting, the annual general meeting is deemed to have been held on the date of the

unanimous resolution. The shareholders must, in any unanimous resolution passed under this Article

10.2, select as the Company’s annual reference date a date that would be appropriate for the holding of

the applicable annual general meeting.

10_.3 Calling of Meetings of Shareholders

The directors may, whenever they think ﬁt, call a meeting of shareholders.


10.4 Notice for Meetings of Shareholders

The Company must send notice of the date, time and location of any meeting of shareholders, in the

manner provided in these Articles, or in such other manner, if any, as may be prescribed by ordinary

resolution (whether previous notice of the resolution has been given or not), to each shareholder entitled

to attend the meeting, to each director and to the auditor of the Company, unless these Articles otherwise

provide, at least the following number of days before the meeting:

(1) ifand for so long as the Company is a public company, 21 days;

(2) otherwise, 10 days

10.5 Record Date for Notice

The directors may set a date as the record date for the purpose of determining shareholders entitled to

notice of any meeting of shareholders. The record date must not precede the date on which the meeting is

to be held by more than two months or, in the case of a general meeting requisitioned by shareholders

under the Business Corporations Act, by more than four months. The record date must not precede the

date on which the meeting is held by fewer than:

(1) if and for so long as the Company is a public company, 21 days;

(2) otherwise, 10 days.

If no record date is set, the record date is 5 pm. on the day immediately preceding the ﬁrst date on which

the notice is sent or, if no notice is sent, the beginning of the meeting.

10.6 Record Date for Voting

The directors may set a date as the record date for the purpose of determining shareholders entitled to

vote at any meeting of shareholders. The record date must not precede the date on which the meeting is

to be held by more than two months or, in the case of a general meeting requisitioned by shareholders

under the Business Corporations Act, by more than four months. If no record date is set, the record date

is 5 pm. on the day immediately preceding the first date on which the notice is sent or, if no notice is

sent, the beginning of the meeting.

10.7 Failure to Give Notice and Waiver of Notice

The accidental omission to send notice of any meeting to, or the non-receipt of any notice by, any of the

persons entitled to notice does not invalidate any proceedings at that meeting. Any person entitled to

notice of a meeting of shareholders may, in writing or otherwise, waive or reduce the period of notice of

such meeting.

10.8 Notice of Special Business at Meetings of Shareholders

If a meeting of shareholders is to consider special business within the meaning of Article 11.1, the notice

of meeting must:

(1) state the general nature of the special business; and

(2) if the special business includes considering, approving, ratifying, adopting or authorizing any
document or the signing of or giving of effect to any document, have attached to it a copy of the
document or state that a copy of the document will be available for inspection by shareholders:


(a) at the Company’s records ofﬁce, or at such other reasonably accessible location in British
Columbia as is speciﬁed in the notice; and

(h) during statutory business hours on any one or more speciﬁed days before the day set for the
holding of the meeting.

11. PROCEEDINGS AT MEETINGS or SHAREHOLDERS

11.1 Special Business

At a meeting of shareholders, the following business is special business:

(1) at a meeting of shareholders that is not an annual general meeting, all business is special business
except business relating to the conduct of or voting at the meeting;

(2) at an annual general meeting, all business is special business except for the following:

(a) business relating to the conduct of or voting at the meeting;

(b) consideration of any ﬁnancial statements of the Company presented to the meeting;

(c) consideration of any reports of the directors or auditor;

(d) the setting or changing of the number of directors;

(e) the election or appointment of directors;

(0 the appointment of an auditor;

(g) the setting of the remuneration of an auditor;

(h) business arising out of a report of the directors not requiring the passing of a special resolution
or an exceptional resolution;

(i) any other business which, under these Articles or the Business Corporations Act, may be
transacted at a meeting of shareholders without prior notice of the business being given to the
shareholders.

11.2 Special Majority

The majority of votes required for the Company to pass a special resolution at a meeting of shareholders
is two-thirds of the votes cast on the resolution.

11.3 Quorum

Subject to the special rights and restrictions attached to the shares of any class or series of shares, the
quorum for the transaction of business at a meeting of shareholders is two persons who are, or who
represent by proxy, shareholders who, in the aggregate, hold at least 5% of the issued shares entitled to
be voted at the meeting.

11.4 One Shareholder May Constitute Quorum

If there is only one shareholder entitled to vote at a meeting of shareholders:


(1) the quorum is one person who is, or who represents by proxy, that shareholder, and

(2) that shareholder, present in person or by proxy, may constitute the meeting.

11.5 Other Persons May Attend

The directors, the president (if any), the secretary (if any), the assistant secretary (if any), any lawyer for

the Company, the auditor of the Company and any other persons invited by the directors are entitled to

attend any meeting of shareholders, but if any of those persons does attend a meeting of shareholders,

that person is not to be counted in the quorum and is not entitled to vote at the meeting unless that

person is a shareholder or proxy holder entitled to vote at the meeting.

11.6 Requirement of Quorum

No business, other than the election of a chair of the meeting and the adjournment of the meeting, may

be transacted at any meeting of shareholders unless a quorum of shareholders entitled to vote is present

at the commencement of the meeting, but such quorum need not be present throughout the meeting.

11.7 Lack of Quorum

If, within one-half hour from the time set for the holding of a meeting of shareholders, a quorum is not

present:

(1) in the case of a general meeting requisitioned by shareholders, the meeting is dissolved, and

(2) in the case of any other meeting of shareholders, the meeting stands adjourned to the same day in
the next week at the same time and place.

11.8 Lack of Quorum at Succeeding Meeting

If, at the meeting to which the meeting referred to in Article 11.7(2) was adjourned, a quorum is not

present within one-half hour from the time set for the holding of the meeting, the person or persons

present and being, or representing by proxy, one or more shareholders entitled to attend and vote at the

meeting constitute a quorum.

11.9 Chair

The following individual is entitled to preside as chair at a meeting of shareholders:

(l) the chair of the board, if any; or

(2) if the chair of the board is absent or unwilling to act as chair of the meeting, the president, if any.

11.10 Selection of Alternate Chair

If, at any meeting of shareholders, there is no chair of the board or president present within 15 minutes

aﬁer the time set for holding the meeting, or if the chair of the board and the president are unwilling to

act as chair of the meeting, or if the chair of the board and the president have advised the secretary, if

any, or any director present at the meeting, that they will not be present at the meeting, the directors

present must choose one of their number to be chair of the meeting or if all of the directors present

decline to take the chair or fail to so choose or if no director is present, the shareholders entitled to vote

at the meeting who are present in person or by proxy may choose any person present at the meeting to

chair the meeting


11.11 Adjournments
The chair of a meeting of shareholders may, and if so directed by the meeting must, adjourn the meeting
from time to time and from place to place, but no business may be transacted at any adjourned meeting
other than the business leﬁ unﬁnished at the meeting from which the adjournment took place.
11.12 Notice of Adjourned Meeting
It is not necessary to give any notice of an adjourned meeting or of the business to be transacted at an
adjourned meeting of shareholders except that, when a meeting is adjoumed for 30 days or more, notice
of the adjourned meeting must be given as in the case of the original meeting.
11.13 Decisions by Show of Hands or Poll
Subject to the Business CorporationsAct, every motion put to a vote at a meeting of shareholders will be
decided on a show of hands unless a poll, before or on the declaration of the result of the vote by show
of hands, is directed by the chair or demanded by at least one shareholder entitled to vote who is present
in person or by proxy.
11.14 Declaration of Result
The chair of a meeting of shareholders must declare to the meeting the decision on every question in
accordance with the result of the show of hands or the poll, as the case may be, and that decision must be
entered in the minutes of the meeting. A declaration of the chair that a resolution is carried by the
necessary majority or is defeated is, unless a poll is directed by the chair or demanded under Article
11.13, conclusive evidence without proof of the number or proportion of the votes recorded in favour of
or against the resolution.
11.15 Motion Need Not be Seconded
No motion proposed at a meeting of shareholders need be seconded unless the chair of the meeting rules
otherwise, and the chair of any meeting of shareholders is entitled to propose or second a motion.
11.16 Casting Vote
In case of an equality of votes, the chair of a meeting of shareholders does not, either on a show of hands
or on a poll, have a second or casting vote in addition to the vote or votes to which the chair may be
entitled as a shareholder.
11.17 Manner ofTaking Poll
Subject to Article 11.18, if a poll is duly demanded at a meeting of shareholders:
(l) the poll must be taken:
(a) at the meeting, or within seven days aﬁer the date of the meeting. as the chair of the meeting
directs; and
(b) in the manner, at the time and at the place that the chair of the meeting directs;
(2) the result of the poll is deemed to be the decision of the meeting at which the poll is demanded;
and


(3) the demand for the poll may be withdrawn by the person who demanded it.

11.18 Demand for Poll on Adjournment

A poll demanded at a meeting of shareholders on a question of adjournment must be taken immediately

at the meeting.

11.19 Chair Must Resolve Dispute

In the case of any dispute as to the admission or rejection of a vote given on a poll, the chair of the

meeting must determine the dispute, and his or her determination made in good faith is ﬁnal and

conclusive.

11.20 Casting of Votes

On a poll, a shareholder entitled to more than one vote need not cast all the votes in the same way.

11.21 Demand for Poll

No poll may he demanded in respect of the vote by which a chair of a meeting of shareholders is elected.

11.22 Demand for Poll Not to Prevent Continuance of Meeting

The demand for a poll at a meeting of shareholders does not, unless the chair of the meeting so rules,

prevent the continuation of a meeting for the transaction of any business other than the question on

which a poll has been demanded.

11.23 Retention of Ballots and Proxies

The Company must, for at least three months aﬁer a meeting of shareholders, keep each ballot cast on a

poll and each proxy voted at the meeting, and, during that period, make them available for impaction

during normal business hours by any shareholder or proxyholder entitled to vote at the meeting. At the

end of such three month period, the Company may destroy such ballots and proxies.

12. VOTES or SHAREHOLDERS

12.1 Number of Votes by Shareholder or by Shares

Subject to any special rights or restrictions attached to any shares and to the restrictions imposed on joint

shareholders under Article 12.3:

(1) on a vote by show of hands, every person present who is a shareholder or proxy holder and entitled
to vote on the matter has one vote; and

(2) on a poll, every shareholder entitled to vote on the matter has one vote in respect of each share
entitled to be voted on the matter and held by that shareholder and may exercise that vote either in
person or by proxy.

12.2 Votes of Persons in Representative Capacity

A person who is not a shareholder may vote at a meeting of shareholders, whether on a show of hands or

on a poll, and may appoint a proxy holder to act at the meeting, if, before doing so, the person satisﬁes


the chair of the meeting, or the directors, that the person is a legal personal representative or a trustee in

bankruptcy for a shareholder who is entitled to vote at the meeting.

12.3 Votes by Joint Holders

If there are joint shareholders registered in respect of any share:

(1) any one of the joint shareholders may vote at any meeting, either personally or by proxy, in respect
of the share as if that joint shareholder were solely entitled to it; or

(2) if more than one of the joint shareholders is present at any meeting, personally or by proxy, and
more than one of them votes in respect of that share, then only the vote of the joint shareholder
present whose name stands ﬁrst on the central securities register in respect of the share will be
counted.

12.4 Legal Personal Representatives as Joint Shareholders

Two or more legal personal representatives of a shareholder in whose sole name any share is registered

are, for the purposes of Article 12.3, deemed to be joint shareholders.

12.5 Representative of a Corporate Shareholder

If a corporation, that is not a subsidiary of the Company, is a shareholder, that corporation may appoint a

person to act as its representative at any meeting of shareholders of the Company, and:

(l) for that purpose, the instrument appointing a representative must:

(a) be received at the registered ofﬁce of the Company or at any other place speciﬁed, in the
notice calling the meeting, for the receipt of proxies, at least the number of business days
speciﬁed in the notice for the receipt of proxies, or if no number of days is speciﬁed, two
business days before the day set for the holding of the meeting; or

(b) be provided, at the meeting, to the chair of the meeting or to a person designated by the chair
of the meeting;

(2) if a representative is appointed under this Article 12.5:

(a) the representative is entitled to exercise in respect of and at that meeting the same rights on
behalf of the corporation that the representative represents as that corporation could exercise if
it were a shareholder who is an individual, including, without limitation, the right to appoint a
proxy holder; and

(b) the representative, if present at the meeting, is to be counted for the purpose of forming a
quorum and is deemed to be a shareholder present in person at the meeting.

Evidence of the appointment of any such representative may be sent to the Company by written
instrument, fax or any other method of transmitting legibly recorded messages.

12.6 Proxy Provisions Do Not Apply to All Companies

Articles 127 to 12.15 do not apply to the Company if and for so long as it is a public company or a pre-
existing reporting company which has the Statutory Reporting Company Provisions as part of its Articles
or to which the Statutory Reporting Company Provisions apply.


12.7 Appointment of Proxy Holders

Every shareholder of the Company, including a corporation that is a shareholder but not a subsidiary of

the Company, entitled to vote at a meeting of shareholders of the Company may, by proxy, appoint one

or more (but not more than ﬁve) proxy holders to attend and act at the meeting in the manner, to the
extent and with the powers conferred by the proxy.

12.8 Alternate Proxy Holders

A shareholder may appoint one or more alternate proxy holders to act in the place of an absent proxy

holder.

12.9 When Proxy Holder Need Not Be Shareholder

A person must not be appointed as a proxy holder unless the person is a shareholder, although a person

who is not a shareholder may be appointed as a proxy holder if:

(1) the person appointing the proxy holder is a corporation or a representative of a corporation
appointed under Article 12.5;

(2) the Company has at the time of the meeting for which the proxy holder is to be appointed only one
shareholder entitled to vote at the meeting; or

(3) the shareholders present in person or by proxy at and entitled to vote at the meeting for which the
proxy holder is to be appointed, by a resolution on which the proxy holder is not entitled to vote
but in respect of which the proxy holder is to be counted in the quorum, permit the proxy holder to
attend and vote at the meeting.

12.10 Deposit of Proxy

A proxy for a meeting of shareholders must:

(1) be received at the registered ofﬁce of the Company or at any other place speciﬁed, in the notice
calling the meeting, for the receipt of proxies, at least the number of business days speciﬁed in the
notice, or if no number of days is speciﬁed, two business days before the day set for the holding of
the meeting; or

(2) unless the notice provides otherwise, be provided, at the meeting, to the chair of the meeting or to
a person designated by the chair of the meeting.

A proxy may be sent to the Company by written instrument, fax or any other method of transmitting

legibly recorded messages.

12.11 Validity of Proxy Vote

A vote given in accordance with the terms of a proxy is valid notwithstanding the death or incapacity of

the shareholder giving the proxy and despite the revocation of the proxy or the revocation of the

authority under which the proxy is given, unless notice in writing of that death, mcapacrty or revocation
is received:

(1) at the registered ofﬁce of the Company, at any time up to and including the last business day
before the day set for the holding of the meeting at which the proxy is to be used; or


(2) by the chair of the meeting, before the Vote is taken.
12.12 Form of Proxy
A proxy, whether for a speciﬁed meeting or otherwise, must be either in the following form or in any
other form approved by the directors or the chair of the meeting:
[name of company]
(the “Company”)
The undersigned, being a shareholder of the Company, hereby appoints [name] or, failing that
person, [name], as proxy holder for the undersigned to attend, act and vote for and on behalf of the
undersigned at the meeting of shareholders of the Company to be held on [man/h, day, year] and at
any adjournment of that meeting.
Number of shares in respect of which this proxy is given (if no number is speciﬁed, then this proxy
if given in respect of all shares registered in the name of the shareholder):
Signed [month day, year]
[Signature ofshareholder]
[N mm: ofsharehalderiprinled]
12.13 Revocation of Proxy
Subject to Article 12.14, every proxy may be revoked by an instrument in writing that is:
(1) received at the registered ofﬁce of the Company at any time up to and including the last business
day before the day set for the holding of the meeting at which the proxy is to be used; or
(2) provided, at the meeting, to the chair of the meeting.
12.14 Revocation of Proxy Must Be Signed
An instrument referred to in Article 12.13 must be signed as follows:
(1) if the shareholder for whom the proxy holder is appointed is an individual, the instrument must be
signed by the shareholder or his or her legal personal representative or trustee in bankruptcy;
(2) if the shareholder for whom the proxy holder is appointed is a corporation, the instrument must be
signed by the corporation or by a representative appointed for the corporation under Article 12.5.
12.15 Production of Evidence of Authority to Vote
The chair of any meeting of shareholders may, but need not, inquire into the authority of any person to
vote at the meeting and may, but need not, demand from that person production of evidence as to the
existence of the authority to vote.


13. DIRECTORS

13.1 First Directors; Number of Directors

The ﬁrst directors are the persons designated as directors of the Company in the Notice of Articles that

applies to the Company when it is recognized under the Business Corporations Act. The number of

directors, excluding additional directors appointed under Article 14.8, is set at:

(1) subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the number of directors that is equal to the number of the
Company’s ﬁrst directors;

(2) if the Company is a public company, the greater of three and the most recently set of:

(a) the number of directors set by ordinary resolution (whether or not previous notice of the
resolution was given); and
(b) the number of directors set under Article MA;

(3) if the Company is not a public company, the most recently set of:

(a) the number of directors set by ordinary resolution (whether or not previous notice of the
resolution was given); and
(b) the number of directors set under Article 144.

13.2 Change in Number of Directors

If the number of directors is set under Articles [3. l(2)(a) or 13. l(3)(a):

(1) the shareholders may elect or appoint the directors needed to ﬁll any vacancies in the board of
directors up to that number;

(2) if the shareholders do not elect or appoint the directors needed to ﬁll any vacancies in the board of
directors up to that number contemporaneously with the setting of that number, then the directors
may appoint, or the shareholders may elect or appoint, directors to ﬁll those vacancies.

13.3 Directors’ Acts Valid Despite Vacancy

An act or proceeding of the directors is not invalid merely because fewer than the number of directors set

or otherwise required under these Articles is in oﬁice.

13.4 Qualiﬁcations of Directors

A director is not required to hold a share in the capital of the Company as qualiﬁcation for his or her

ofﬁce but must be qualiﬁed as required by the Business Corporations Ac! to become, act or continue to

act as a director.

13.3 Remuneration of Directors

The directors are entitled to the remuneration for acting as directors, if any, as the directors may from

time to time determine. If the directors so decide, the remuneration of the directors, if any, will be

determined by the shareholders. That remuneration may be in addition to any salary or other
remuneration paid to any ofﬁcer or employee of the Company as such, who is also a director.


13.4 Reimbursement of Expenses of Directors

The Company must reimburse each director for the reasonable expenses that he or she may incur in and

about the business of the Company.

13.5 Special Remuneration for Directors

If any director performs any professional or other services for the Company that in the opinion of the

directors are outside the ordinary duties of a director, or if any director is otherwise specially occupied in

or about the Company’s business, he or she may be paid remuneration ﬁxed by the directors, or, at the
option of that director, fixed by ordinary resolution, and such remuneration may be either in addition to,
or in substitution for, any other remuneration that he or she may be entitled to receive,

13.6 Gratuity, Pension or Allowance on Retirement of Director

Unless otherwise determined by ordinary resolution, the directors on behalf of the Company may pay a

gratuity or pension or allowance on retirement to any director who has held any salaried ofﬁce or place

of profit with the Company or to his or her spouse or dependants and may make contributions to any
fund and pay premiums for the purchase or provision of any such gratuity, pension or allowance.

14. ELECTION AND REMOVAL OF DIRECTORS

14.1 Election at Annual General Meeting

At every annual general meeting and in every unanimous resolution contemplated by Article 10.2:

(1) the shareholders entitled to vote at the annual general meeting for the election of directors must
elect, or in the unanimous resolution appoint, a board of directors consisting of the number of
directors for the time being set under these Articles; and

(2) all the directors cease to hold ofﬁce immediately before the election or appointment of directors
under paragraph (1 ), but are eligible for re-election or re-appointment.

14.2 Consent to be a Director

No election, appointment or designation of an individual as a director is valid unless:

(I) that individual consents to be a director in the manner provided for in the Business Corporations
Act;

(2) that individual is elected or appointed at a meeting at which the individual is present and the
individual does not refuse, at the meeting, to be a director; or

(3) with respect to ﬁrst directors, the designation is otherwise valid under the Business Corporations
Act.

14.3 Failure to Elect or Appoint Directors

If:

(1) the Company fails to hold an annual general meeting, and all the shareholders who are entitled to
vote at an annual general meeting fail to pass the unanimous resolution contemplated by Article


10.2, on or before the date by which the annual general meeting is required to be held under the
Business Corporations Act; or
(2) the shareholders fail, at the annual general meeting or in the unanimous resolution contemplated
by Article 102, to elect or appoint any directors;
then each director then in ofﬁce continues to hold ofﬁce until the earlier of:
(3) the date on which his or her successor is elected or appointed; and
(4) the date on which he or she otherwise ceases to hold ofﬁce under the Business Corporations Actor
these Articles.
14.4 Places of Retiring Directors Not Filled
If, at any meeting of shareholders at which there should be an election of directors, the places of any of
the retiring directors are not ﬁlled by that election, those retiring directors who are not re-elected and
who are asked by the newly elected directors to continue in ofﬁce will, if willing to do so, continue in
ofﬁce to complete the number of directors for the time being set pursuant to these Articles until further
new directors are elected at a meeting of shareholders convened for that purpose If any such election or
continuance of directors does not result in the election or continuance of the number of directors for the
time being set pursuant to these Articles, the number of directors of the Company is deemed to be set at
the number of directors actually elected or continued in ofﬁce.
14.5 Directors May Fill Casual Vacancies
Any casual vacancy occurring in the board of directors may be ﬁlled by the directors.
14.6 Remaining Directors Power to Act
The directors may act notwithstanding any vacancy in the board of directors, but if the Company has
fewer directors in ofﬁce than the number set pursuant to these Articles as the quorum of directors, the
directors may only act for the purpose of appointing directors up to that number or of summoning a
meeting of shareholders for the purpose of ﬁlling any vacancies on the board of directors or, subject to
the Business Corporalions Acl, for any other purpose.
14.7 Shareholders May Fill Vacancies
If the Company has no directors or fewer directors in ofﬁce than the number set pursuant to these
Articles as the quorum of directors, the shareholders may elect or appoint directors to ﬁll any vacancies
on the board of directors.
14.8 Additional Directors
Notwithstanding Articles 13.1 and 13.2, between annual general meetings or unanimous resolutions
contemplated by Article 10.2, the directors may appoint one or more additional directors, but the number
of additional directors appointed under this Article 14.8 must not at any time exceed:
(1) one-third of the number of ﬁrst directors, if, at the time of the appointments, one or more of the
ﬁrst directors have not yet completed their ﬁrst term of ofﬁce; or


l
l (2) in any other case, one-third of the number of the current directors who were elected or appointed
as directors other than under this Article 14.8.
Any director so appointed ceases to hold office immediately before the next election or appointment of
directors under Article 14.1(1), but is eligible for re-election or re-appointment.
14.9 Ceasing to be a Director
A director ceases to be a director when:
(l) the term of ofﬁce of the director expires;
(2) the director dies;
(3) the director resigns as a director by notice in writing provided to the Company or a lawyer for the
Company; or

(4) the director is removed from ofﬁce pursuant to Articles 14.10 or 14.11.
14.10 Removal of Director by Shareholders
The Company may remove any director before the expiration of his or her term of ofﬁce by special
resolution. In that event, the shareholders may elect, or appoint by ordinary resolution, a director to ﬁll
the resulting vacancy. If the shareholders do not elect or appoint a director to ﬁll the resulting vacancy
contemporaneously with the removal, then the directors may appoint or the shareholders may elect, or
appoint by ordinary resolution, a director to fill that vacancy.
14.11 Removal of Director by Directors
The directors may remove any director before the expiration of his or her term of ofﬁce if the director is
convicted of an indictable offence, or if the director ceases to be qualiﬁed to act as a director of a
company and does not promptly resign, and the directors may appoint a director to ﬁll the resulting
vacancy.
14.12 Nominations of Directors - see attached Schedule "A"
15. ALTERNATE DIRECTORS
15.] Appointment of Alternate Director
Any director (an “appointor”) may by notice in writing received by the Company appoint any person (an
“appointee”) who is qualiﬁed to act as a director to be his or her alternate to act in his or her place at
meetings of the directors or committees of the directors at which the appointor is not present unless (in
the case of an appointee who is not a director) the directors have reasonably disapproved the
appointment of such person as an alternate director and have given notice to that elfect to his or her
appointor within a reasonable time after the notice of appointment is received by the Company.
15.2 Notice of Meetings
Every alternate director so appointed is entitled to notice of meetings of the directors and of committees
of the directors of which his or her appointor is a member and to attend and vote as a director at any such
meetings at which his or her appointor is not present.


15.3 Alternate for More Than One Director Attending Meetings

A person may be appointed as an alternate director by more than one director, and an alternate director:

(1) will be counted in determining the quorum for a meeting of directors once for each of his or her
appointors and, in the case of an appointee who is also a director, once more in that capacity;

(2) has a separate vote at a meeting of directors for each of his or her appointors and, in the case of an
appointee who is also a director, an additional vote in that capacity;

(3) will be counted in determining the quorum for a meeting of a committee of directors once for each
of his or her appointors who is a member of that committee and, in the case of an appointee who is
also a member of that committee as a director, once more in that capacity;

(4) has a separate vote at a meeting of a committee of directors for each of his or her appointors who
is a member of that committee and, in the case of an appointee who is also a member of that
committee as a director, an additional vote in that capacity.

15.4 Consent Resolutions

Every aitemate director, if authorized by the notice appointing him or her, may sign in place of his or her

appointor any resolutions to be consented to in writing

15.5 Alternate Director Not an Agent

Every alternate director is deemed not to be the agent of his or her appointor.

15.6 Revocation of Appointment of Alternate Director

An appointor may at any time, by notice in writing received by the Company, revoke the appointment of

an aitemate director appointed by him or her.

15.7 Ceasing to be an Alternate Director

The appointment of an alternate director ceases when:

(1) his or her appointor ceases to be a director and is not promptly re-elected or re—appointed;

(2) the alternate director dies;

(3) the alternate director resigns as an alternate director by notice in writing provided to the Company
or a lawyer for the Company;

(4) the alternate director ceases to be qualiﬁed to act as a director; or

(5) his or her appointor revokes the appointment of the aitemate director.

15.8 Remuneration and Expenses of Alternate Director

The Company may reimburse an alternate director for the reasonable expenses that would be properly

reimbursed if he or she were a director, and the aitemate director is entitled to receive from the Company

such proportion, if any, of the remuneration otherwise payable to the appomtor as the appomtor may
from time to time direct.


16. POWERS AND DUTIES or DIRECTORS

16.1 Powers of Management

The directors must, subject to the Business Corporations Act and these Articles, manage or supervise the
management of the business and affairs of the Company and have the authority to exercise all such
powers of the Company as are not, by the Business Corporations Act or by these Articles, required to be
exercised by the Shareholders of the Company.

16.2 Appointment of Attorney of Company

The directors may from time to time, by power of attomey or other instrument, under seal if so required
by law, appoint any person to be the attorney of the Company for such purposes, and with such powers,
authorities and discretions (not exceeding those vested in or exercisable by the directors under these
Articles and excepting the power to ﬁll vacancies in the board of directors, to remove a director, to
change the membership of, or ﬁll vacancies in, any committee of the directors, to appoint or remove
ofﬁcers appointed by the directors and to declare dividends) and for such period, and with such
remuneration and subject to such conditions as the directors may think ﬁt. Any such power of attorney
may contain such provisions for the protection or convenience of persons dealing with such attorney as
the directors think ﬁt. Any such attorney may be authorized by the directors to sub~delegate all or any of
the powers, authorities and discretions for the time being vested in him or her.

17. DISCLOSURE or INTEREST OF DIRECTORS

17.1 Obligation to Account for Proﬁts

A director or senior ofﬁcer who holds a disclosable interest (as that term is used in the Business
Corporations Ac!) in a contract or transaction into which the Company has entered or proposes to enter
is liable to account to the Company for any proﬁt that accrues to the director or senior ofﬁcer under or as
a result of the contract or transaction only if and to the extent provided in the Business Corporations Act.
17.2 Restrictions on Voting by Reason of Interest

A director who holds a disclosable interest in a contract or transaction into which the Company has
entered or proposes to enter is not entitled to vote on any directors’ resolution to approve that contract or
transaction, unless all the directors have a disclosable interest in that contract or transaction, in which
case any or all of those directors may vote on such resolution.

17.3 Interested Director Counted in Quorum

A director who holds a disclosable interest in a contract or transaction into which the Company has
entered or proposes to enter and who is present at the meeting of directors at which the contract or
transaction is considered for approval may be counted in the quorum at the meeting whether or not the
director votes on any or all of the resolutions considered at the meeting.

17.4 Disclosure of Conﬂict of Interest or Property

A director or senior oﬂicer who holds any ofﬁce or possesses any property, right or interest that could
result, directly or indirectly, in the creation of a duty or interest that materially conﬂicts WIth that


individual’s duty or interest as a director or senior ofﬁcer, must disclose the nature and extent of the
conﬂict as required by the Business Corporations Act.

17.5 Director Holding Other Ofﬁce in the Company

A director may hold any ofﬁce or place of proﬁt with the Company, other than the ofﬁce of auditor of the
Company, in addition to his or her oﬂice of director for the period and on the terms (as to remuneration
or otherwise) that the directors may determine.

17.6 No Disqualiﬁcation ’

No director or intended director is disqualiﬁed by his or her ofﬁce from contracting with the Company
either with regard to the holding of any ofﬁce or place of proﬁt the director holds with the Company or
as vendor, purchaser or otherwise, and no contract or transaction entered into by or on behalf of the
Company in which a director is in any way interested is liable to be voided for that reason.

17.7 Professional Services by Director or Ofﬁcer

Subject to the Business Corporations Act, a director or ofﬁcer, or any person in which a director or
ofﬁcer has an interest, may act in a professional capacity for the Company, except as auditor of the
Company, and the director or ofﬁcer or such person is entitled to remuneration for professional services
as if that director or ofﬁcer were not a director or ofﬁcer.

17.8 Director or Ofﬁcer in Other Corporations

A director or ofﬁcer may be or become a director, ofﬁcer or employee of, or otherwise interested in, any
person in which the Company may be interested as a shareholder or otherwise, and, subject to the
Business Corporations Act, the director or oﬁicer is not accountable to the Company for any
remuneration or other beneﬁts received by him or her as director, oﬂicer or employee of, or from his or
her interest in, such other person.

18. PROCEEDINGS or DIRECTORS

18.1 Meetings of Directors

The directors may meet together for the conduct of business, adjourn and otherwise regulate their
meetings as they think ﬁt, and meetings of the directors held at regular intervals may be held at the place,
at the time and on the notice, if any, as the directors may from time to time determine.

18.2 Voting at Meetings

Questions arising at any meeting of directors are to be decided by a majority of votes and, in the case of
an equality of votes, the chair of the meeting does not have a second or casting vote.

18.3 Chair of Meetings

The following individual is entitled to preside as chair at a meeting of directors:

(1) the Chair ofthe board, ifany;


(2) in the absence of the chair of the board, the president, if any, if the president is a director; or
(3) any other director chosen by the directors if:
(a) neither the chair of the board nor the president, if a director, is present at the meeting within
15 minutes aﬁer the time set for holding the meeting;
(b) neither the chair of the board nor the president, if a director, is willing to chair the meeting; or
(c) the chair of the board and the president, if a director, have advised the secretary, if any, or any
other director, that they will not be present at the meeting.
18.4 Meetings by Telephone or Other Communications Medium
A director may participate in a meeting of the directors or of any committee of the directors in person or
by telephone if all directors participating in the meeting, whether in person or by telephone or other
communications medium, are able to communicate with each other. A director may participate in a
meeting of the directors or of any committee of the directors by a communications medium other than
telephone if all directors participating in the meeting, whether in person or by telephone or other
communications medium, are able to communicate with each other and if all directors who wish to
participate in the meeting agree to such participation. A director who participates in a meeting in a
manner contemplated by this Article 18.4 is deemed for all purposes of the Business Corparalions Ac!
and these Articles to be present at the meeting and to have agreed to participate in that manner.
18.5 Calling of Meetings
A director may, and the secretary or an assistant secretary of the Company, if any, on the request of a
director must, call a meeting of the directors at any time.
18.6 Notice of Meetings
Other than for meetings held at regular intervals as determined by the directors pursuant to Article l8.1,
reasonable notice of each meeting of the directors, specifying the place, day and time of that meeting
must be given to each of the directors and the alternate directors by any method set out in Article 24.1 or
orally or by telephone. 1
18.7 When Notice Not Required
It is not necessary to give notice of a meeting of the directors to a director or an alternate director if:
(1) the meeting is to be held immediately following a meeting of shareholders at which that director
was elected or appointed, or is the meeting of the directors at which that director rs appomted; or
(2) the director or alternate director, as the case may be, has waived notice of the meeting.
18.8 Meeting Valid Despite Failure to Give Notice
The accidental omission to give notice of any meeting of directors to, or the non-receipt of any notice by,
any director or alternate director, does not invalidate any proceedings at that meeting,


18.9 Waiver of Notice of Meetings

Any director or alternate director may send to the Company a document signed by him or her waiving

notice of any past, present or future meeting or meetings of the directors and may at any time withdraw

that waiver with respect to meetings held after that withdrawalr Aﬁer sending a waiver with respect to all

future meetings and until that waiver is withdrawn, no notice of any meeting of the directors need be

given to that director and, unless the director otherwise requires by notice in writing to the Company, to

his or her alternate director, and all meetings of the directors so held are deemed not to be improperly

called or constituted by reason of notice not having been given to such director or alternate director.

18.10 Quorum

The quorum necessary for the transaction of the business of the directors may be set by the directors and,

if not so set, is deemed to be set at two directors or, if the number of directors is set at one, is deemed to

be set at one director, and that director may constitute a meeting.

18.11 Validity of Acts Where Appointment Defective

Subject to the Business Corporations Act, an act of a director or ofﬁcer is not invalid merely because of

an irregularity in the election or appointment or a defect in the qualiﬁcation of that director or oﬁicer.

18.12 Consent Resolutions in Writing

A resolution of the directors or of any committee of the directors consented to in writing by all of the

directors entitled to vote on it, whether by signed document, fax, email or any other method of

transmitting legibly recorded messages, is as valid and effective as if it had been passed at a meeting of

the directors or of the committee of the directors duly called and held. Such resolution may be in two or

more counterparts which together are deemed to constitute one resolution in writing. A resolution passed

in that manner is effective on the date stated in the resolution or on the latest date stated on any

counterpart. A resolution of the directors or of any committee of the directors passed in accordance with

this Article 18.12 is deemed to be a proceeding at a meeting of directors or of the committee of the

directors and to be as valid and effective as if it had been passed at a meeting of the directors or of the

committee of the directors that satisfies all the requirements of the Business Corporations Act and all the

requirements of these Articles relating to meetings of the directors or of a committee of the directors.

19. EXECUTIVE AND OTHER COMMITTEES

19.] Appointment and Powers of Executive Committee

The directors may, by resolution, appoint an executive committee consisting of the director or directors

that they consider appropriate, and this committee has, during the intervals between meetings of the

board of directors, all of the directors’ powers, except:

(1) the power to ﬁll vacancies in the board of directors;

(2) the power to change the membership of, or ﬁll vacancies in, any committee of the directors; and

(3) such other powers, if any, as may be set out in the resolution or any subsequent directors’
resolution.


19.2 Appointment and Powers of Other Committees
The directors may, by resolution:
(1) appoint one or more committees (other than the executive committee) consisting of the director or
directors that they consider appropriate;
(2) delegate to a committee appointed under paragraph (1) any of the directors’ powers, except:
(a) the power to fill vacancies in the board of directors;
3 (b) the power to change the membership of, or fill vacancies in, any committee of the directors;
and
l
‘i (c) the power to appoint or remove ofﬁcers appointed by the directors; and
‘ (3) make any delegation referred to in paragraph (2) subject to the conditions set out in the resolution
or any subsequent directors’ resolution.

19.3 Obligations of Committees

Any committee appointed under Articles 19.1 or 19.2, in the exercise of the powers delegated to it, must:

(1) conform to any rules that may from time to time be imposed on it by the directors; and

(2) report every act or thing done in exercise of those powers at such times as the directors may
require.

19.4 Powers of Board

The directors may, at any time, with respect to a committee appointed under Articles 191 or 19.2:

(1) revoke or alter the authority given to the committee, or override a decision made by the committee,
except as to acts done before such revocation, alteration or overriding;

(2) ten-ninate the appointment of, or change the membership of, the committee; and

(3) ﬁll vacancies in the committee.

19.5 Committee Meetings

Subject to Article 193(1) and unless the directors otherwise provide in the resolution appointing the

committee or in any subsequent resolution, with respect to a committee appointed under Articles 19.1 or

19.2:

(1) the committee may meet and adjoum as it thinks proper;

(2) the committee may elect a chair of its meetings but, if no chair of a meeting is elected, orVif at a
meeting the chair of the meeting is not present within 15 minutes after the time set for holding the
meeting, the directors present who are members of the committee may choose one of their number
to chair the meeting;

(3) a majority of the members of the committee constitutes a quorum of the committee; and


(4) questions arising at any meeting of the committee are determined by a majority of votes of the
members present, and in case of an equality of votes, the chair of the meeting does not have a
second or casting vote,

20. OFFICERS

20.1 Directors May Appoint Ofﬁcers

The directors may, from time to time, appoint such ofﬁcers, if any, as the directors determine and the

directors may, at any time, terminate any such appointment.

20.2 Functions, Duties and Powers of Ofﬁcers

The directors may, for each ofﬁcer:

(1) determine the functions and duties of the ofﬁcer;

(2) entrust to and confer on the ofﬁcer any of the powers exercisable by the directors on such terms
and conditions and with such restrictions as the directors think ﬁt; and

(3) revoke, withdraw, alter or vary all or any of the functions, duties and powers of the officer.

20.3 Qualiﬁcations

No oﬁcer may be appointed unless that oﬁicer is qualiﬁed in accordance with the Business

Corporations Act. One person may hold more than one position as an ofﬁcer of the Company. Any

person appointed as the chair of the board or as the managing director must be a director. Any other

oﬁicer need not be a director.

20.4 Remuneration and Terms of Appointment

All appointments of officers are to be made on the terms and conditions and at the remuneration

(whether by way of salary, fee, commission, participation in proﬁts or otherwise) that the directors thinks

ﬁt and are subject to termination at the pleasure of the directors, and an oﬂicer may in addition to such

remuneration be entitled to receive, aﬂer he or she ceases to hold such ofﬁce or leaves the employment
of the Company, a pension or gratuity.

21. INDEMNIFICATION

21.1 Deﬁnitions

In this Article 21:

(1) “eligible penalty“ means a judgment, penalty or fine awarded or imposed in, or an amount paid in
settlement of, an eligible proceeding;

(2) “eligible proceeding” means a legal proceeding or investigative action, whether current,
threatened, pending or completed, in which a director, former director or alternate director elf-the
Company (an “eligible party”) or any of the heirs and legal personal representatives of the eligible
party, by reason of the eligible party being or having been a director or alternate director of the
Company:


(a) is or may be joined as a party; or
(b) is or may be liable for or in respect of a judgment, penalty or ﬁne in, or expenses related to,
the proceeding;
(3) “expenses” has the meaning set out in the Business Corporations Act.
21.2 Mandatory Indemniﬁcation of Directors and Former Directors
Subject to the Business Corporations Act, the Company must indemnify a director, former director or
alternate director of the Company and his or her heirs and legal personal representatives against all
eligible penalties to which such person is or may be liable, and the Company must, after the ﬁnal
disposition of an eligible proceeding, pay the expenses actually and reasonably incurred by such person
in respect of that proceeding. Each director and alternate director is deemed to have contracted with the
Company on the terms of the indemnity contained in this Article 212.
21.3 Indemniﬁcation of Other Persons
Subject to any restrictions in the Business Corporations Act, the Company may indemnify any person.
21.4 Non-Compliance with Business Corporations Act
The failure of a director, alternate director or oﬁicer of the Company to comply with the Business
Corporations Act or these Articles does not invalidate any indemnity to which he or she is entitled under
this Part.
21.5 Company May Purchase Insurance
The Company may purchase and maintain insurance for the beneﬁt of any person (or his or her heirs or
legal personal representatives) who:
(1) is or was a director, alternate director, ofﬁcer, employee or agent of the Company;
(2) is or was a director, alternate director, oﬁicer, employee or agent of a corporation at a time when
the corporation is or was an affiliate of the Company;
(3) at the request of the Company, is or was a director, alternate director, ofﬁcer, employee or agent of
a corporation or of a partnership, trust, joint venture or other unincorporated entity;
(4) at the request of the Company, holds or held a position equivalent to that of a director, alternate
director or ofﬁcer of a partnership, trust, joint venture or other unincorporated entity;
against any liability incurred by him or her as such director, alternate director, ofﬁcer, employee or agent
or person who holds or held such equivalent position.
22. DIVIDENDS
22.1 Payment of Dividends Subject to Special Rights
The provisions of this Article 22 are subject to the rights, if any, of shareholders holding shares with
special rights as to dividends.


22.2 Declaration of Dividends

Subject to the Business Corporations Act, the directors may from time to time declare and authorize

payment of such dividends as they may deem advisable.

22.3 No Notice Required

The directors need not give notice to any shareholder of any declaration under Article 22.2.

22.4 Record Date

The directors may set a date as the record date for the purpose of determining shareholders entitled to

receive payment of a dividend. The record date must not precede the date on which the dividend is to be

paid by more than two months. If no record date is set, the record date is 5 pm. on the date on which the
directors pass the resolution declaring the dividend.

22.5 Manner of Paying Dividend

A resolution declaring a dividend may direct payment of the dividend wholly or partly by the distribution

of speciﬁc assets or of fully paid shares or of bonds, debentures or other securities of the Company, or in

any one or more of those ways.

22.6 Settlement of Difﬁculties

If any difﬁculty arises in regard to a distribution under Article 22.5, the directors may settle the difﬁculty

as they deem advisable, and, in particular, may:

(1) set the value for distribution of speciﬁc assets;

(2) determine that cash payments in substitution for all or any part of the speciﬁc assets to which any
shareholders are entitled may be made to any shareholders on the basis of the value so ﬁxed in
order to adjust the rights of all parties; and

(3) vest any such speciﬁc assets in trustees for the persons entitled to the dividend.

22.7 When Dividend Payable

Any dividend may be made payable on such date as is ﬁxed by the directors.

22.8 Dividends to be Paid in Accordance with Number of Shares

All dividends on shares of any class or series of shares must be declared and paid according to the

number of such shares held.

22.9 Receipt by Joint Shareholders

If several persons are joint shareholders of any share, any one of them may give an effective receipt for

any dividend, bonus or other money payable in respect of the share.

22.10 Dividend Bears No Interest

No dividend bears interest against the Company.


22.11 Fractional Dividends
If a dividend to which a shareholder is entitled includes a fraction of the smallest monetary unit of the
currency of the dividend, that fraction may be disregarded in making payment of the dividend and that
payment represents full payment of the dividend
22.12 Payment of Dividends
Any dividend or other distribution payable in cash in respect of shares may be paid by cheque, made
payable to the order of the person to whom it is sent, and mailed to the address of the shareholder, or in
the case of joint shareholders, to the address of the joint shareholder who is ﬁrst named on the central
securities register, or to the person and to the address the shareholder or joint shareholders may direct in
writing. The mailing of such cheque will, to the extent of the sum represented by the cheque (plus the
amount of the tax required by law to be deducted), discharge all liability for the dividend unless such
cheque is not paid on presentation or the amount of tax so deducted is not paid to the appropriate taxing
authority
22.13 Capitalization of Surplus
Notwithstanding anything contained in these Articles, the directors may from time to time capitalize any
surplus of the Company and may from time to time issue, as fully paid, shares or any bonds, debentures
or other securities of the Company as a dividend representing the surplus or any part of the surplus
23. DOCUMENTS, RECORDS AND REPORTS
23.1 Recording of Financial Affairs
The directors must cause adequate accounting records to be kept to record properly the ﬁnancial atfairs
and condition of the Company and to comply with the Business Corporations Act.
23.2 Inspection of Accounting Records
Unless the directors determine otherwise, or unless otherwise determined by ordinary resolution, no
shareholder of the Company is entitled to inspect or obtain a copy of any accounting records of the
Company.
24. NOTICES
24.] Method of Giving Notice
Unless the Business corpora/ions Act or these Articles provides otherwise, a notice, statement, report or
other record required or permitted by the Business Corporalionr Act or these Articles to be sent by or to
a person may be sent by any one of the following methods:
(1) mail addressed to the person at the applicable address for that person as follows:

(a) for a record mailed to a shareholder, the shareholder’s registered address;

(b), for a record mailed to a director or ofﬁcer, the prescribed address for mailing shown for the

director or ofﬁcer in the records kept by the Company or the mailing address provrded by the
recipient for the sending of that record or records of that class;


(c) in any other case, the mailing address of the intended recipient;

(2) delivery at the applicable address for that person as follows, addressed to the person:

(a) for a record delivered to a shareholder, the shareholder’s registered address;

(b) for a record delivered to a director or officer, the prescribed address for delivery shown for the
director or ofﬁcer in the records kept by the Company or the delivery address provided by the
recipient for the sending of that record or records of that class;

(c) in any other case, the delivery address of the intended recipient;

(3) sending the record by fax to the fax number provided by the intended recipient for the sending of
that record or rccords of that class;

(4) sending the record by email to the email address provided by the intended recipient for the sending
of that record or records of that class;

(5) physical delivery to the intended recipient.

24.2 Deemed Receipt of Mailing

A record that is mailed to a person by ordinary mail to the applicable address for that person referred to

in Article 24.] is deemed to be received by the person to whom it was mailed on the day, Saturdays,

Sundays and holidays excepted, following the date of mailing.

24.3 Certiﬁcate of Sending

A certiﬁcate signed by the secretary, if any, or other oﬁicer of the Company or of any other corporation

acting in that behalf for the Company stating that a notice, statement, report or other record was

addressed as required by Article 24.1, prepaid and mailed or otherwise sent as permitted by Article 24.1

is conclusive evidence of that fact.

24.4 Notice to Joint Shareholders

A notice, statement, report or other record may be provided by the Company to the joint shareholders of

a share by providing the notice to the joint shareholder ﬁrst named in the central securities register in

respect of the share,

24.5 Notice to Trustees

A notice, statement, report or other record may be provided by the Company to the persons entitled to a

share in consequence of the death, bankruptcy or incapacity of a shareholder by:

(l) mailing the record, addressed to them:

(a) by name, by the title of the legal personal representative of the deceased or incapacitated
shareholder, by the title of trustee of the bankrupt shareholder or by any similar description;
and

(b) at the address, if any, supplied to the Company for that purpose by the persons claiming to be
so entitled; or


(2) if an address referred to in paragraph (l)(b) has not been supplied to the Company, by giving the
notice in a manner in which it might have been given if the death, bankruptcy or incapacity had not
occurred.

25. SEAL
25.1 Who May Attest Seal
Except as provided in Articles 25.2 and 25.3, the Company’s seal, if any, must not be impressed on any
record except when that impression is attested by the signatures of:
(1) any two directors;
(2) any ofﬁcer, together with any director;
(3) if the Company only has one director, that director; or
(4) any one or more directors or ofﬁcers or persons as may be determined by the directors.
25.2 Sealing Copies
For the purpose of certifying under seal a certiﬁcate of incumbency of the directors or ofﬁcers of the
Company or a true copy of any resolution or other document, despite Article 25‘], the impression of the
sea] may be attested by the signature of any director or ofﬁcer.
25.3 Mechanical Reproduction of Seal
The directors may authorize the seal to be impressed by third parties on share certiﬁcates or bonds,
debentures or other securities of the Company as they may determine appropriate from time to time. To
enable the seal to be impressed on any share certiﬁcates or bonds, debentures or other securities of the
Company, whether in deﬁnitive or interim form, on which facsimiles of any of the signatures of the
directors or oﬁicers of the Company are, in accordance with the Business Corporations Act or these
Articles, printed or otherwise mechanically reproduced, there may be delivered to the person employed
to engrave, lithograph or print such deﬁnitive or interim share certiﬁcates or bonds, debentures or other
securities one or more unmounted dies reproducing the seal and the chair of the board or any senior
ofﬁcer together with the secretary, treasurer, secretary-treasurer, an assistant secretary, an assistant
treasurer or an assistant secretary-treasurer may in writing authorize such person to cause the seal to be
impressed on such deﬁnitive or interim share certiﬁcates or bonds, debentures or other securities by the
use of such dies. Share certiﬁcates or bonds, debentures or other securities to which the seal has been so
impressed are for all purposes deemed to be under and to bear the seal impressed on them.

26. PROHIBITIONS

26.] Deﬁnitions

In this Article 26:

(l) “designated security” means:

(a) a voting security of the Company;


(b) a security of the Company that is not a debt security and that carries a residual right to
participate in the earnings of the Company or, on the liquidation or winding up of the
Company, in its assets; or

(c) a security of the Company convertible, directly or indirectly, into a security described in ‘
paragraph (a) or (b);

(2) “security” has the meaning assigned in the Securities Act (British Columbia);
(3) “voting security” means a security of the Company that:

(a) is not a debt security, and r

(b) carries a voting right either under all circumstances or under some circumstances that have
occurred and are continuing.

26.2 Application

Article 26.3 does not apply to the Company if and for so long as it is a public company or a pre-existing
reporting company which has the Statutory Reporting Company Provisions as part of its Articles or to
which the Statutory Reporting Company Provisions apply.

26.3 Consent Required for Transfer of Shares or Designated Securities

No share or designated security may be sold, transferred or otherwise disposed of without the consent of
the directors and the directors are not required to give any reason for refusing to consent to any such sale,
transfer or other disposition.


Schedule “A”
SHOSHONI GOLD LTD.
(the “Company”)
ADVANCE NOTICE PROVISIONS
14.12  Nominations of Directors 
 
Only persons who are eligible under the Business Corporations Act and who are nominated in accordance 
with the following procedures shall be eligible for election as directors of the Company:
(1)
nominations  of  persons  for  election  to  the  board  may  be  made  at  any  annual  meeting  of 
shareholders or at any special meeting of shareholders if one of the purposes for which the special 
meeting was called was the election of directors:
(a)
(b)
by or at the direction of the board, including pursuant to a notice of meeting;
by or at the direction or request of one or more shareholders pursuant to a proposal made 
in accordance with Division 7 of Part 5 of the Business Corporations Act, or a requisition 
of the shareholders made in accordance with section 167 the Business Corporations Act; 
or
(c)
by any person (a “Nominating Shareholder”):
(i)
who,  at  the  close  of  business  on  the  date  of  the  giving  by  the  Nominating 
Shareholder of the notice provided for below in this Article 14.12 and at the close 
of  business  on  the  record  date  for  notice  of  such  meeting,  is  entered  in  the 
Company’s securities register as a holder of one or more common shares carrying 
the right to vote at such meeting or who beneficially owns shares that are entitled 
to be voted at such meeting; and
(ii)
who complies with the notice procedures set forth below in this Article 14.12;
(2)
in addition to any other applicable requirements, for a nomination to be made by a Nominating 
Shareholder, the Nominating Shareholder must have given timely (in accordance with paragraph 
(3) below) notice thereof in proper written form (in accordance with paragraph (4) below) to the 
Secretary of the Company at the head office of the Company;
(3)
to be timely, a Nominating Shareholder’s notice to the Secretary of the Company must be made:
(a)
in the case of an annual meeting of shareholders, not less than 30 nor more than 65 days 
prior to the date of the annual meeting of shareholders; provided, however, that in the 
event the annual meeting of shareholders is to be held on a date that is less than 50 days 
after  the  date  (the  “Notice  Date”)  on  which  the  first  public  announcement  (as  defined 
below)  of  the  date  of  the  annual  meeting  was  made,  notice  by  the  Nominating 
Shareholder  may  be  made  not  later  than  the  close  of  business  on  the  tenth  (10th)  day 
following the Notice Date; and
(b)
in the case of a special  meeting (which is not also an annual meeting) of shareholders 
called for the purpose of electing directors (whether or not called for other purposes), not 
later than the close of business on the fifteenth (15th) day following the day on which the
8
first  public  announcement  (as  defined  below)  of  the  date  of  the  special  meeting  of 
shareholders was made,
the time periods for giving a Nominating Shareholder notice set forth above shall in all cases be 
determined based on the original date of the applicable annual meeting or special meeting of 
shareholders and, in no event shall any adjournment or postponement of a meeting of 
shareholders or the reconvening of any adjourned or postponed meeting of shareholders, or the 
announcement thereof, commence a new time period for the giving of a Nominating 
Shareholder's notice as described above;
(4)
to be in proper written form, a Nominating Shareholder’s notice to the Secretary of the Company 
must set forth:
(a)
(b)
the effective date of the information in the Nominating Shareholder’s notice, which date 
shall be within 10 calendar days of the date of delivery of such notice to the Company;
as to each person whom the Nominating Shareholder proposes to nominate for election as 
a director:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
the name, age, business address and residential address of the person;
the present principal occupation, business or employment of the person within 
the  preceding  five  years,  as  well  as  the  name  and  principal  business  of  any 
company in which such employment is carried on;
the citizenship of such person;
the class or series and number of shares in the capital of the Company which are 
controlled  or  which  directly  or  indirectly  controlled  or  directed  or  which  are 
owned  beneficially  or  of  record  by  the  person  as  of  the  record  date  for  the 
meeting  of  shareholders  (if  such  date  shall  then  have  been  made  publicly 
available and shall have occurred) and as of the date of such notice;
the  amount  and  material  terms  of  any  other  securities,  including  any  options, 
warrants  or  convertible  securities,  in  the  capital  of  the  Company,  which  are 
controlled or which are owned beneficially or of record by the person as of the 
record  date  of  the  meeting  of  shareholders  (if  such  date  shall  then  have  been 
made publicly available and shall have occurred) and also as of the date of such 
notice;
confirmation that the person meets the qualifications of directors set out in the 
Business Corporations Act;
a  personal  information  form  in  the  form  prescribed  by  the  principal  stock 
exchange on which the shares of the Company then trade; and
any  other  information  relating  to  the  person  that  would  be  required  to  be 
disclosed  in  a  dissident’s  proxy  circular  in  connection  with  solicitations  of 
proxies for election of directors pursuant to the Business Corporations Act and 
Applicable Securities Laws (as defined below);
(c)
as to the Nominating Shareholder giving the notice, full particulars regarding any proxy, 
contract, agreement, arrangement, understanding or relationship pursuant to which such 
Nominating  Shareholder  has  a  right  to  vote  or  direct  the  voting  of  any  shares  of  the
9
Company and any other information relating to such Nominating Shareholder that would 
be required to be included in a dissident’s proxy circular in connection with solicitations 
of  proxies  for  election  of  directors  pursuant  to  the  Business  Corporations  Act  and 
Applicable Securities Laws (as defined below);
(5)
(6)
the  Company  may  require  any  proposed  nominee  to  furnish  such  other  information  as  may 
reasonably be required by the Company to determine the eligibility of such proposed nominee to 
serve  as  an  independent  director  of  the  Company  or  that  would  reasonably  be  expected  to  be 
material to a reasonable shareholder’s understanding of the independence and/or qualifications, or 
lack thereof, of such proposed nominee;
no  person  shall  be  eligible  for  election  as  a  director  of  the  Company  unless  nominated  in 
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  this  Article  14.12;  provided,  however,  that  nothing  in  this 
Article  14.12  shall  be  deemed  to  preclude  discussion  by  a  shareholder  (as  distinct  from  the 
nomination of directors) at a meeting of shareholders of any matter that is properly before such 
meeting pursuant to the provisions of the Business Corporations Act or at the discretion of the 
Chairman; and the Chairman of the meeting shall have the power and duty to determine whether a 
nomination was made in accordance with the procedures set forth in the foregoing provisions and, 
if any proposed nomination is not in compliance with such foregoing provisions, to declare that 
such defective nomination shall be disregarded;
(7)
for purposes of this Article 14.12:
(a)
(b)
“Applicable Securities Laws” means the applicable securities legislation of each relevant 
province and territory of Canada, as amended from time to time, the rules, regulations 
and  forms  made  or  promulgated  under  any  such  statute  and  the  published  national 
instruments,  multilateral  instruments,  policies,  bulletins  and  notices  of  the  securities 
commission  and  similar  regulatory  authority  of  each  province  and  territory  of  Canada; 
and
“public announcement” shall mean disclosure in a press release reported by a national 
news service in Canada, or in a document publicly filed by the Company under its profile 
on the System of Electronic Document Analysis and Retrieval at www.sedar.com; and
notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  these  Articles,  notice  given  to  the  Secretary  of  the 
Company  pursuant  to  this  Article  14.12  may  only  be  given  by  personal  delivery,  facsimile 
transmission or by email (at such email address as stipulated from time to time by the Secretary 
of the Company for purposes of this notice), and shall be deemed to have been given and made 
only at the time it is served by personal delivery, email (at the address as aforesaid) or sent by 
facsimile  transmission  (provided  that  receipt  of  confirmation  of  such  transmission  has  been 
received) to the Secretary at the address of the head office of the Company; provided that if such 
delivery or electronic communication is made on a day which is a not a business day, or later than 
5:00 p.m. (Vancouver time) on a day which is a business day, then such delivery or electronic 
communication shall be deemed to have been made on the subsequent day that is a business day; 
and
notwithstanding the foregoing, the board may, in its sole discretion, waive any requirement in this 
Article 14.12.
(8)
(9)