
DEF 14C 1 d234946ddef14c.htm DEF 14C DEF 14C
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
INFORMATION REQUIRED IN INFORMATION STATEMENT
SCHEDULE 14C INFORMATION
Information Statement Pursuant to Section 14(c) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Check the appropriate box:
Preliminary Information Statement
Confidential, for Use of the Commission Only (as permitted by Rule 14c-5(d)(2))
Definitive Information Statement
SAEXPLORATION HOLDINGS, INC.
(Name of Registrant As Specified In Its Charter)
¨
¨
x
Payment of Filing Fee (Check the appropriate box):
x
¨
No fee required.
Fee computed on the table below per Exchange Act Rules 14c-5(g) and 0-11.
(1)
Title of each class of securities to which transaction applies:
Aggregate number of securities to which transaction applies:
(2)
Per unit price or other underlying value of transaction computed pursuant to Exchange Act Rule 0-11 (set forth the
amount on which the filing fee is calculated and state how it was determined):
(3)
(4)
Proposed maximum aggregate value of transaction:
(5)
Total fee paid:
Fee paid previously with preliminary materials.
Check box if any part of the fee is offset as provided by Exchange Act Rule 0-11(a)(2) and identify the filing for which the
offsetting fee was paid previously. Identify the previous filing by registration statement number, or the Form or Schedule and
the date of its filing.
(1)
Amount Previously Paid:
(2)
(3)
(4)
Form, Schedule or Registration Statement No.:
Filing Party:
Date Filed:
¨
¨
SAEXPLORATION HOLDINGS, INC.
1160 Dairy Ashford Rd., Suite 160
Houston, Texas 77079
To the Stockholders of SAExploration Holdings, Inc.:
NOTICE OF STOCKHOLDER ACTION BY WRITTEN CONSENT
We are delivering this Notice and the accompanying Information Statement to inform our stockholders that on August 4, 2016, the
holders of a majority of the shares of SAExploration Holdings, Inc. (the “Company,” “our” or “we”) common stock, $.0001 par value
per share (the “Common Stock”) adopted resolutions by written consent, in lieu of a meeting of stockholders, to approve the 2016
Long-Term  Incentive  Plan  (the  “2016  Plan”),  which  is  an  incentive  compensation  plan  for  employees  of  the  Company  and  its
subsidiaries.
The 2016 Plan was approved by stockholder written consent pursuant to Section 228 of the Delaware General Corporation Law and
Section 2.12 of the Company’s Second Amended and Restated By-Laws (the “By-Laws”), which permit any action that may be taken
at a meeting of the stockholders to be taken by written consent by the holders of the number of shares of stock required to approve
the action at a meeting at which all shares entitled to vote were present and voted. All necessary corporate approvals in connection
with the adoption of the 2016 Plan have been obtained.
The  Information  Statement  is  being  furnished  to  the  holders  of  the  Company’s  Common  Stock  pursuant  to  Section  14(c)  of  the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), the rules thereunder and Section 2.12 of the By-Laws solely for
the purpose of informing our stockholders of this corporate action before it takes effect. In accordance with Rule 14c-2 under the
Exchange  Act,  the  2016  Plan  shall  become  effective  twenty  calendar  days  following  the  mailing  of  this  Notice  and  the
accompanying Information Statement.
The  2016  Plan  was  approved  and  recommended  by  our  Board  of  Directors  prior  to  the  stockholder  action  by  written  consent
described in this Information Statement.
WE ARE NOT ASKING YOU FOR A PROXY
AND YOU ARE REQUESTED NOT TO SEND US A PROXY
You have the right to receive this Notice and the accompanying Information Statement if you were a stockholder of record of our
Company at the close of business on August 3, 2016.
By Order of the Board of Directors
Brent Whiteley
Chief Financial Officer, General Counsel and
Secretary
August 15, 2016
SAEXPLORATION HOLDINGS, INC.
1160 Dairy Ashford Rd., Suite 160
Houston, Texas 77079
INFORMATION STATEMENT
General
In this Information Statement, unless the context otherwise requires, “we,” “our,” “us,” the “Company” and similar expressions refer to
SAExploration Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation.
This Information Statement is being sent to inform our stockholders that we have obtained consent from the holders of a majority of
the shares of the Company’s common stock, $.0001 par value per share (the “Common Stock”) to approve the 2016 Long-Term
Incentive Plan (the “2016 Plan”), which is an incentive compensation plan for employees of the Company and its subsidiaries.
This Information Statement is being mailed on or about August 15, 2016 to the Company’s stockholders of record as of August 3,
2016  (the  “Record  Date”).  This  Information  Statement  constitutes  notice  to  our  stockholders  of  corporate  actions  taken  by  our
stockholders without a meeting as required by the Delaware General Corporation Law (the “DGCL”) and pursuant to Section 2.12 of
the By-Laws.
We will pay the costs of preparing and sending out the enclosed Notice and this Information Statement.
The date of this Information Statement is August 15, 2016.
WE ARE NOT ASKING YOU FOR A PROXY
AND YOU ARE REQUESTED NOT TO SEND US A PROXY
The Action by Written Consent
As of the Record Date, the holders of a majority of the Company’s outstanding Common Stock (the “Consenting Stockholders”) who
executed a written consent approving the 2016 Plan, as described herein (the “Consent”), collectively beneficially owned 6,644,533
shares of our outstanding Common Stock. As of the Record Date, there were 9,344,288 shares of our Common Stock issued and
outstanding. No payment was made to any person or entity in consideration of execution of the Consent.
Voting and Vote Required
The  Company  is  not  seeking  consents,  authorizations  or  proxies  from  you.  Section  228  of  the  DGCL  (“Section  228”)  and
Section 2.12 of the By-Laws provide that the written consent of the holders of outstanding shares of stock, having not less than the
minimum number of votes which would be necessary to authorize or take such action at a meeting at which all shares entitled to
vote thereon were present and voted, may be substituted for a meeting. Approval of at least a majority of outstanding stock entitled to
vote thereon was required to approve the 2016 Plan.
As  of  the  Record  Date,  the  Company  had  9,344,288  shares  of  Common  Stock  outstanding  and  entitled  to  vote.  Each  share  of
Common Stock is entitled to one vote. On the Record Date, the Consenting Stockholders collectively beneficially owned 6,644,533
shares of Common Stock, which represents a majority of the Company’s outstanding Common Stock. Accordingly,  the  written
consent executed by the Consenting Stockholders pursuant to Section 228 and Section 2.12 of the By-Laws is sufficient to
approve the 2016 Plan and no further stockholder action is required to approve this matter.
Notice Pursuant to Section 228
Pursuant to Section 228 and Section 2.12 of the By-Laws, the Company is required to provide prompt notice of the taking of a
corporate  action  by  written  consent  to  the  Company’s  stockholders  who  have  not  consented  in  writing  to  such  action.  This
Information Statement serves as the notice required by Section 228 and Section 2.12 of the By-Laws.
Dissenters’ Rights of Appraisal
The  DGCL  does  not  provide  dissenters’  rights  of  appraisal  to  our  stockholders  in  connection  with  the  matters  discussed  in  this
Information Statement.
APPROVAL OF THE SAEXPLORATION HOLDINGS, INC.
2016 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
Background
The 2016 Plan has been approved by the Company’s Board of Directors on August 3, 2016, the administration of which has been
delegated by the Board of Directors to the Compensation Committee of our Board of Directors (the “Compensation Committee”), and
the Consenting Stockholders and will take effect on the twentieth (20th) day following the date on which this Information Statement is
first sent or given to our stockholders. The Company has submitted the 2016 Plan to the Consenting Stockholders for their approval
so that options granted under the 2016 Plan may qualify for treatment as incentive stock options, awards under the 2016 Plan may
constitute performance-based compensation not subject to Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the
“Code”) and the 2016 Plan will comply with the listing standards of the Nasdaq Global Market.
A summary of the principal features of the 2016 Plan is provided below, but is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of
the 2016 Plan, which is attached to this Information Statement as Annex A.
Description of 2016 Plan
Purpose
The purpose of the 2016 Plan is to promote the long-term success of the Company and create value for our stockholders. The 2016
Plan is intended to:
•
encourage our employees to focus on long-range objectives;
•
help the Company attract and retain employees with exceptional qualifications; and
•
further align our employees’ interests with those of our other stockholders through compensation that is based on our Common
Stock.
As used in this description of the 2016 Plan, “Committee” means either the Compensation Committee or the director(s) and/or the
chief executive officer of the Company appointed by the Board of Directors to make grants to employees who are not executive
officers, as applicable.
Eligible Participants
Employees of the Company (including employees of our subsidiaries or affiliates, as specified in the 2016 Plan) are eligible to
receive awards under the 2016 Plan. As of the date of this Information Statement, there are approximately 2,360 such employees.
The Committee may grant awards to employees who are foreign nationals or who are employed by the Company or any subsidiary
outside the United States of America or who provide services to us under an agreement with a foreign nation or agency, on terms
and conditions different from those specified in the 2016 Plan, as the Committee deems necessary to achieve the purposes of the
2016 Plan and comply with applicable foreign laws.
Administration
-2-
The 2016 Plan will be administered by the Compensation Committee. Our Board of Directors may delegate to a committee of two or
more non-employee directors who are also “outside directors” as defined under Section 162(m) of the Code and “nonemployee
directors” as defined in Rule 16b-3 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”) when granting
awards to a “covered employee” within the meaning of Section 162(m)(3) of the Code who is then subject to Section 16 of the
Exchange Act.
Our Board of Directors may (a) delegate to a committee of one or more members of the Board of Directors who are not “outside
directors” the authority to grant awards to eligible persons who are either (i) not then “covered employees” and are not expected to
be “covered employees” at the time of recognition of income resulting from such award or (ii) not persons with respect to whom the
Company wishes to comply with Section 162(m) of the Code or (b) delegate to a committee of one or more members of the Board of
Directors  who  are  not  “nonemployee  directors”  the  authority  to  grant  awards  to  eligible  persons  who  are  not  then  subject  to
Section 16 of the Exchange Act. The Board of Directors may also appoint one or more directors and/or the chief executive officer to
make grants of awards to employees who are not executive officers under Section 16 of the Exchange Act. The Board of Directors
has delegated administration of the 2016 Plan to the Compensation Committee.
Subject  to  the  Company’s  obligations  pursuant  to  any  applicable  employment  agreements,  the  Committee  has  the  authority  to
interpret and construe all provisions of the 2016 Plan and to make all decisions and determinations relating to the operation of the
2016 Plan, including the authority and discretion to:
•
select the individuals to receive awards;
•
determine the type, number, vesting requirements, and other features and conditions of the awards;
•
interpret and administer the 2016 Plan;
•
make all other decisions relating to the operation of the 2016 Plan and reconcile any inconsistency in, correct any defect in
and/or supply any omission in the 2016 Plan; and
•
carry out any other duties delegated to it by the Board of Directors under the 2016 Plan.
Duration
The 2016 Plan will be effective on the twentieth day following the date on which this Information Statement is first sent or given to
our stockholders. The 2016 Plan will continue in effect until the date when the 2016 Plan is terminated by our Board of Directors as
provided in the 2016 Plan, provided, however, that no incentive stock options, or “ISOs,” may be granted after the date that is ten
(10) years after the date on which the approval by stockholders is effective.
Shares Subject to 2016 Plan
Upon  effectiveness  of  the  2016  Plan,  subject  to  adjustment  as  described  in  the  2016  Plan,  total  awards  that  may  be  issued  or
transferred (i) upon the exercise of options or stock appreciation rights, (ii) as restricted shares and released from outstanding risks
of  forfeiture  thereof,  (iii)  in  payment  of  stock  units,  (iv)  in  payment  of  performance  cash  awards  that  have  been  earned  or  (v)  in
payment of dividend equivalents paid with respect to awards made under the 2016 Plan are limited to a maximum of 1,038,258
shares of Common Stock, which will be immediately available for issuance under the 2016 Plan. These shares may be shares of
original issuance or treasury shares. The aggregate number of shares of Common Stock available under the 2016 Plan issued to
participants that may be issued with respect to options and stock appreciation rights, including upon the exercise of incentive stock
options, over its life shall not exceed 519,129 shares of Common Stock, in each case subject to adjustment as described in the 2016
Plan. The aggregate number of shares of Common Stock and restricted
-3-
shares issued to all participants pursuant to all awards of restricted shares and stock units made under the 2016 Plan over its life
shall not exceed 519,129 shares of Common Stock, in each case subject to adjustment as described in the 2016 Plan. For the
avoidance  of  doubt  shares  of  Common  Stock  available  under  the  2016  Plan  shall  not  be  issued  to  fund  any  of  the  annual
performance awards provided for under any employment agreement.
The 2016 Plan requires that 622,955 of the shares reserved for issuance under the 2016 Plan be granted by the Committee to
certain employees of the Company or any subsidiary identified in the 2016 Plan as soon as administratively practicable after receipt
by the Company of stockholder approval of the 2016 Plan and the effectiveness of stockholder approval of the 2016 Plan, in the form
of stock units and options, on the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the 2016 Plan (the “MIP Shares”).
The aggregate number of shares of Common Stock available for issuance or transfer under the 2016 Plan will be reduced by (i) one
(1) share of Common Stock for every one (1) share of Common Stock subject to an option or stock appreciation right granted under
the 2016 Plan and (ii) one (1) share of Common Stock for every one (1) share of Common Stock issued or transferred in connection
with an award other than an option or stock appreciation right granted under the 2016 Plan. Subject to the paragraph below and the
2016 Plan, shares of Common Stock covered by an award granted under the 2016 Plan will not be counted as used unless and until
they are actually issued or transferred.
The following shares of Common Stock will not be added to the aggregate number available for issuance or transfer: (i) shares of
Common Stock tendered or otherwise used in payment of the exercise price of an option; (ii) shares of Common Stock withheld or
otherwise used by the Company to satisfy a tax withholding obligation; (iii) shares of Common Stock subject to a stock appreciation
right  that  are  not  actually  issued  in  connection  with  its  settlement  of  shares  of  Common  Stock  on  exercise  of  the  award;  and
(iv) shares of Common Stock reacquired by the Company on the open market or otherwise using cash proceeds from the exercise of
options. If a participant has elected to give up the right to receive compensation in exchange for shares of Common Stock based on
fair market value, the shares of Common Stock will not count against the maximum shares of Common Stock available under the
2016 Plan. Any shares of Common Stock that become available for issuance or transfer under the 2016 Plan will be added back as
(i) one (1) share of Common Stock if such share was subject to an option or stock appreciation right granted under the 2016 Plan,
and (ii) as one (1) share of Common Stock if such share was issued or transferred pursuant to an award granted under the 2016
Plan other than an option or stock appreciation right granted under the 2016 Plan. If an award under the 2016 Plan is forfeited or is
settled in cash, the subject shares will again be available for grant under the 2016 Plan.
In the event of a subdivision of our outstanding shares of Common Stock, stock split, reverse stock split, a declaration of a dividend
payable  in  shares  of  Common  Stock,  or  a  combination  or  consolidation  of  the  outstanding  shares  of  Common  Stock  (by
reclassification or otherwise) into a lesser number of shares, or an exchange of shares, the maximum number of shares of Common
Stock  remaining  available  for  awards  under  the  2016  Plan,  the  numbers  of  shares  subject  to  outstanding  awards,  the  exercise
prices under outstanding awards and the limits on awards will be proportionately adjusted automatically, without the necessity for
Committee  action,  to  prevent  dilution  or  enlargement  of  benefits  under  the  2016  Plan.  In  the  event  of  a  declaration  of  an
extraordinary  dividend  payable  in  a  form  other  than  Common  Stock  in  an  amount  that  has  a  material  effect  on  the  price  of  our
Common Stock, a capitalization, a spin-off, any other change in the Common Stock that otherwise would result from any split-off,
spin-out, split-up or a similar occurrence, issuance of rights or warrants to purchase securities or any other corporate transaction or
event  having  an  effect  similar  to  any  of  the  foregoing,  the  Committee  will  make  such  adjustments  to  the  foregoing  as  it  deems
appropriate in its sole discretion. Moreover, in the event of any such transaction or event or in the event of a change in control, the
Committee shall provide in substitution for any outstanding awards under the 2016 Plan such alternative consideration (including
cash), if any, as it determines to be equitable in the circumstances and may require the surrender of all awards so replaced in a
manner that complies with Section 409A of the Code. In addition, for each stock option
-4-
or stock appreciation right with an exercise price greater than the consideration offered in connection with any such transaction or
event or change in control, the committee may elect to cancel such stock option or stock appreciation right. Any such adjustment to
the specified number of ISOs will be made only if and to the extent that such adjustment would not cause any option intended to
qualify as an ISO to fail to so qualify.
Award Agreements
The terms and conditions of each award made under the 2016 Plan will be outlined in a written award agreement between the
Company and the participant.
Types of Awards
The 2016 Plan provides for the following types of awards:
•
stock options;
•
stock appreciation rights;
•
restricted shares;
•
stock units; and
•
performance cash awards.
Stock Options. The Committee may from time to time award stock options to any eligible participant. Stock options give the holder
the right to purchase shares of our Common Stock within a specified time at a specified price. Two types of stock options may be
granted under the 2016 Plan: ISOs, which are subject to special U.S. tax treatment as described below, and nonstatutory options, or
“NSOs.” As specified in the applicable award agreement, awards of stock options may be subject to vesting conditions, may provide
for accelerated exercisability, including in the event of the optionee’s death, disability, or retirement or other events, and may provide
for expiration in the event the optionee ceases to be an employee. The exercise price of a stock option shall be the fair market value
(as defined in the 2016 Plan) of a share of Common Stock at the time of grant as determined by the Committee unless the option is
being granted in substitution for an outstanding option as part of a corporate transaction (such as a merger). Notwithstanding, if an
ISO is granted to a person who, at the time of grant, owns Common Stock possessing more than 10% of the total combined voting
power of all classes of our voting stock, such ISO cannot have an exercise price less than 110% of the fair market value of a share of
Common Stock at the time of grant and cannot expire more than five (5) years after the date of the original grant.
Upon exercise, the exercise price of a stock option may be paid in cash or cash equivalents or, at the discretion of the Committee, by
the surrender of Common Stock already owned by the optionee, by delivering an irrevocable instruction directing a securities broker
to sell all or part of the shares being purchased, by delivering a full recourse promissory note, or by making payment in any other
form consistent with applicable law. Except as otherwise provided in the 2016 Plan and except as described in an award agreement
for  MIP  Shares  that  are  granted  in  the  form  of  stock  options  designated  as  NSOs,  no  grant  of  options  can  become  exercisable
sooner than after one (1) year. The expiration dates of options cannot be more than ten (10) years after the date of the original grant.
The Committee may offer to buy out an outstanding stock option for cash or cash equivalents or authorize an optionee to elect to
cash out an outstanding option provided that cash payments shall not exceed the fair market value less the exercise price. Prior to
the issuance of shares of Common Stock upon the exercise of a stock option, no right to vote or receive dividends or any other rights
as a stockholder will exist for the underlying shares.
The aggregate number of shares of Common Stock that may be issued or transferred by the Company upon the exercise of ISOs will
not  exceed  207,652  shares  of  Common  Stock.  If  a  participant  awarded  an  ISO  under  the  2016  Plan  makes  a  disqualifying
disposition of such shares (which is a disposition (including any sale) within two (2) years after the date of the grant or within one
(1) year after the date of exercise), the participant must notify the Company in writing immediately following the disposition, and the
Company may, if determined by
-5-
the Committee, retain possession, as agent for the participant, of any Common Stock acquired as a result of the exercise of an ISO
until the end of the period described above, subject to complying with any instruction from the participant as to the sale of such the
Common Stock.
311,477 shares of Common Stock, or 50%, of the MIP Shares in the form of stock options that are designated as NSOs will be
granted  on  September  26,  2016,  with  exercise  prices  determined  based  on  the  volume-weighted  average  price  per  share  of
Common Stock for the 30-day period ending on the grant date and a vesting schedule, each as set forth in the (i) amended and
restated employment agreements with Jeff Hastings, Brian Beatty, Brent Whiteley, Mike Scott, and Darin Silvernagle, and (ii) the
new employment agreement with Ryan Abney, each dated as of August 3, 2016 (collectively, the “New Employment Agreements”)
and the forms of award agreements for the MIP Shares under the 2016 Plan.
Stock Appreciation Rights. The Committee may grant stock appreciation rights under the 2016 Plan; provided that no grant of stock
appreciation  rights  may  become  exercisable  sooner  than  after  one  (1)  year.  A  stock  appreciation  right  entitles  the  holder  upon
exercise  to  receive  an  amount  in  shares  of  Common  Stock,  cash  or  a  combination  thereof  (as  determined  by  the  Committee),
computed by reference to appreciation in the value of our Common Stock. Stock appreciation rights may be granted alone or in
tandem with a stock option. As specified in the applicable award agreement, awards of stock appreciation rights may be subject to
vesting conditions, may provide for accelerated exercisability, including in the event of the holder’s death, disability, or retirement or
other  events,  and  may  provide  for  forfeiture  in  the  event  the  holder  ceases  to  be  an  employee.  The  exercise  price  of  a  stock
appreciation  right  cannot  be  less  than  100%  of  the  fair  market  value  of  a  share  of  Common  Stock  on  the  date  of  grant.  Upon
exercise,  the  holder  of  a  stock  appreciation  right  will  receive  shares  of  Common  Stock,  cash,  or  a  combination  of  both,  as  the
Committee shall determine. Prior to the issuance of shares of Common Stock upon the exercise of a stock appreciation right, no
right to vote or receive dividends or any other rights as a stockholder will exist for the underlying shares.
Restricted Shares.  A  grant  of  restricted  shares  involves  the  immediate  transfer  by  us  to  a  participant  of  ownership  of  a  specific
number of shares of Common Stock in consideration of the performance of services. The Committee may grant restricted shares of
Common Stock to eligible participants, in the amounts, and subject to the terms and conditions as the Committee determines in its
discretion, as specified in an applicable restricted shares award agreement. Such award agreement may provide for accelerated
vesting  of  the  restricted  shares,  including  in  the  event  of  the  participant’s  death,  disability  or  other  events.  Awards  of  restricted
shares of Common Stock may be made in exchange for services or other lawful consideration and may or may not be contingent on
the satisfaction of performance targets. Except as otherwise described in an applicable award agreement or in the 2016 Plan, no
grant of restricted shares will have the restrictions eliminated for a period of time shorter than three (3) years if based only on the
passage of time rather than performance targets, except that the restrictions may be removed ratably during the three-year period as
determined by the Committee. Awards of restricted shares may be subject to vesting conditions and to the attainment of performance
criteria as specified in the applicable award agreement. If the award is intended to satisfy the requirements of Section 162(m) of the
Code, such performance target will be based on one or more criteria as specified in the 2016 Plan and may be subject to other
restrictions as applicable. Any conditions to vesting and performance criteria may be waived in the event of a change in control of
the Company, or the holder’s death or disability.
Subject to any restrictions, conditions and forfeiture provisions placed on such restricted shares by the Committee, any recipient of
an award of restricted shares will have all the rights of a stockholder of the Company, including the right to vote the shares and
dividend rights. However, the award agreement may require that dividends be accumulated and paid when the restricted shares
vest, be issued as additional restricted shares or be paid currently to the holder. Any dividends not paid currently will be subject to
the  same  conditions  and  restrictions,  including  the  risk  of  forfeiture,  as  the  related  award;  provided,  however,  that  dividend
equivalents or other distributions on shares of Common Stock underlying restricted shares with restrictions that lapse as a result of
achievement of performance targets will be deferred until and paid contingent upon the achievement of applicable performance
targets.
-6-
Stock Units. A grant of stock units constitutes an agreement by us to deliver shares of Common Stock or cash to the participant in
the future in consideration of the performance of services, but subject to the fulfillment of such conditions during the restriction period
as the Committee may specify. The Committee may grant units having a value equal to an identical number of shares of Common
Stock to such eligible participants, in such amounts, and subject to such terms and conditions as the Committee determines in its
discretion. Awards of stock units, other than awards of stock units that are MIP Shares, may be subject to vesting conditions and to
the  attainment  of  performance  criteria  as  specified  in  the  applicable  award  agreement.  Such  stock  units  award  agreement  may
provide for accelerated vesting of the stock units, including in the event of the participant’s death, disability or other events. Except
as otherwise provided in the 2016 Plan and except as described in an award agreement for MIP Shares that are granted in the form
of stock units, no grant of stock units will have the restrictions eliminated for a period of time shorter than three (3) years if based only
on the passage of time rather than performance targets, except that the restrictions may be removed ratably during the three-year
period as determined by the Committee. If the stock units (other than the stock units that are MIP Shares) specify that the period of
restriction  will  terminate  only  upon  the  achievement  of  performance  targets  or  that  the  stock  units  will  be  earned  based  on  the
achievement  of  performance  targets,  then,  notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  contained  in  this  paragraph,  the  period  of
restriction may not be less than one (1) year. Other than with respect to the stock units that are MIP Shares, the Committee may
include as vesting conditions or as conditions for any award of stock units the requirement that the performance of the Company or a
business unit of the Company for a specified period (not less than one (1) year) equal or exceed a target determined in advance by
the Committee. If the award of stock units is intended to satisfy the requirements of Section 162(m) of the Code, such target will be
based on one or more of the criteria set forth in the 2016 Plan and may be subject to other restrictions as applicable. Any conditions
to vesting and/or performance target may be waived in the event of a change in control of the Company, or the participant’s death or
disability.
If the requirements specified by the Committee are met, then on the designated settlement date, the holder of such units will receive
shares of Common Stock, cash or any combination thereof, equal to the fair market value of the corresponding number of shares of
Common Stock. Payment of such amount may be deferred until a later date. Stock units awarded under the 2016 Plan may include
a right to receive dividend equivalents, which would entitle the holder of a stock unit to receive a credit for the amount equal to the
dividends paid on an equal number of shares of our Common Stock while the stock unit is outstanding. If the stock units become
vested, dividend equivalents are settled in the same manner as stock units and, prior to distribution, any dividend equivalents that
are not paid are subject to the same terms and conditions as the stock units to which they attach; provided, however, that dividend
equivalents  or  other  distributions  on  shares  of  Common  Stock  underlying  stock  units  with  restrictions  that  lapse  as  a  result  of
achievement of performance targets will be deferred until and paid contingent upon the achievement of applicable performance
targets. Prior to an issuance of shares of Common Stock in settlement of a stock unit, no right to vote as a stockholder will exist with
respect to the underlying shares.
A holder of stock units will have no rights other than those of a general creditor of the Company. Stock units represent an unfunded
and unsecured obligation of the Company, subject to the terms and conditions of the applicable stock units award agreement.
311,477  shares  of  Common  Stock,  or  50%,  of  the  MIP  Shares  shall  be  in  the  form  of  stock  units  that  will  be  granted  on
September 26, 2016, with a vesting schedule as set forth in the New Employment Agreements and the forms of award agreements
for the MIP Shares under the 2016 Plan.
Performance Cash Awards. The Committee may grant cash awards contingent on the satisfaction of certain performance targets
intended to satisfy the requirements of Section 162(m) of the Code. The Committee shall include as a condition for performance
cash awards the requirement that the performance of the Company or a business unit of the Company for a specified period (not
less than one (1) year) equal or exceed a target determined in advance by the Committee. The Committee will determine such
performance metrics. If the award is intended to satisfy the requirements of Section 162(m) of the Code, such target will be based on
one or more of the criteria set forth in the 2016 Plan. Any conditions to vesting or performance criteria may be waived in the
-7-
event of a change in control of the Company, or the holder’s death or disability. If the requirements specified by the Committee are
met, the award will be paid to the holder in cash. The form and timing of payment of performance cash awards shall satisfy the
requirements of Section 409A of the Code in form and operation. The amount of a deferred distribution may be increased by an
interest factor or by dividend equivalents. A holder of an unpaid performance cash award shall have no rights other than those of a
general  creditor  of  the  Company.  Unpaid  performance  cash  awards  represent  an  unfunded  and  unsecured  obligation  of  the
Company, subject to the terms and conditions of the applicable performance cash award agreement.
Performance Goals
The Committee, in its discretion, may designate any restricted shares, stock units (other than stock units that are MIP Shares) or
performance cash award granted under the 2016 Plan as a qualified performance-based award (as defined in the 2016 Plan) in
order  to  make  the  taxable  compensation  amount  of  the  award  fully  deductible  without  regard  to  the  $1,000,000  compensation
deduction limit imposed by Section 162(m) of the Code. If an award is so designated, the Committee must establish objectively
determinable performance goals for the award which may be (i) described in terms of Company-wide objectives or objectives that
are related to the performance of the individual participant or of one or more of the subsidiaries, divisions, departments, regions,
functions  or  other  organizational  units  within  the  Company  or  its  subsidiaries;  (ii)  made  relative  to  the  performance  of  other
companies or subsidiaries, divisions, departments, regions, functions or other organizational units within such other companies; and
(iii) made relative to an index or one or more of the performance objectives. Such business criteria could include the following:
•
revenue (or any sub-component thereof)
•
revenue growth
•
operating costs
•
operating margin as a percentage of revenue
•
earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization
•
earnings before income taxes
•
net operating profit after taxes
•
net income
•
net income as a percentage of revenue
•
free cash flow
•
earnings per share
•
net operating profit after taxes per share
•
free cash flow per share
•
return on net assets employed before interest and taxes
•
return on equity, investment, invested capital, net capital employed, assets, or net assets
•
total stockholder return or relative total stockholder return (as compared with one of the Company’s peer groups)
•
safety performance metrics, including relative to industry standards
•
strategic team goals
Section 162(m)
-8-
The  2016  Plan  is  also  intended  to  enable  us  to  structure  certain  awards  so  that  they  may  be  able  to  qualify  as  “qualified
performance-based compensation” under Section 162(m) of the Code. If our equity awards qualify as “qualified performance-based
compensation”  for  purposes  of  Section  162(m)  of  the  Code,  then  we  would  generally  be  able  to  receive  a  federal  income  tax
deduction  for  certain  compensation  paid  to  our  chief  executive  officer  and  the  other  three  most  highly  compensated  executive
officers (other than our chief financial officer) in excess of $1 million for any taxable year. While we believe it is in the best interests
of the Company and our stockholders to have the ability to potentially grant “qualified performance-based compensation” under
Section  162(m)  of  the  Code,  we  may  decide  to  grant  compensation  that  will  not  qualify  as  “qualified  performance-based
compensation” for purposes of Section 162(m) of the Code. Moreover, even if we intend to grant compensation that qualifies as
“qualified  performance-based  compensation”  for  purposes  of  Section  162(m)  of  the  Code,  we  cannot  guarantee  that  such
compensation will so qualify or ultimately will be deductible by us.
With respect to performance awards, in order to satisfy the “qualified performance-based compensation” exception to the deduction
limitation  of  Section  162(m)  of  the  Code,  the  vesting  of  the  award  must  be  contingent  solely  on  the  attainment  of  one  or  more
performance goals determined by a committee of two or more outside directors. The award must also be granted pursuant to a
shareholder approved plan containing (1) the material terms of the performance criteria pursuant to which the performance goals
may be established, (2) the individuals eligible to receive awards under the plan, and (3) a specified limit on the number of shares or
value a participant may receive within a certain time period or periods. Stockholder approval of the 2016 Plan by the Consenting
Stockholders is intended to satisfy the shareholder approval requirements under Section 162(m) of the Code.
In particular, the 2016 Plan includes a list of performance measures upon which the Compensation Committee must condition a
grant or vesting of a “qualified performance-based award” pursuant to the 2016 Plan, which measures are to be based on one or
more of the performance targets set forth above.
Limitations on Grants
Subject to adjustment as described above, the maximum number of shares of Common Stock or amount of cash subject to each
type of award that may be granted under the 2016 Plan in any calendar year to any one person is as follows:
Stock Options
Stock Appreciation Rights
Restricted Shares (that are intended to qualify as “qualified performance-based compensation” under
Section 162(m) of the Code, in the aggregate)
Stock Units (that are intended to qualify as “qualified performance-based compensation” under Section 162(m) of
the Code, in the aggregate)
Performance Cash Awards (that are intended to qualify as “qualified performance-based compensation” under
Section 162(m) of the Code, in the aggregate)
100,000  
  100,000
100,000
100,000
$1,200,000
We  have  submitted  the  2016  Plan  to  the  Consenting  Stockholders  for  their  approval,  including  the  performance  measures  and
individual grant limits under the 2016 Plan, as well as the individuals eligible to receive awards under the 2016 Plan, so that options
granted under the 2016 Plan may qualify for treatment as incentive stock options, as well as to have the flexibility to potentially grant
performance-based awards under the 2016 Plan that may be fully deductible for federal income tax purposes. The approval of the
Consenting Stockholders of the 2016 Plan and the material terms for qualified performance-based compensation under the 2016
Plan will take effect on the twentieth (20th) day following the date this Information Statement is first sent or given to our stockholders.
Assuming that all other Section 162(m) requirements are met,  we  may  be  able  to  obtain  tax  deductions  with  respect  to  awards
issued under the 2016 Plan to our Section 162(m) executive officers without
-9-
regard to the limitations of Section 162(m) through the 2021 annual meeting of stockholders (in other words, for five years).
Transferability of Awards
Awards  made  under  the  2016  Plan  will  generally  not  be  transferable,  except  in  the  event  of  the  death  of  the  participant  or  as
otherwise determined by the Committee. However, the Committee may authorize all or a portion of any award (other than ISOs) to
be granted on terms which permit transfer by the participant to the spouse, parents, children, stepchildren, adoptive relationships,
sisters, brothers or grandchildren of the participant and to certain trusts, partnerships or limited liability companies related to the
participant. Following transfer, any such awards will continue to be subject to the same terms and conditions as were applicable
immediately prior to the transfer.
Change in Control; Reorganizations
An award agreement may provide, or the Committee may amend an award agreement to provide, that, upon a change in control of
the  Company,  the  award  will  vest  or  become  exercisable.  A  “change  in  control,”  unless  otherwise  defined,  includes  any  of  the
following events that occurs after the closing date:
•
•
•
a change in the composition of the Board of Directors such that a majority of the Board of Directors consists of individuals other
than directors (i) serving on the Board of Directors as of the effective date of the 2016 Plan, or (ii) nominated or appointed to the
Board of Directors by at least 50% of those directors or directors who become incumbents by virtue of such a nomination or
appointment, whom we sometimes refer to as “incumbent directors”;
a reorganization, merger, consolidation, share exchange or other business combination involving the Company or any of its
subsidiaries, or a disposition of substantially all of the Company’s assets, or the Company’s acquisition of the assets or stock of
another entity, except where the Company’s beneficial holders prior to such transaction hold at least 50% of the combined
voting power of the surviving entity, no person or group becomes a beneficial owner of 50% or more of the surviving company’s
common stock or voting power, and incumbent directors continue to constitute a majority of our Board of Directors;
at least 50% of our Common Stock has been acquired by one person or persons acting as a group; provided, however, that
stock acquisition would not result in a change in control if it would not have been made a change in control under business
combination as defined in the 2016 Plan; or
•
the Company is liquidating or selling all or substantially all of its assets.
If the Company becomes a party to a merger or consolidation, all outstanding awards shall be subject to the agreement of merger or
consolidation. The agreement of merger or consolidation may provide for one or more of the following with respect to all awards
outstanding under the 2016 Plan:
•
the continuation of such outstanding awards (if the Company is the surviving corporation);
•
•
the assumption of such outstanding awards by the surviving corporation or its parent, provided that the assumption of stock
options or stock appreciation rights shall comply with Section 424(a) of the Code;
the  substitution  by  the  surviving  corporation  or  its  parent  of  new  awards  for  such  outstanding  awards,  provided  that  the
substitution of stock options or stock appreciation rights shall comply with Section 424(a) of the Code;
•
•
full exercisability of outstanding stock options and stock appreciation rights and full vesting of the Common Stock subject to
such stock options and stock appreciation rights, followed by their cancellation immediately prior to the closing of the merger;
the cancellation of outstanding stock options and stock appreciation rights and a payment to the optionees equal to the excess
of (i) the fair market value of the Common Stock subject to such stock options and stock appreciation rights as of the closing
date of such merger or consolidation over (ii) their exercise price;
•
the cancellation of outstanding stock units and a payment to the holders equal to the fair market value of the Common Stock
subject to such stock units as of the closing date of such merger or consolidation; or
-10-
•
full vesting of the Common Stock subject to restricted share awards.
The foregoing, as well as the provisions of any award agreement providing for exercisability, transfer or accelerated vesting of any
stock option, stock appreciation right, restricted shares or stock unit shall be inapplicable to an award granted within six (6) months
before the occurrence of any other change in control, if the holder is subject to the reporting requirements of Section 16(a) of the
Exchange Act and no exception from liability under Section 16(b) of the Exchange Act is available.
Stock-Based Awards in Substitution for Options or Awards Granted by Other Company
Awards may be granted under the 2016 Plan in substitution for or in conversion of, or in connection with an assumption of, stock
options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock, restricted stock units or other stock or stock-based awards held by awardees of an
entity engaging in a corporate acquisition or merger transaction with the Company or any subsidiary. Any conversion, substitution or
assumption will be effective as of the close of the merger or acquisition, and, to the extent applicable, will be conducted in a manner
that complies with Section 409A of the Code. The awards so granted may reflect the original terms of the awards being assumed or
substituted or converted for and need not comply with other specific terms of the 2016 Plan, and may account for shares of Common
Stock substituted for the securities covered by the original awards and the number of shares subject to the original awards, as well
as  any  exercise  or  purchase  prices  applicable  to  the  original  awards,  adjusted  to  account  for  differences  in  stock  prices  in
connection with the transaction.
If  the  company  acquired  by  or  merged  with  the  Company  or  any  subsidiary  has  shares  available  under  a  pre-existing  plan
previously approved by stockholders and not adopted in contemplation of such acquisition or merger, the shares available for grant
may be used for awards made after such acquisition or merger under the 2016 Plan; provided, however, that awards using such
available shares may not be made after the date awards or grants could have been made under the terms of the pre-existing plan
absent the acquisition or merger, and may only be made to individuals who were not employees or directors of the Company or any
subsidiary prior to such acquisition or merger.
Any shares of Common Stock issued pursuant to the two paragraphs above will not reduce the shares of Common Stock available
for issuance or transfer under the 2016 Plan or count towards the limits, including the aggregate plan limit of the 2016 Plan.
Awards Under Other Plans
The Company may grant awards under other plans or programs which may be settled in the form of shares of Common Stock issued
under the 2016 Plan. Those shares will be treated as shares of Common Stock issued in settlement of stock units under the 2016
Plan and will reduce the maximum number of shares available under the 2016 Plan.
Amendment and Termination
Our Board of Directors may, at any time, amend or terminate the 2016 Plan without stockholder approval unless, in the case of an
amendment, (i) the amendment materially increase the benefits accruing to participants under the 2016 Plan, (ii) the amendment
would materially increase the number of securities issuable under the 2016 Plan, (iii) the amendment would materially modify the
requirements for participation in the 2016 Plan, or (iv) applicable law or stock exchange rules would otherwise require stockholder
approval. Subject to adjustment as described in the 2016 Plan, no amendment or termination may affect the rights of any participant
under any award previously granted under the 2016 Plan without the participant’s consent. All outstanding awards will terminate
immediately before our dissolution or liquidation.
-11-
Except in connection with a corporate transaction or event described under the 2016 Plan, the terms of outstanding awards may not
be  amended  without  shareholder  approval  to  affect  outstanding  options  or  stock  appreciation  rights  in  a  way  that  reduces  their
exercise price or cancels them in exchange for cash, other awards or options or stock appreciation rights with an exercise price that
is  less  than  the  exercise  price  of  the  original  options  or  stock  appreciation  rights.  Repricing  of  “underwater”  options  and  stock
appreciation rights is not allowed.
If permitted by Section 409A and Section 162(m) of the Code, but subject to the terms described in the 2016 Plan, the Committee
may  in  the  events  of  termination  of  employment  by  reason  of  death,  disability  or  retirement,  or  in  the  case  of  unforeseeable
emergency or other special circumstances or in the event of a change in control accelerate the time of exercise or the time of which
risk of forfeiture or prohibition or restriction on transfer would lapse or end or may waive any other limitation or requirement for any
not immediately exercisable awards other than for qualified performance-based awards where such actions could lead to the loss of
exemption under Section 162(m) of the Code. The Committee may prospectively or retroactively amend the terms of any award
except where such action would lead to loss of exemption under Section 162(m) (other than in connection with the participant’s
death, disability or change in control).
The terms of the agreements regarding MIP Shares can only be amended with the consent of the relevant employee.
Certain Federal Income Tax Consequences
Tax Consequences to Participants
The following is a brief summary of certain United States federal income tax consequences relating to awards under the 2016 Plan.
This summary is not intended to be complete and does not describe federal taxes other than income taxes (such as Medicare and
Social Security taxes), state, local, foreign, or other tax consequences. The tax information summarized is not tax advice.
Nonqualified Stock Options. In general, (i) no income will be recognized by an optionee at the time an NSO is granted; (ii) at the time
of exercise of an NSO, ordinary income will be recognized by the optionee in an amount equal to the difference between the option
price paid for the shares of Common Stock and the fair market value of the shares, if unrestricted, on the date of exercise; and (iii) at
the time of sale of shares of Common Stock acquired pursuant to the exercise of an NSO, appreciation (or depreciation) in value of
the shares after the date of exercise will be treated as either short-term or long-term capital gain (or loss) depending on how long the
shares have been held.
Incentive Stock Options. No income will be recognized by an optionee upon the grant of an ISO. In general, no income will be
recognized upon the exercise of an ISO. However, the difference between the option price paid and the fair market value of the
shares at exercise may constitute a preference item for the alternative minimum tax. If shares of Common Stock are issued to the
optionee pursuant to the exercise of an ISO, and if no disqualifying disposition of such shares is made by such optionee within two
(2) years after the date of the grant or within one (1) year after the transfer of such shares to the optionee, then upon sale of such
shares, any amount realized in excess of the option price will be taxed to the optionee as a long-term capital gain and any loss
sustained will be a long-term capital loss.
If shares of Common Stock acquired upon the timely exercise of an ISO are disposed of prior to the expiration of either holding
period described above, the optionee generally will recognize ordinary income in the year of disposition in an amount equal to the
excess (if any) of the fair market value of such shares at the time of exercise (or, if less, the amount realized on the disposition of
such shares if a sale or exchange) over the option price paid for such shares. Any further gain (or loss) realized by the participant
generally will be taxed as short-term or long-term capital gain (or loss) depending on the holding period.
-12-
Stock Appreciation Rights. No income will be recognized by a participant in connection with the grant of a stock appreciation right.
When the stock appreciation right is exercised, the participant normally will be required to include as taxable ordinary income in the
year of exercise an amount equal to the amount of cash received and the fair market value of any unrestricted shares of Common
Stock or other property received on the exercise.
Restricted Shares. The recipient of restricted shares of Common Stock generally will not be subject to tax until the shares are no
longer subject to forfeiture or restrictions on transfer for purposes of Section 83 of the Code (the “Restrictions”). At such time the
recipient will be subject to tax at ordinary income rates on the fair market value of the restricted shares (reduced by any amount paid
by the participant for such restricted shares). However, a recipient who so elects under Section 83(b) of the Code within 30 days of
the date of transfer of the shares will have taxable ordinary income on the date of transfer of the shares equal to the excess of the fair
market value of such shares (determined without regard to the Restrictions) over the purchase price, if any, of such restricted shares.
Any appreciation (or depreciation) realized upon a later disposition of such shares will be treated as long-term or short-term capital
gain (or loss) depending upon how long the shares have been held. If a Section 83(b) election has not been made, any dividends
received with respect to restricted shares that are subject to the restrictions generally will be treated as compensation that is taxable
as ordinary income to the participant.
Stock Units. Generally, no income will be recognized upon the award of stock units. The recipient of a stock unit award generally
will be subject to tax at ordinary income rates on any cash received and the fair market value of any unrestricted shares of Common
Stock or other property on the date that such amounts are transferred to the participant under the award (reduced by any amount
paid by the participant for such stock units). Stock units that are granted in one year and payable in a later year generally are subject
to Section 409A of the Code. Awards subject to Section 409A may be subject to earlier taxation and additional taxes and penalties.
The  Company  intends  that  any  awards  of  stock  units  under  the  2016  Plan  will  be  structured  to  satisfy  the  short-term  deferral
exemption under Section 409A or otherwise meet the requirements of Section 409A in order to avoid early taxation and penalties to
the recipient.
Performance Cash Awards. Generally, no income will be recognized in connection with a performance cash award until it vests. The
recipient of a performance cash award generally will be subject to tax at ordinary income rates on any cash received. Performance
cash awards that are granted in one year and payable in a later year generally are subject to Section 409A of the Code. Awards
subject  to  Section  409A  may  be  subject  to  earlier  taxation  and  additional  taxes  and  penalties.  The  Company  intends  that  any
awards of performance cash under the 2016 Plan will be structured to satisfy the short-term deferral exemption under Section 409A
or otherwise meet the requirements of Section 409A in order to avoid early taxation and penalties to the recipient.
The Company’s Tax Consequences
To the extent that a participant recognizes ordinary income in the circumstances described above, the Company will be entitled to a
corresponding deduction provided that, among other things, (i) the income meets the test of reasonableness, (ii) is an ordinary and
necessary business expense, (iii) is not an “excess parachute payment” within the meaning of Section 280G of the Code, (iv) is
properly  reported  to  the  IRS  and  (v)  is  not  disallowed  by  the  $1,000,000  limitation  on  certain  executive  compensation  under
Section 162(m) of the Code. The Section 162(m) deduction limit applies to compensation paid to the Company’s chief executive
officer and its three other most highly compensated officers (other than its chief financial officer) in a given year. The limit does not
apply  to  certain  types  of  performance-based  compensation  if  certain  conditions  are  met.  These  conditions  include  stockholder
approval of the 2016 Plan under which the compensation is paid and, for awards other than stock options and stock appreciation
rights, the establishment of performance criteria that must be satisfied in order for the award to vest. The 2016 Plan is designed to
allow awards made under the 2016 Plan to potentially qualify as “qualified performance-based compensation” under Section 162(m)
of the Code, which will allow the Committee, in its discretion, to grant awards that may qualify for treatment as performance-based
compensation not subject to the deduction limit.
-13-
Our  general  philosophy  is  to  qualify  future  compensation  for  tax  deductibility  under  Section  162(m)  of  the  Code,  wherever
appropriate, recognizing that, under certain circumstances, the limitations may be exceeded. Qualification is sought to the extent
practicable and only to the extent that it is consistent with our overall compensation objectives.
Clawback Provisions.
Any award that is subject to recovery under any law, government regulation or stock exchange listing requirement, will be subject to
such deductions and clawback as may be required to be made pursuant to such law, government regulation or stock exchange
listing requirement (or any policy adopted by the Company pursuant to any such law, government regulation or stock exchange
listing requirement).
Tax Withholding
The Company has the right to deduct or withhold, or require a participant to remit to the Company, an amount sufficient to satisfy
federal, state, and local taxes (including employment taxes) required by law to be withheld on any exercise, lapse of restriction or
other taxable event arising as a result of the 2016 Plan. The Committee may permit a holder of an award to satisfy all or part of such
withholding obligations by having the Company withhold all or a portion of any shares of Common Stock that would otherwise have
been issued to the holder or by surrendering shares previously acquired.
Effective Date and Termination
The 2016 Plan has been approved by the Company’s Board of Directors and the Consenting Stockholders and will take effect on
the twentieth (20th) day following the date on which this Information Statement is first sent or given to our stockholders. No grant of
stock  options  will  be  made  under  the  2016  Plan  after  the  date  that  is  10  years  after  the  date  on  which  the  approval  by  our
stockholders is effective. All awards granted prior to termination of the 2016 Plan will continue in effect thereafter subject to the terms
of the applicable award agreement and the terms of the 2016 Plan.
We  will  not  be  required  to  issue  any  fractional  common  shares  under  the  2016  Plan,  but  the  Committee  can  either  eliminate
fractional common shares for no payment or settle fractional common shares in cash.
New Plan Benefits
The following table sets forth the number of stock options and stock units that will be granted in accordance with the terms of the
2016 Plan on September 26, 2016 to the individuals and groups set forth below.
Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board
  Chief Operating Officer
Name
 
 
Jeff Hastings
Brian Beatty
 
Brent Whiteley   Chief Financial Officer, General Counsel and Secretary  
 
All Current Executive Officers as a Group
Current Position
Number of
Stock Options   
88,252   
 
88,252   
 
 
70,082   
311,477
Number of
Stock Units   
88,252   
 
88,252   
 
 
70,082   
311,477
Total Number
of Stock
Options and
Units
176,504  
176,504  
140,164  
622,954
Other  than  as  set  forth  above,  it  is  not  presently  possible  to  determine  the  benefits  or  amounts  that  will  be  received  by  the
Company’s named executive officers or its other employees pursuant to the 2016 Plan in the future, nor is it possible to determine
the dollar value of the awards.
Registration with the SEC
We intend to file a Registration Statement on Form S-8 relating to the issuance of securities under the 2016 Plan with the Securities
and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) pursuant to the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, as soon as practicable after approval of
the 2016 Plan by the Consenting Stockholders have taken effect.
Executive Compensation
Overview of Executive Compensation
-14-
We seek to provide total compensation packages that are competitive in terms of potential value to our executives, and which are
tailored to our unique characteristics and needs within our industry in order to create an executive compensation program that will
adequately  reward  our  executives  for  their  roles  in  creating  value  for  our  stockholders.  We  intend  to  be  competitive  with  other
similarly situated companies in our industry.
The compensation decisions regarding our executives are based on our need to attract individuals with the skills necessary for us to
achieve our business plan, to reward those individuals fairly over time, and to retain those individuals who continue to perform at or
above our expectations.
Our executives’ compensation has three primary components — salary, cash incentive bonus and stock-based awards. We view the
three  components  of  executive  compensation  as  related  but  distinct.  Although  our  Compensation  Committee  reviews  total
compensation, we do not believe that significant compensation derived from one component of compensation should negate or
reduce compensation from other components. We determine the appropriate level for each compensation component based in part,
but not exclusively, on our view of internal equity and consistency, individual performance and other information deemed relevant
and timely. The Compensation Committee is in the process of developing policies for allocating compensation between long-term
and currently paid out compensation, between cash and non-cash compensation, and among different forms of compensation.
In addition to the guidance provided by our Compensation Committee, we may utilize the services of third parties from time to time in
connection  with  the  hiring  and  compensation  awarded  to  executive  employees.  This  could  include  subscriptions  to  executive
compensation surveys and other databases.
Our Compensation Committee is charged with performing an annual review of our executive officers’ cash compensation and equity
holdings to determine whether they provide adequate incentives and motivation to executive officers and whether they adequately
compensate the executive officers relative to comparable officers in other companies.
On July 26, 2016, in connection with our recently consummated comprehensive restructuring transactions, we effected a 135-to-1
reverse stock split, pursuant to which every 135 shares of issued and outstanding Common Stock was automatically converted into
one (1) share of Common Stock, with fractional shares cashed out based on the closing price per share on the effective date of the
reverse stock split. Any references to numbers of shares issued or reserved prior to the reverse stock split in this section entitled
“Executive Compensation” are presented on a pre-split basis.
Summary Compensation Table
The following table provides summary information concerning the compensation of our Principal Executive Officer and the two other
most-highly compensated executive officers (“Named Executive Officers”) for the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014:
Name and Principal Position During
Salary
Stock
Awards
Option
Awards
Non-Equity
Incentive Plan
All Other
Compensation
Total
($)
($)
Name and Principal Position During
Period Presented
Jeff Hastings
Executive Chairman
Year     
 
    
   2015     591,948     
—(1)   
   2014     563,760     128,177(2)   115,011(3)   
   2015     591,948     
—(1)   
   2014     563,760     128,177(2)   115,011(3)   
—(1) 
 
 
Brent Whiteley
 399,475  
 2015  
 
  
  
  
CFO, General Counsel and Secretary    2014     380,452      64,875(2)    58,211(3)
Brian Beatty
President and CEO
—(1)
—(1)
—(1)
($)
($)
 
733,880(4)   
845,641(5)   
733,880(6)   
845,641(7)   
385,700(8) 
 
 
445,584(9)
($)
($)
57,711(10)   1,383,539  
62,761(10)   1,715,350  
47,510(11)   1,373,338  
50,234(12)   1,702,823  
49,606(13) 
  834,781  
 
65,697(14)   1,014,819
(1) There were no restricted stock or stock option awards for 2015 performance.
-15-
(2) Reflects the grant date fair value of restricted stock unit awards for each named executive officer computed in accordance with
Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 718.
(3) Reflects the grant date fair value of incentive stock option awards for each named executive officer computed in accordance
with FASB ASC Topic 718. For 2014, the assumptions underlying the valuation of the stock options under the Black-Scholes
options pricing model are as follows: expected life of 5.5 years; volatility of 52.3%; a risk-free interest rate of 1.8%; and no
dividend yield.
(4) Mr. Hastings earned $733,880 under the 2013 Long-Term Incentive Plan for 2015 performance, which will be paid at a future
date after sufficient improvement occurs in our liquidity.
(5) Mr. Hastings earned $845,641 under the 2013 Long-Term Incentive Plan, of which $295,846 for 2014 performance was paid in
July 2014 and $549,795 for 2014 performance was paid in April 2015.
(6) Mr. Beatty earned $733,880 under the 2013 Long-Term Incentive Plan for 2015 performance, which will be paid at a future date
after sufficient improvement occurs in our liquidity.
(7) Mr. Beatty earned $845,641 under the 2013 Long-Term Incentive Plan, of which $295,846 for 2014 performance was paid in
July 2014 and $549,795 for 2014 performance was paid in April 2015.
(8) Mr. Whiteley earned $385,700 under the 2013 Long-Term Incentive Plan for 2015 performance, which will be paid at a future
date after sufficient improvement occurs in our liquidity.
(9) Mr. Whiteley earned $445,584 under the 2013 Long-Term Incentive Plan, of which $140,664 for 2014 performance was paid in
July 2014 and $304,920 for 2014 performance was paid in April 2015.
(10) Represents  Mr.  Hastings’  $2,750/month  automobile  allowance  and  the  payment  of  the  premiums  on  his  health  and  life
insurance policies.
(11) Represents Mr. Beatty’s $2,750/month automobile allowance, a Canadian retirement registered savings plan company match
of $9,724, and the payment of the premiums on his health and life insurance policies.
(12) Represents Mr. Beatty’s $2,750/month automobile allowance, a Canadian retirement registered savings plan company match
of $11,063, and the payment of the premiums on his health and life insurance policies.
(13) Represents Mr. Whiteley’s $1,750/month automobile allowance, a 401(k) plan company match of $3,895, and the payment of
the premiums on his health and life insurance policies.
(14) Represents Mr. Whiteley’s $1,750/month automobile allowance, a 401(k) plan company match of $10,400, and the payment of
the premiums on his health and life insurance policies.
Initial Employment Agreements
Effective June 24, 2013, we entered into employment agreements with each of our Named Executive Officers, with the following
titles under the 2013 agreements: Jeff Hastings, Executive Chairman; Brian Beatty, President and Chief Executive Officer; and Brent
Whiteley, Chief Financial Officer, General Counsel, and Secretary (collectively, the “Initial Employment Agreements”). On August 3,
2016, the Initial Employment Agreements were amended and restated as described below. Each Initial Employment Agreement was
for a term of three (3) years, subject to earlier termination in certain circumstances, with an automatic renewal for one (1) year terms
unless notice to terminate is provided at least 90 days prior to the expiration of such term.
The Initial Employment Agreements provided for initial base salaries as follows: Jeff Hastings ($489,000); Brian Beatty ($489,000);
and Brent Whiteley ($330,000). The executives were guaranteed a five percent annual salary increase and as much as a 15%
salary  increase  if  certain  criteria  are  met.  On  August  13,  2013,  in  accordance  with  the  Initial  Employment  Agreements,  our
Compensation Committee confirmed that the criteria set forth in the Initial Employment Agreements had been met and determined to
increase  the  base  salaries  of  Messrs.  Hastings,  Beatty  and  Whiteley  by  10%.  The  Initial  Employment  Agreements  provided  for
participation in our 2013 Long-Term Incentive Plan with an annual cash performance bonus of at least 50% and as much as 150%,
for Messrs. Hastings and Beatty, and at least 40% and as much as 120%, for Mr. Whiteley, of twelve times such executive’s highest
paid monthly base salary within the calendar year. In addition, the executives each received a monthly automobile allowance.
-16-
The Initial Employment Agreements provided that, in the event of a termination of an executive’s employment by us without cause
(as defined in the Initial Employment Agreements) or termination by executive for good reason (as defined in the Initial Employment
Agreements)  or  if,  within  six  months  of  a  change  of  control  (as  defined  in  the  Initial  Employment  Agreements),  the  executive
resigned or we did not renew his employment agreement upon its expiration, upon the execution of a full and final release in favor of
us, we would pay him the following no later than 52 days after his termination (or, if in connection with a change of control, no later
than six months after his termination): (i) all accrued but unpaid base salary and vacation; (ii) a prorated portion of any bonus for the
year the executive was terminated; (iii) a payment equal to the previous two years’ bonuses; (iv) a severance amount equal to 24
months of base salary; and (v) reimbursement of premiums associated with continuation of coverage through COBRA for a period of
up to 18 months. Additionally, upon the above listed termination events there would be immediate vesting of all restricted stock
awards under certain equity incentive plans that had not already vested.
The  Initial  Employment  Agreements  restricted  our  executives  from  disclosing  confidential  information  we  use  to  compete  in  the
marketplace for any purpose other than to advance our interests. At our option, in our sole discretion, upon payment to an executive
of an amount equal to twelve months of his base salary plus 100% of his possible bonus, for one year following his termination, the
executive  may  not  directly  or  indirectly  solicit  or  accept  business  from  any  of  our  customers  (as  defined  in  the  employment
agreement), or solicit or induce any employee to leave us.
Amended and Restated Employment Agreements
On  August  3,  2016,  the  Company  entered  into  amended  and  restated  employment  agreements  with  Jeff  Hastings,  who  was
appointed Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board of Directors; Brian Beatty, who was appointed Chief Operating Officer;
and  Brent  Whiteley  who  will  continue  to  serve  as  Chief  Financial  Officer,  General  Counsel  and  Secretary  (collectively,  the
“Amended and Restated Employment Agreements”). Each Amended and Restated Employment Agreement will be for a term of
three (3) years, subject to earlier termination in certain circumstances, with subsequent automatic annual renewals for one (1) year
terms unless notice to terminate is provided at least 90 days prior to the expiration of any such term.
The  Amended  and  Restated  Employment  Agreements  provide  for  initial  base  salaries  as  follows:  Mr.  Hastings  ($664,198),
Mr.  Beatty  ($664,198),  and  Mr.  Whiteley  ($448,231).  Commencing  with  the  Company’s  2017  fiscal  year,  each  executive’s  base
salary may be increased annually (but not decreased without such executive’s written consent) in the discretion of the Board of
Directors. The Amended and Restated Employment Agreements provide for participation in the Company’s management incentive
programs or arrangements, including (i) an annual cash performance bonus, of which up to 50% may be paid in shares of Common
Stock at the option of the Compensation Committee, of (1) at least 50% and as much as 150% (with a guaranteed 50%) for Messrs.
Hastings and Beatty; and (2) at least 40% and as much as 120% (with a guaranteed 40%) for Mr. Whiteley, in each case, if certain
executive goals are achieved, applied to twelve (12) times such executive’s highest paid monthly base salary within the applicable
calendar year, and (ii) equity compensation to be granted in connection with the adoption of the 2016 Plan, including proposed
grants on September 26, 2016 (the “MIP Awards”) of stock units entitling the recipient to receive shares of Common Stock upon
vesting  (88,252  shares  for  Mr.  Hastings,  88,252  shares  for  Mr.  Beatty,  and  70,082  shares  for  Mr.  Whiteley),  and  stock  options
(88,252  for  Mr.  Hastings,  88,252  for  Mr.  Beatty,  and  70,082  for  Mr.  Whiteley)  at  exercise  prices  determined  based  on  volume-
weighted average prices (as described under the Amended and Restated Employment Agreements, the 2016 Plan and the award
agreements for such stock units and options) and during the periods specified therein.
The Amended and Restated Employment Agreements provide that, in the event of a termination of an executive’s employment by
the  Company  without  cause  (as  defined  in  the  Amended  and  Restated  Employment  Agreements)  or  by  the  executive  for  good
reason (as defined in the Amended and Restated Employment Agreements) or, within six (6) months of a change of control (as
defined in the Amended and Restated Employment Agreements), should the Company not renew or replace the Amended and
Restated Employment Agreement with an agreement
-17-
containing  substantially  the  same  or  better  terms,  if  the  executive  elects  to  terminate  his  employment  with  the  Company,  upon
execution of a full and final release in favor of the Company, the Company will pay the executive no later than 52 days after his
termination (or, if in connection with a change of control, no later than six (6) months after his termination): (i) all accrued but unpaid
base salary and vacation, (ii) a prorated portion of any bonus for the year such executive was terminated, (iii) a payment equal to the
previous two (2) years’ bonuses, (iv) a severance amount equal to 24 months of base salary, and (v) reimbursement of premiums
associated with continuation of coverage through COBRA for a period of up to 18 months, and, in addition, (x) all of such executive’s
unvested equity awards under the 2016 Plan and any other incentive plan of the Company will become immediately vested, and (y)
all of such executive’s unvested equity awards under the 2016 Plan and any other incentive plan of the Company also will become
immediately vested in the event of termination of an executive’s employment due to his death or permanent disability (as defined in
the Amended and Restated Employment Agreements).
The Amended and Restated Employment Agreements provide that, in the event of a termination of an executive’s employment by
the  Company  other  than  for  cause  (as  defined  in  the  Amended  and  Restated  Employment  Agreements)  or  due  to  his  death  or
disability, all unvested portions of the executive’s MIP Awards shall become fully vested upon such termination. Notwithstanding
any provisions in the Amended and Restated Employment Agreements, the 2016 Plan or any award agreement evidencing the MIP
Awards,  if  the  executive  terminates  his  employment  for  any  reason  other  than  good  reason  prior  to  the  first  anniversary  of  the
Company’s recently consummated comprehensive restructuring transactions, any MIP Awards (whether vested or unvested) will be
automatically forfeited, and the executive will be required to return and/or repay any shares or cash proceeds received in respect of
such MIP Awards.
Under  the  Amended  and  Restated  Employment  Agreement  for  each  of  the  executives,  as  well  as  under  the  Initial  Employment
Agreements, each such executive waived the termination by a change of control provision, and the corresponding provisions of his
prior  employment  agreement,  and  any  right  to  claim  any  such  compensation  and  benefits  in  connection  with  our  recently
consummated comprehensive restructuring transactions.
The Amended and Restated Employment Agreements, as more fully provided in nondisclosure agreements between the Company
and each executive, restrict the executives from using or disclosing confidential information for any purposes other than advancing
the  Company’s  interests.  Under  the  Amended  and  Restated  Employment  Agreements,  during  their  terms  and  for  one  (1)  year
following  termination  thereof,  the  executives  will  not  directly  or  indirectly  solicit  or  accept  business  from  any  of  the  Company’s
customers  (as  defined  in  the  Amended  and  Restated  Employment  Agreements),  or  solicit  or  induce  any  employee  to  leave  the
Company.  At  the  option  of  the  Company,  in  its  sole  discretion,  on  the  date  of  termination  of  an  executive’s  employment,  the
Company may elect, upon payment to such executive of an amount equal to twelve (12) months of his base salary plus a certain
percentage of his possible bonus (100% in the case of Messrs. Hastings and Beatty; 75% in the case of Mr. Whiteley) to extend for
one (1) additional year following his termination with the Company the requirements that the executive will not directly or indirectly
solicit or accept business from any of the Company customers (as defined in the Amended and Restated Employment Agreements),
or solicit or induce any employee to leave the Company.
Other Employment Benefits
Our executives also participate in our other benefit plans on the same terms as our other employees. These plans include medical,
dental and life insurance and retirement savings plans. Included in such plans are a 401(k) Plan we offer to all eligible employees of
our U.S. operations. Through May 31, 2015, we matched each employee’s contributions up to a maximum of four percent of the
employee’s  base  salary.  Beginning  June  1,  2015,  our  matching  contribution  was  suspended  indefinitely  due  to  continuing
weakened demand in the oil and natural gas industry.
Stock Awards
2013 Long-Term Incentive Plan
-18-
In connection with our previous merger with Trio Merger Corp., our stockholders approved our 2013 Long-Term Incentive Plan (the
“2013 Plan), which has subsequently been terminated, in connection with our recently consummated comprehensive restructuring
transactions. The 2013 Plan reserved up to 792,513 shares of our Common Stock for issuance in accordance with the 2013 Plan’s
terms, including a maximum of up to 396,256 shares that were reserved for issuance pursuant to awards of restricted stock. The
purpose of the 2013 Plan was to provide our employees who, by their position, ability and diligence are able to make important
contributions to our growth and profitability, with an incentive to assist us in achieving our long-term corporate objectives, to attract
and retain executive officers and other employees of outstanding competence and to provide such persons with an opportunity to
acquire an equity interest in us. Our employees and employees of our subsidiaries were eligible to participate in the 2013 Plan. The
2013 Plan provided for the award of stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock, stock units and performance cash
awards.
Performance  cash  awards  under  the  2013  Plan  were  determined  primarily  on  the  achievement  of  financial  and  operational
performance metrics. In July 2014, we successfully issued long-term financing in the form of 10% senior secured notes due in July
2019. As a result of this achievement, Messrs. Hastings, Beatty and Whiteley were awarded an interim 2014 performance payment
equal to approximately 50% of annual base salary compensation. The 2014 annual performance payment based on achievement of
financial and operational performance metrics was awarded to Messrs. Hastings, Beatty and Whiteley in March 2015. The 2015
annual  performance  payment  based  on  achievement  of  financial  and  operational  performance  metrics  was  awarded  to  Messrs.
Hastings, Beatty and Whiteley in March 2016.
The  Compensation  Committee  determined  that  the  maximum  potential  share-based  compensation  awards  under  the  2013  Plan
would be based 45% on financial performance and 55% on an unconditional grant. Messrs. Hastings and Beatty were eligible to
earn restricted stock and stock option awards of up to 100% of base salary compensation and Mr. Whiteley was eligible to earn
restricted stock and stock option awards of up to 75% of base salary compensation.
On June 18, 2015, our Board of Directors, upon the recommendation of the Compensation Committee, made restricted stock unit
and incentive stock option grants under the 2013 Plan to our executive officers as part of across-the-board awards to employees
based  on  our  2014  performance  and  the  respective  employee’s  compensation  plan.  Since  the  2014  financial  performance
objectives were not achieved, only the unconditional grant was awarded. The unconditional grant was allocated equally to restricted
stock units and incentive stock options based upon our Common Stock closing price on January 2, 2015 of $4.12 and incentive
stock options valued using the Black-Scholes options pricing model. The January 2, 2015 closing stock price represented the timing
of initial discussions by the Compensation Committee of potential 2013 Plan awards. The grants were effective June 29, 2015 and
vest one-third on the date which is 90 days after the issuance and one-third each on the first and second anniversaries of the grant.
The incentive stock options were granted with an exercise price of $4.12 and expire upon the earlier of termination of employment or
ten years after the grant date.
In  connection  with  our  recently  consummated  comprehensive  restructuring  transactions,  the  2013  Plan  was  terminated  and  all
outstanding awards thereunder were immediately vested and converted into shares of our Common Stock.
-19-
Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year-End
The  following  table  provides  information  about  the  holdings  of  stock  options  and  restricted  stock  units  by  our  named  executive
officers at December 31, 2015:
Name
Jeff Hastings
Brian Beatty
Brent Whiteley
Number of
Securities
Underlying
Unexercised
Options (#)
Exercisable     
 
25,776    
25,776    
 
 
13,046
Option Awards(1)
Stock Awards(1)
Number of
Securities
Underlying
Unexercised
Options (#)
Unexercisable(1)
51,551     $
51,551     $
26,092     $
Option
Exercise
Price ($)    
4.12    
4.12    
4.12
Option
Expiration
Date
6/29/2025    
  6/29/2025    
  6/29/2025
Number of
Shares or Units
of Stock That
Have Not
Vested (#)(1)
25,132     $
25,132     $
12,720     $
Market Value
of Shares or
Units of
Stock That
Have Not
Vested ($)(1)  
51,018  
51,018  
25,822
(1)
In connection with our recently consummated comprehensive restructuring transactions, the 2013 Plan was terminated and all
outstanding awards thereunder were immediately vested and converted into shares of our Common Stock.
Director Compensation
On July 26, 2016, in connection with our recently consummated comprehensive restructuring transactions, we effected a 135-to-1
reverse stock split, pursuant to which every 135 shares of issued and outstanding Common Stock was automatically converted into
one (1) share of Common Stock, with fractional shares cashed out based on the closing price per share on the effective date of the
reverse stock split. Any references to numbers of shares issued or reserved prior to the reverse stock split in this section entitled
“Director Compensation” are presented on a pre-split basis.
General
In 2015, each non-employee director received $25,000 annually in cash for Board service, payable quarterly in advance. In addition,
each independent director serving on a committee received $50,000 annually in cash for committee service, and the Chairman of
our Audit Committee received an additional $20,000 annually in cash, in each case payable quarterly in advance. On December 1,
2015, our Board approved grants of restricted stock under the 2013 Non-Employee Director Share Incentive Plan (“Non-Employee
Director Plan”) to our non-employee directors serving on a committee of our Board. Each non-employee director was granted the
number of shares equal to $50,000 divided by the average of the last sale prices of our Common Stock for five consecutive trading
days  ending  two  days  before  issuance.  Messrs.  Dalton,  Monahan,  Rosenfeld  and  Sgro  each  received  20,920  shares  of  our
Common Stock pursuant to those awards, and the shares vested upon issuance.
The following table summarizes the compensation earned by our non-employee directors in 2015:
Name(1)
Gary Dalton
Gregory R. Monahan
Eric S. Rosenfeld
David D. Sgro
Fees Earned
or Paid in
Cash ($)
75,000    
75,000    
75,000
Stock
Awards
($)(2)
49,999    
  49,999    
  49,999
All Other
Compensation
($)
—    
—    
—
Total ($) 
 124,999  
 124,999  
 124,999
David D. Sgro
95,000
49,999
—
144,999
(1) Each  of  Messrs.  Monahan,  Rosenfeld  and  Sgro  resigned  from  the  Board  of  Directors,  effective  as  of  July  27,  2016.  Jeff
Hastings, Brian Beatty and Brent Whiteley (Mr. Whiteley resigned from the Board of Directors, effective as of July 27, 2016) are
not included in this table because they were our employees during 2015, and received no compensation for their services as
members of our Board. The compensation received by Messrs. Hastings, Beatty and Whiteley as employees during 2015 is
shown in the section entitled “Executive Compensation — Summary Compensation Table” above.
-20-
(2) All of the amounts shown above represent the value as of December 1, 2015, the date of grant, of Common Stock granted
under  the  Non-Employee  Director  Plan  to  our  non-employee  directors  serving  on  a  committee  of  the  Board,  as  described
above.
On August 3, 2016, the Board of Directors approved changes to the compensation of non-employee directors, as described below.
Each independent director serving on a committee will be entitled to receive $75,000 annually in cash for committee service, the
Chairman  of  the  Audit  Committee  will  be  entitled  to  receive  an  additional  $20,000  annually  in  cash,  and  the  Chairman  of  the
Compensation  Committee  will  be  entitled  to  receive  an  additional  $5,000  annually  in  cash  in  each  case  payable  quarterly  in
advance.
In addition, subject to the approval by the Board of Directors and stockholders of the Company of any new or revised non-employee
director share incentive plan required to effect these changes, each non-employee director will be entitled to be paid annually on
December 1 compensation in the form of a grant of a number of shares of Common Stock equal to $50,000 divided by the average
of the last sale prices of Common Stock for three (3) consecutive trading days after the third quarter earnings release date, which
shall be vested upon issuance, and each director may make an election by the annual meeting date each year to receive the cash
compensation described above in the equivalent value in stock. If so elected, the number of shares granted will be based on the
cash compensation amount owed for the quarter divided by the average of the last sale prices for the three consecutive trading days
after the earnings release date for each quarter. The directors designated for nomination to the Board of Directors by an affiliate may
make an election by the annual meeting date each year to receive the stock compensation described above in all cash rather than
stock.
Non-Employee Director Plan
The  Non-Employee  Director  Plan  is  administered  by  the  full  Board  of  Directors.  The  Non-Employee  Director  Plan  provides  for
discretionary  grants  of  awards  of  Common  Stock  to  our  independent  non-employee  directors,  as  determined  by  our  Board  of
Directors from time to time. The awards may take the form of unrestricted or restricted shares of our Common Stock or options to
purchase  shares  of  our  Common  Stock.  We  had  reserved  400,000  shares  of  our  Common  Stock  for  issuance  under  the  Non-
Employee Director Plan, of which a total of 161,700 shares had been awarded as of April 20, 2016. Subject to the approval by the
Board of Directors and stockholders of the Company, the Company intends to adopt a new or revised non-employee director share
incentive plan to replace the existing Non-Employee Director Plan.
INTEREST OF CERTAIN PERSONS IN MATTERS TO BE ACTED UPON
Our officers will be eligible to receive awards and grants under the 2016 Plan, and certain members of our senior management are
expected to receive the MIP Shares on September 26, 2016, on the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the 2016 Plan.
Other than as described above, and except in their capacity as stockholders (which interest does not differ from that of the other
holders of Common Stock), none of our officers, directors, or any of their respective affiliates or associates has any interest in the
2016 Plan.
DELIVERY OF DOCUMENTS TO STOCKHOLDERS
Pursuant to the rules of the SEC, we and the services that we employ to deliver communications to our stockholders are permitted to
deliver to two or more stockholders sharing the same address a single copy of this Information Statement. Upon written or oral
request, we will deliver a separate copy of the Information Statement to any stockholder at a shared address to which a single copy
of the Information Statement was
-21-
delivered and who wishes to receive a separate copy of the Information Statement. Stockholders receiving multiple copies of the
Information Statement may likewise request that we deliver single copies of such documents in the future. Stockholders may notify
us of their requests by calling or writing us at:
SAExploration Holdings, Inc.
1160 Dairy Ashford Rd., Suite 160
Houston, Texas 77079
Attention: Investor Relations
Telephone: (281) 258-4409
Email: rabney@saexploration.com
STOCK OWNERSHIP
The following table sets forth information as of July 28, 2016, regarding the beneficial ownership of our Common Stock by:
•
each person known to be the beneficial owner of more than five percent of our outstanding shares of Common Stock;
•
each of our Directors and our Named Executive Officers; and
•
all current Executive Officers and Directors as a group.
Unless otherwise indicated, we believe that all persons named in the table have sole voting and investment power with respect to
all shares of Common Stock beneficially owned by them.
Name and Address of Beneficial Owner(1)
Directors and Executive Officers:
Jeff Hastings(3)
Brian Beatty(3)
Brent Whiteley
Mike Scott(3)
Darin Silvernagle(3)
Ryan Abney
Trish Gerber
Mel Cooper(6)
Michael Kass(7)
Jake Mercer(8)
Gary Dalton
All directors and executive officers as a group (11
persons)
Five Percent Holders:
Whitebox Advisors LLC(9)
BlueMountain Capital Management, LLC(10)
FMR LLC(11)
Aristides Capital LLC(12)
Morgan Stanley Investment Management(13)
Beneficial Ownership as of July 28, 2016(2)
Amount and Nature
of Beneficial Ownership
168,019(4)  
9,062(5)  
 
2,227  
382  
 
 
289  
 
61  
 
29  
—    
 
 
—    
 
—    
299
180,368
2,609,039  
2,409,106  
806,405  
728,280  
506,833
Approximate Percentage
of Beneficial Ownership
1.8%
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
—    
—    
—    
*
1.93%
27.9% 
25.8% 
8.63% 
7.8% 
5.42%
Less than 1%.
*
(1) Unless otherwise indicated, the business address of each of the individuals is 1160 Dairy Ashford Rd., Suite 160, Houston,
Texas 77079.
(2) The percentage of beneficial ownership is calculated based on 9,344,288 shares of common stock outstanding as of July 28,
2016.
(3) The business address of this individual is 3333 8th Street SE, 3rd Floor, Calgary Alberta, T2G 3A4.
-22-
(4)
(5)
Includes (i) 830 shares held directly by Jeff Hastings, (ii) 24,221 shares held indirectly through CLCH, LLC (“CLCH”), and
(iii) 142,968 shares held indirectly through Speculative Seismic Investments, LLC (“SSI”). CLCH and SSI are both controlled
by  Mr.  Hastings.  The  business  address  for  CLCH  is  4721  Golden  Spring  Circle,  Anchorage,  Alaska  99507.  The  business
address for SSI is 11 Crestwood Dr., Houston, TX 77007.
Includes  (i)  197  shares  directly  owned  by  Mr.  Beatty  and  (ii)  8,865  shares  directly  owned  by  Seismic  Holdings.  Seismic
Holdings is controlled by Mr. Beatty and his wife, Sheri L. Beatty. The business address for Seismic Holdings is 59 Westpoint
Court SW, Calgary, AB, T3H 4M7.
(6) The business address of the reporting person is 603 Shiloh Rd., Bastrop, TX 78602.
(7) The business address of the reporting person is 280 Park Avenue, 12th Floor, New York, NY 10017.
(8) The business address of the reporting person is 3033 Excelsior Blvd., Suite 300, Minneapolis, MN 55416.
(9) The  business  address  of  the  reporting  person  is  3033  Excelsior  Blvd.,  Suite  300,  Minneapolis,  MN  55416.  The  foregoing
information  was  derived  from  a  Schedule  13D/A  filed  on  August  8,  2016,  in  which  the  reporting  person  identifies  itself  as
having shared voting and dispositive power over 2,609,039 shares of Common Stock. The Schedule 13D/A further indicated
that  Whitebox  General  Partner  LLC  has  shared  voting  and  dispositive  power  over  2,609,039  shares  of  Common  Stock,
Whitebox  Multi-Strategy  Partners,  LP  has  shared  voting  and  dispositive  power  over  1,582,394  shares  of  Common  Stock,
Whitebox Credit Partners, LP has shared voting and dispositive power over 510,492 shares of Common Stock, and WBox
2015-7 Ltd. has shared voting and dispositive power over 1,026,461 shares of Common Stock.
(10) The business address of the reporting person is 280 Park Avenue, 12th Floor, New York, NY 10017. The foregoing information
was derived from a Schedule 13D filed on August 8, 2016, in which the reporting person identifies itself as having shared
voting and dispositive power over 2,409,106 shares of common Stock. The Schedule 13D further indicated that BlueMountain
GP  Holdings,  LLC  has  shared  voting  and  dispositive  power  over  1,976,336  shares  of  Common  Stock,  Blue  Mountain  CA
Master Fund GP, Ltd. and Blue Mountain Credit Alternatives Master Fund L.P. have shared voting and dispositive power over
1,674,107 shares of Common Stock, BlueMountain Long/Short Credit GP, LLC and BlueMountain Guadalupe Peak Fund L.P.
have shared voting and dispositive power over 80,647 shares of Common Stock, BlueMountain Kicking Horse Fund GP, LLC
and BlueMountain Kicking Horse Fund L.P. have shared voting and dispositive power over 61,411 shares of Common Stock,
BlueMountain Timberline Ltd. has shared voting and dispositive power over 59,405 shares of Common Stock, BlueMountain
Summit  Opportunities  GP  II,  LLC  and  BlueMountain  Summit  Trading  L.P.  have  shared  voting  and  dispositive  power  over
160,171 shares of Common Stock, and BlueMountain Montenvers GP S.a.r.l. and BlueMountain Montenvers Master Fund SCA
SICAV-SIF have shared voting and dispositive power over 373,365 shares of Common Stock.
(11) The business address of the reporting person is 245 Summer Street, Boston, MA 02210. The reporting person filed a Schedule
13G/A on August 10, 2016, which indicated that the reporting person no longer holds any shares of Common Stock.
(12) The business address of the reporting person is 25 S. Huron St., Suite 2A, Toledo, OH 43604. The foregoing information was
derived from a Schedule 13G filed on August 5, 2016, in which the reporting person identifies itself as having sole voting and
dispositive power over 728,280 shares of Common Stock. The Schedule 13G further indicated that Christopher M. Brown has
sole  voting  and  dispositive  power  over  728,280  shares  of  Common  Stock,  Aristides  Fund  QP,  LP  has  sole  voting  and
dispositive power over 127,478 shares of Common Stock, and Aristides Fund LP has sole voting and dispositive power over
600,802 shares of Common Stock.
(13) The business address of the reporting person is 440 S. LaSalle Street, 39th Floor, Chicago, IL 60605.
-23-
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Information Statement contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the U.S. federal securities laws, with respect
to our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and business, and our expectations or beliefs concerning future events.
These forward-looking statements can generally be identified by phrases such as “expects,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,”
“intends,”  “plans  to,”  “ought,”  “could,”  “will,”  “should,”  “likely,”  “appears,”  “projects,”  “forecasts,”  “outlook”  or  other  similar  words  or
phrases. There are inherent risks and uncertainties in any forward-looking statements. Although we believe that our expectations
are reasonable, we can give no assurance that these expectations will prove to have been correct, and actual results may vary
materially. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update, amend or clarify any forward-looking statements to
reflect events, new information or otherwise. Some of the important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from our
expectations are discussed below. All written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to us, or persons acting on our behalf,
are expressly qualified in their entirety by these cautionary statements.
You should refer to our periodic and current reports filed with the SEC and the risk factors from our Annual Report on Form 10-K for
the year ended December 31, 2015, as amended by our Annual Report on Form 10-K/A filed on April 29, 2016 (collectively, the
“2015 Form 10-K”) for specific risks which would cause actual results to be significantly different from those expressed or implied by
any of our forward-looking statements. It is not possible to identify all of the risks, uncertainties and other factors that may affect
future results. In light of these risks and uncertainties, the forward-looking events and circumstances discussed in this Information
Statement  may  not  occur  and  actual  results  could  differ  materially  from  those  anticipated  or  implied  in  the  forward-looking
statements. Accordingly, readers of this Information Statement are cautioned not to place undue reliance on the forward-looking
statements.
-24-
INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE OF CERTAIN DOCUMENTS
The SEC allows us to “incorporate by reference” into this Information Statement the information we have filed with the SEC, which
means  that  we  can  disclose  important  information  to  you  without  actually  including  the  specific  information  in  this  Information
Statement by referring you to those documents. The information incorporated by reference is an important part of this Information
Statement, and information that we file later with the SEC will automatically update and supersede this information. Therefore, you
should check for reports that we may have filed with the SEC after the date of this Information Statement.
We incorporate by reference into this Information Statement the documents listed below:
•
Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015, as amended by Form 10-K/A filed on April 29, 2016;
•
Our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the periods ended March 31, 2016 and June 30, 2016; and
•
Our  Current  Reports  on  Form  8-K  (excluding  information  “furnished”  on  Items  2.02  and  7.01  and  related  exhibits  unless
otherwise  specified)  filed  on  January  26,  2016,  February  5,  2016,  April  22,  2016,  June  13,  2016,  June  24,  2016,  July  1,
2016, July 14, 2016, August 1, 2016, August 4, 2016 and August 9, 2016.
Any statement contained in this Information Statement or in a document incorporated by reference herein shall be deemed to be
modified or superseded for purposes of this Information Statement to the extent that a statement contained in any subsequently filed
document which is incorporated by reference herein modifies or supersedes such statement. Any such statement so modified or
superseded shall not be deemed, except as so modified or superseded, to constitute a part of this Information Statement.
You  may  request  a  copy  of  any  document  incorporated  by  reference  in  this  Information  Statement  and  any  exhibit  specifically
incorporated by reference in those documents, at no cost, by writing or telephoning us at the following address or phone number:
SAExploration Holdings, Inc.
1160 Dairy Ashford, Suite 160
Houston, Texas 77079
Attention: Corporate Secretary
Telephone: (281) 258-4400
-25-
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We file annual, quarterly and current reports and other information (File No. 001-35471) with the SEC pursuant to the Exchange Act.
For further information regarding us, please see our filings with the SEC, including our annual, quarterly, and current reports and
proxy  statements,  which  you  may  read  and  copy  at  the  Public  Reference  Room  maintained  by  the  SEC  at  100  F  Street,  N.E.,
Washington, D.C. 20549. You may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-
SEC-0330. Our public filings with the SEC are also available to the public on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
We maintain a website at www.saexploration.com. The information on our website or on any other website is not, and you must not
consider  such  information  to  be,  a  part  of  this  Information  Statement.  You  should  rely  only  on  the  information  contained  in  this
Information Statement and in the documents incorporated by reference.
By Order of the Board of Directors
Brent Whiteley
Chief Financial Officer, General Counsel and
Secretary
August 15, 2016
-26-
Annex A
SAEXPLORATION HOLDINGS, INC.
2016 Long-Term Incentive Plan
(As Adopted August 3, 2016)
ARTICLE 1 INTRODUCTION.
The  Plan  was  adopted  by  the  Board  on  August  3,  2016,  subject  to  approval  by  the  Company’s  stockholders,  to  be  effective
immediately  upon  receipt  by  the  Company  and  the  effectiveness  of  such  stockholder  approval.  The  purpose  of  the  Plan  is  to
promote the long-term success of the Company and the creation of stockholder value by (a) encouraging Employees to focus on
long-range  objectives,  (b)  encouraging  the  attraction  and  retention  of  Employees  with  exceptional  qualifications,  and  (c)  linking
Employees  directly  to  stockholder  interests  through  increased  stock  ownership.  The  Plan  seeks  to  achieve  these  purposes  by
providing  for  Awards  in  the  form  of  Restricted  Shares,  Stock  Units,  Options  (which  may  be  ISOs  or  NSOs),  Performance  Cash
Awards and SARs.
The  Plan  shall  be  governed  by,  and  construed  in  accordance  with,  the  laws  of  the  State  of  Delaware  (except  its  choice-of-law
provisions).
ARTICLE 2 ADMINISTRATION.
2 .1 Committee  Composition.  The  Committee  shall  administer  the  Plan.  Except  as  otherwise  determined  by  the  Board,  the
Committee  shall  consist  solely  of  two  or  more  Non-Employee  Directors  who  are  also  Outside  Directors.  The  Board  shall  have
discretion to determine whether or not it intends to comply with the exemption requirements of Rule 16b-3 of the Exchange Act
and/or Section 162(m) of the Code. However, if the Board intends to satisfy such exemption requirements, the Committee shall be a
committee of the Board that at all times consists solely of two or more Non-Employee Directors who are also Outside Directors.
Within the scope of such authority, the Board or the Committee may (a) delegate to a committee of one or more members of the
Board who are not Outside Directors the authority to grant Awards to eligible persons who are either (i) not then Covered Employees
and are not expected to be Covered Employees at the time of recognition of income resulting from such Award or (ii) not persons
with respect to whom the Company wishes to comply with Section 162(m) of the Code or (b) delegate to a committee of one or more
members of the Board who are not Non-Employee Directors the authority to grant Awards to eligible persons who are not then
subject to Section 16 of the Exchange Act. Nothing herein shall create an inference that an Award is not validly granted under the
Plan in the event Awards are granted under the Plan by a compensation committee of the Board that does not at all times consist
solely of two or more Non-Employee Directors who are also Outside Directors.
2.2 Committee Responsibilities. Subject to the Company’s obligations pursuant to any applicable employment agreements, the
Committee  shall:  (a)  select  the  Employees  who  are  to  receive  Awards  under  the  Plan;  (b)  determine  the  type,  number,  vesting
requirements, and other features and conditions of such Awards; (c) interpret and administer the Plan; (d) make all other decisions
relating to the operation of the Plan and reconcile any inconsistency in, correct any defect in and/or supply any omission in this Plan;
and (e) carry out any other duties delegated to it by the Board under the Plan. The Committee may adopt such rules or guidelines as
it deems appropriate to implement the Plan. The Committee’s determinations under the Plan shall be final, conclusive and binding
on all persons.
2.3 Non-Executive  Officer  Grants.  The  Board  may  appoint  a  single  Director,  an  additional  committee  of  Directors  and/or  the
Company’s Chief Executive Officer to determine Awards for Employees who are not Executive Officers of the Company. The single
Director, the members of the additional committee, and/or the Company’s Chief Executive Officer need not satisfy the requirements
of Section 2.1. Such Director, committee,
A-1
or the Company’s Chief Executive Officer may grant Awards under the Plan to such Employees. However, the Committee shall
nevertheless,  subject  to  the  Company’s  obligations  pursuant  to  any  applicable  employment  agreements,  prescribe  the  terms,
features,  and  conditions  of  such  Awards  and  the  aggregate  number  of  Company  shares  subject  to  such  Awards.  Within  the
limitations  of  this  Section  2.3,  any  reference  in  the  Plan  to  the  Committee  shall  include  any  such  single  Director,  additional
committee,  and/or  the  Company’s  Chief  Executive  Officer  to  whom  the  Board  has  delegated  the  required  authority  under  this
Section 2.3.
2.4 Compliance with Section 409A.
(a) To the extent applicable, it is intended that the Plan shall comply and that Awards shall be designed, granted and administered
in such a manner that they are either exempt from the application of, or comply with, the requirements of Section 409A of the Code
(“Section  409A”).  Any  reference  in  this  Plan  to  Section  409A  will  also  include  any  regulations  or  any  other  formal  guidance
promulgated with respect to such Section by the U. S. Department of the Treasury or the Internal Revenue Service. If the Committee
determines that an Award, payment, distribution, deferral election, transaction, or any other action or arrangement contemplated by
the  provisions  of  the  Plan  would,  if  undertaken  or  implemented,  cause  a  holder  to  become  subject  to  additional  taxes  under
Section  409A,  then  unless  the  Committee  specifically  provides  otherwise,  such  Award,  payment,  distribution,  deferral  election,
transaction or other action or arrangement shall not be given effect to the extent it causes such result and the related provisions of
the Plan and/or Award Agreement will be deemed modified or, if necessary, suspended in order to comply with the requirements of
Section 409A to the extent determined appropriate by the Committee, in each case without the consent of or notice to the holder. In
any case, a Participant will be solely responsible and liable for the satisfaction of all taxes and penalties that may be imposed on a
Participant or for a Participant’s account in connection with this Plan and grants hereunder (including any taxes and penalties under
Section 409A), and neither the Company nor any of its affiliates will have any obligation to indemnify or otherwise hold a Participant
harmless from any or all of such taxes or penalties. The exercisability of an Option shall not be extended to the extent that such
extension  would  subject  the  holder  to  additional  taxes  under  Section  409A.  Each  payment  subject  to  Section  409A  shall  be
considered a separate payment and not one of a series of payments for purposes of Section 409A.
(b) Neither a Participant nor any of a Participant’s creditors or beneficiaries will have the right to subject any deferred compensation
(within the meaning of Section 409A) payable under this Plan and grants hereunder to any anticipation, alienation, sale, transfer,
assignment,  pledge,  encumbrance,  attachment  or  garnishment.  Except  as  permitted  under  Section  409A,  any  deferred
compensation (within the meaning of Section 409A) payable to a Participant or for a Participant’s benefit under this Plan and grants
hereunder may not be reduced by, or offset against, any amount owing by a Participant to the Company or any of its Subsidiaries.
(c) If, at the time of a Participant’s separation from service (within the meaning of Section 409A), (i) the Participant will be a specified
employee (within the meaning of Section 409A and using the identification methodology selected by the Company from time to time)
and  (ii)  the  Company  makes  a  good  faith  determination  that  an  amount  payable  hereunder  constitutes  deferred  compensation
(within the meaning of Section 409A) the payment of which is required to be delayed pursuant to the six-month delay rule set forth in
Section 409A in order to avoid taxes or penalties under Section 409A, then the Company will not pay such amount on the otherwise
scheduled payment date but will instead pay it, without interest, on the earlier of (A) the tenth (10th) business day of the seventh
(7th) month after such separation from service, and (B) the date of the Participant’s death.
2.5 Foreign Awardees. In order to facilitate the making of any grant or combination of grants under this Plan, and subject to the
Company’s obligations pursuant to any applicable employment agreements, the Committee may grant Awards to eligible persons
who are foreign nationals or who are employed by the Company or any Subsidiary outside the United States of America or who
provide services to the Company under
A-2
an agreement with a foreign nation or agency, on such terms and conditions different from those specified in this Plan as may, in the
judgment  of  the  Committee,  be  necessary  or  desirable  to  foster  and  promote  achievement  of  the  purposes  of  this  Plan  and,  in
furtherance of such purposes, the Committee may make such modifications, amendments, procedures, subplans and the like as
may be necessary or advisable to comply with the provisions of laws and regulations in other countries or jurisdictions in which the
Company or its Subsidiaries operate, and the Secretary of the Company or other appropriate officer may certify any such document
as  having  been  approved  and  adopted  in  the  same  manner  as  this  Plan.  No  such  special  terms,  modifications,  amendments,
procedures or subplans, however, will include any provisions that are inconsistent with the terms of this Plan as then in effect unless
this Plan could have been amended to eliminate such inconsistency without further approval by the shareholders of the Company.
ARTICLE 3 SHARES AVAILABLE FOR GRANTS.
3.1 Basic Limitation.
(a) Common Shares issued pursuant to the Plan may be authorized but unissued shares or treasury shares. The aggregate number
of  Common  Shares  that  may  be  issued  or  transferred  (i)  upon  the  exercise  of  Options  or  SARs,  (ii)  as  Restricted  Shares  and
released from outstanding risks of forfeiture thereof, (iii) in payment of Stock Units, (iv) in payment of Performance Cash Awards that
have been earned or (v) in payment of dividend equivalents paid with respect to awards made under the Plan shall not exceed
1,038,258 Common Shares, subject to Section 3.2. The number of Common Shares that are subject to Awards outstanding at any
time under the Plan shall not exceed the number of Common Shares that then remain available for issuance under the Plan. The
aggregate number of Common Shares available under the Plan issued to Participants that may be issued with respect to Options
and SARs, including upon the exercise of ISOs, over its life shall not exceed 519,129 Common Shares, in each case subject to
Section 3.2. The aggregate number of Common Shares and Restricted Shares issued to all Participants pursuant to all Awards of
Restricted  Shares  and  Stock  Units  made  under  the  Plan  over  its  life  shall  not  exceed  519,129  Common  Shares,  in  each  case
subject to Section 3.2. For the avoidance of doubt, Common Shares available under the Plan shall not be issued to fund any of the
annual performance awards provided for under any employment agreement. The limitations of this Section 3.1 shall be subject to
adjustment pursuant to Article 11.
(b) 622,955 of the Shares reserved for issuance under the Plan shall, in the aggregate, be granted by the Committee to certain
Employees of the Company or any Subsidiary identified in Appendix B (the “MIP Shares” and any such Awards the “MIP Awards”)
as soon as administratively practicable after receipt by the Company of stockholder approval of this Plan and the effectiveness of
such stockholder approval; provided, that (i) 311,477 Shares of such MIP Shares shall be granted in the form of Stock Units (the
“MIP Stock Units”), in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in the form of Stock Units Agreement (attached hereto as
Appendix D and made a part of this Plan, (the “MIP Stock Units Agreement”)) to such Employees and in such amounts specified
on the MIP Grant Allocation schedule, attached hereto as Appendix B and made a part of this Plan, and (ii) 311,477 Shares of such
MIP Shares shall be granted in the form of Options designated as NSOs (the “MIP Options”), in accordance with the terms and
conditions set forth in the form of Option Agreement (attached hereto as Appendix C and made a part of this Plan (the “MIP Option
Agreement”)  to  such  Employees  and  in  such  amounts  specified  on  the  MIP  Grant  Allocation  schedule,  attached  hereto  as
Appendix B and made a part of this Plan.
(c) The aggregate number of Common Shares available for issuance or transfer under Section 3.1(a) of this Plan will be reduced by
(i) one Common Share for every one Common Share subject to an Option or SAR granted under this Plan and (ii) one (1) Common
Share for every one Common Share issued or transferred in connection with an award other than an Option or SAR granted under
this Plan. Subject to the provisions of Section 3.2 of this Plan, Common Shares covered by an award granted under this Plan will
not be counted as used unless and until they are actually issued or transferred.
A-3
3.2 Shares Returned to Reserve; Share Counting Rules.
(a) If Options, SARs, Restricted Shares, or Stock Units are forfeited or terminate for any other reason before being exercised or
settled, then the Common Shares subject to such Options, SARs, Restricted Shares, or Stock Units shall again become available
for issuance under the Plan and shall not be considered for purposes of determining any limitations on the issuance of Options,
SARs,  Restricted  Shares,  or  Stock  Units.  If  Restricted  Shares  or  Common  Shares  issued  upon  the  exercise  of  Options  are
reacquired by the Company pursuant to a forfeiture provision, then such Common Shares shall again become available for issuance
under  the  Plan  in  accordance  with  Section  3.2(c)  below.  Performance  Cash  Awards  shall  not  affect  the  aggregate  number  of
Common Shares remaining available for issuance under the Plan.
(b)  Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  contained  in  this  Article  3,  the  following  Common  Shares  will  not  be  added  to  the
aggregate number of Common Shares available for issuance or transfer under Section 3.1 above: (i) Common Shares tendered or
otherwise used in payment of the Exercise Price of an Option; (ii) Common Shares withheld or otherwise used by the Company to
satisfy  a  tax  withholding  obligation;  (iii)  Common  Shares  subject  to  a  SAR  that  are  not  actually  issued  in  connection  with  its
Common  Shares  settlement  on  exercise  thereof;  and  (iv)  Common  Shares  reacquired  by  the  Company  on  the  open  market  or
otherwise using cash proceeds from the exercise of Options. In addition, if, under this Plan, a Participant has elected to give up the
right to receive compensation in exchange for Common Shares based on fair market value, such Common Shares will not count
against the aggregate plan limit under Section 3.1 above.
(c) Any Common Share that becomes available for issuance or transfer under this Plan will be added back as (i) one Common
Share if such share was subject to an Option or SAR granted under this Plan, and (ii) as one (1) Common Share if such share was
issued or transferred pursuant to, or subject to, an award granted under this Plan other than an Option or an SAR granted under this
Plan.
3.3 Uncertificated Shares. To the extent that the Plan provides for issuance of stock certificates to reflect the issuance of Common
Shares, the issuance may be effected on an un-certificated basis, to the extent not prohibited by applicable law or the applicable
rules of any stock exchange on which the Company’s equity securities are traded.
3.4 Limited Transferability. Awards shall generally be nontransferable except in the case of the Participant’s death, or as otherwise
determined  by  the  Committee,  and  the  Stock  Option  Agreement,  SAR  Agreement,  Restricted  Shares  Agreement,  Stock  Units
Agreement  or  Performance  Cash  Award  Agreement  entered  into  with  respect  to  any  Award  shall  generally  provide  for  such
nontransferability. The Committee may, however, in its discretion, authorize all or a portion of any Award (other than of ISOs) to be
granted  on  terms  that  permit  transfer  by  the  Participant  to  (i)  the  spouse,  parents,  children,  stepchildren,  adoptive  relationships,
sisters, brothers, or grandchildren of the Participant, (ii) a trust or trusts for the exclusive benefit of the spouse, parents, children,
stepchildren,  adoptive  relationships,  sisters,  brothers,  or  grandchildren  of  the  Participant,  or  (iii)  a  partnership  or  limited  liability
company  in  which  the  spouse,  parents,  children,  stepchildren,  adoptive  relationships,  sisters,  brothers,  or  grandchildren  of  the
Participant are the only partners or members, as applicable; provided in each case that (x) there may be no consideration for any
such transfer (other than in the case of Clause (iii), units in the partnership or membership interests in the limited liability company),
and (y) the agreement pursuant to which such Awards are granted must be approved by the Committee, and must expressly provide
for transferability in a manner consistent with this Section 3.4. Following any such transfer, any such Awards shall continue to be
subject to the same terms and conditions as were applicable immediately prior to the transfer. The provisions of the Award with
respect to expiration, termination or vesting shall continue to apply with respect to the original Participant, and the Award shall be
exercisable by the transferee only to the extent and for the periods specified herein with respect to the Participant. The original
Participant will remain subject to withholding taxes upon exercise of any such Awards by the transferee. The Company shall have
no obligation whatsoever to provide notice to any transferee of any matter, including early expiration or termination of an Award.
ARTICLE 4 ELIGIBILITY.
A-4
4.1 Incentive Stock Options. Only Employees of the Company, a Parent, or a Subsidiary shall be eligible for the grant of ISOs. In
addition,  an  Employee  who  owns  more  than  10%  of  the  total  combined  voting  power  of  all  classes  of  outstanding  stock  of  the
Company or of any of its Parents or Subsidiaries shall not be eligible for the grant of an ISO unless the additional requirements set
forth in Section 422(c)(5) of the Code are satisfied. Notwithstanding anything in Article 3, or elsewhere in this Plan, to the contrary
and  subject  to  adjustment  as  provided  in  Article  11  of  this  Plan,  the  aggregate  number  of  Common  Shares  actually  issued  or
transferred by the Company upon exercise of ISOs will not exceed 207,652 Common Shares.
4.2 Other Grants. Employees shall be eligible for the grant of Restricted Shares, Stock Units, NSOs, SARs or Performance Cash
Awards under this Plan. No Employee of an Affiliate will be eligible for the grant of an NSO or SAR if the Company is not an eligible
issuer of service recipient stock with respect to such Employee under Treasury Regulation § 1.409A-1(b)(5)(iii)(E). No person shall
be eligible for an Award unless Common Shares that might be transferred in connection with the Award can be registered using
Form S-8 under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
ARTICLE 5 OPTIONS.
5.1 Stock Option Agreement. Each grant of an Option under the Plan shall be evidenced by a Stock Option Agreement between
the Optionee and the Company.
5.2 Such Option shall be subject to all applicable terms of the Plan and may be subject to any other terms that are not inconsistent
with the Plan. The Stock Option Agreement shall specify whether the Option is an ISO or an NSO. The provisions of the various
Stock Option Agreements entered into under the Plan need not be identical.
5.3 Number of Shares. Each Stock Option Agreement shall specify the number of Common Shares subject to the Option and shall
provide for the adjustment of such number in accordance with Article 11. The total number of Options granted to any single Optionee
in any single calendar year shall not cover more than 100,000 Common Shares. The limitations set forth in the preceding sentence
shall be subject to adjustment in accordance with Article 11.
5.4 Exercise Price.  Each  Stock  Option  Agreement  shall  specify  the  Exercise  Price,  which  shall  be  the  Fair  Market  Value  of  a
Common  Share,  as  determined  by  the  Committee.  The  preceding  sentence  shall  not  apply  to  Options  granted  pursuant  to  an
assumption of, or substitution for, another option in a manner that would satisfy the requirements of Section 424(a) of the Code,
whether or not such section is applicable.
5.5 Exercisability and Term. Each Stock Option Agreement shall specify the dates or events when all or any installment of the
Option is to become exercisable; provided, that except as otherwise described in a MIP Option Agreement or otherwise described in
this Plan, no grant of Options may become exercisable  sooner  than  after  one  (1)  year.  The  Stock  Option  Agreement  shall  also
specify the term of the Option; provided that the term of an Option shall in no event exceed 10 years from the date of grant. A Stock
Option Agreement may provide for accelerated exercisability, including in the event of the Optionee’s death, disability, or retirement
or other events and may provide for expiration prior to the end of its term in the event of the termination of the Optionee’s Service.
Options granted under this Plan may not provide for any dividends or dividend equivalents thereon.
5.6 Effect of Change in Control. The Committee may determine, at the time of granting an Option or thereafter, that such Option
shall become exercisable as to all or part of the Common Shares subject to such Option in the event that a Change in Control
occurs with respect to the Company or in the event that the Optionee’s employment is terminated after a Change in Control. In
addition, acceleration of exercisability may be required under Section 11.3.
A-5
5.7 Buyout Provisions. The Committee may at any time (a) offer to buy out for a payment in cash or cash equivalents an Option
previously granted or (b) authorize an Optionee to elect to cash out an Option previously granted, in either case at such time and
based upon such terms and conditions as the Committee shall establish; provided that cash payments shall not exceed the Fair
Market Value less the Exercise Price.
5.8 Notification Upon Disqualifying Disposition of an Incentive Stock Option. Each Participant awarded an ISO under this Plan
shall notify the Company in writing immediately after the date the Participant makes a disqualifying disposition of any Common
Shares acquired pursuant to the exercise of such ISO. A disqualifying disposition is any disposition (including, without limitation,
any sale) of such Common Shares before the later of (i) two (2) years after the date of grant of the ISO and (ii) one (1) year after the
date of exercise of the ISO. The Company may, if determined by the Committee and in accordance with procedures established by
the Committee, retain possession, as agent for the applicable Participant, of any Common Shares acquired pursuant to the exercise
of  an  ISO  until  the  end  of  the  period  described  in  the  preceding  sentence,  subject  to  complying  with  any  instruction  from  such
Participant as to the sale of such Common Shares.
ARTICLE 6 PAYMENT FOR OPTION SHARES.
6.1 General Rule. The Exercise Price of Common Shares issued upon exercise of Options shall be payable in full entirely in cash
or cash equivalents at the time when such Common Shares are purchased, except that the Committee at its sole discretion may
accept payment of the Exercise Price in any other form(s) described in this Article 6. However, if the Optionee is an Executive Officer
or Director of the Company, he or she may pay the Exercise Price in a form other than cash or cash equivalents only to the extent
permitted by Section 13(k) of the Exchange Act.
6.2 Surrender of Stock. With the Committee’s consent, provided that the Company has an effective registration statement on Form
S-8  (or  its  successor)  covering  the  issuance  of  the  Common  Shares,  all  or  any  part  of  the  Exercise  Price  may  be  paid  by
surrendering, or attesting to the ownership of, Common Shares that are already owned by the Optionee. Such Common Shares
shall be valued at their Fair Market Value on the date when the new Common Shares are purchased under the Plan.
6.3 Exercise/Sale. With the Committee’s consent, all or any part of the Exercise Price, and any withholding taxes, may be paid by
delivering (on a form prescribed by the Company) an irrevocable direction to a securities broker approved by the Company to sell all
or part of the Common Shares being purchased under the Plan and to deliver all or part of the sales proceeds to the Company.
6.4 Promissory Note. With the Committee’s consent, all or any part of the Exercise Price and any withholding taxes may, except in
the  case  of  an  Executive  Officer  of  the  Company,  be  paid  by  delivering  (on  a  form  prescribed  by  the  Company)  a  full-recourse
promissory note.
6.5 Other Forms of Payment. With the Committee’s consent, all or any part of the Exercise Price and any withholding taxes may be
paid in any other form that is consistent with applicable laws and rules and regulations.
ARTICLE 7 STOCK APPRECIATION RIGHTS.
7.1 SAR Agreement. Each grant of a SAR under the Plan shall be evidenced by a SAR Agreement between the Optionee and the
Company.  Such  SAR  shall  be  subject  to  all  applicable  terms  of  the  Plan  and  may  be  subject  to  any  other  terms  that  are  not
inconsistent with the Plan. The provisions of the various SAR Agreements entered into under the Plan need not be identical.
7.2 Number of Shares. Each SAR Agreement shall specify the number of Common Shares to which the SAR pertains and shall
provide for the adjustment of such number in accordance with Article 11. The total number of SARs granted to any single Participant
in any single calendar year shall not cover more than 100,000 Common Shares.
A-6
7.3 Exercise Price. Each SAR Agreement shall specify the Exercise Price, which shall in no event be less than 100% of the Fair
Market Value of a Common Share on the date of grant. The preceding sentence shall not apply to SARs granted pursuant to an
assumption of, or substitution for, another SAR in a manner that would satisfy the requirements of Section 424(a) of the Code if such
section were applicable.
7.4 Exercisability and Term. Each SAR Agreement shall specify the dates or events when all or any installment of the SAR is to
become exercisable; provided, no grant of SARs may become exercisable sooner than after one (1) year. The SAR Agreement shall
also  specify  the  term  of  the  SAR.  A  SAR  Agreement  may  provide  for  accelerated  exercisability,  including  in  the  event  of  the
Optionee’s death, disability, or retirement or other events and may provide for expiration prior to the end of its term in the event of the
termination of the Optionee’s Service. SARs may be awarded in combination with Options, and such an Award may provide that the
SARs will not be exercisable unless the related Options are forfeited. A SAR granted in combination with an ISO: (i) must be granted
at the same time as the ISO to which it relates; (ii) must be exercisable only when the current Fair Market Value of Common Shares
exceeds the ISO’s exercise price and the ISO is otherwise exercisable; (iii) may not be transferrable except when and to the extent
that the ISO is transferrable under Section 3.4 of the Plan; and (iv) must have economic and tax consequences upon exercise that
are no more favorable than those upon the exercise of the ISO in combination with which it was granted followed by an immediate
sale of the Common Shares that would be received upon such ISO’s exercise. A SAR granted under the Plan not in combination
with an ISO may provide that it will be exercisable only in the event of a Change in Control.
7.5 Effect of Change in Control. The Committee may determine, at the time of granting a SAR or thereafter, that such SAR shall
become exercisable as to all or part of the Common Shares subject to such SAR in the event that the Company is subject to a
Change in Control or in the event that the Optionee’s employment is terminated after a Change in Control. In addition, acceleration
of exercisability may be required under Section 11.3.
7.6 Exercise of SARs. Upon exercise of a SAR, the Optionee (or any person having the right to exercise the SAR after his or her
death or under Section 3.4 of this Plan) shall receive from the Company: (a) Common Shares; (b) cash; or (c) a combination of
Common Shares and cash, as the Committee shall determine. The amount of cash and/or the Fair Market Value of Common Shares
received upon exercise of SARs shall, in the aggregate, be equal to the amount by which the Fair Market Value (on the date of
surrender) of the Common Shares subject to the SARs exceeds the Exercise Price.
ARTICLE 8 RESTRICTED SHARES.
8.1 Restricted Shares Agreement. Each grant of Restricted Shares under the Plan shall be evidenced by a Restricted Shares
Agreement between the recipient and the Company. Such Restricted Shares shall be subject to all applicable terms of the Plan and
may  be  subject  to  any  other  terms  that  are  not  inconsistent  with  the  Plan.  The  provisions  of  the  various  Restricted  Shares
Agreements entered into under the Plan need not be identical.
8.2 Consideration for Awards. Restricted Shares shall be granted to Participants at no additional cost to them; provided, however,
that the value of the services performed by any Participant receiving Restricted Shares must, in the opinion of the Committee, equal
or exceed the par value of the Restricted Shares to be granted to such Participant.
8.3 Performance and/or Vesting Conditions. Each Award of Restricted Shares may or may not be contingent on the satisfaction
of  performance  targets,  or  subject  to  vesting.  Vesting  shall  occur,  in  full  or  in  installments,  upon  satisfaction  of  the  conditions
specified in the Restricted Shares Agreement, and such Restricted Shares Agreement may provide for accelerated vesting of the
Restricted Shares, including in the event of the Participant’s death, disability or other events; provided, that except as otherwise
described  in  a  Restricted  Shares  Agreement  or  otherwise  described  in  this  Plan,  no  grant  of  Restricted  Shares  shall  have  the
restrictions
A-7
eliminated for a period of time shorter than three (3) years if based only on the passage of time rather than performance targets,
except that the restrictions may be removed ratably during the three-year period as determined by the Committee. The Committee
may include as vesting conditions or as conditions for making an Award of Restricted Shares the requirement that the performance
of the Company or a business unit of the Company for a specified period equal or exceed a target determined in advance by the
Committee.  The  Committee  shall  determine  such  performance  metrics.  If  the  Award  is  intended  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of
Section 162(m) of the Code, such target shall be based on one or more of the criteria set forth in Appendix A. In no event shall the
number of Restricted Shares subject to the award and/or the vesting of which is or are subject to performance-based conditions
intended to satisfy the requirements of Section 162(m) of the Code that are granted to any single Participant in a single calendar
year exceed 100,000 Common Shares. The satisfaction of any performance target and/or vesting may be waived in the case of a
Change in Control or the Participant’s death or disability. The Company may retain the certificates representing shares of Restricted
Stock  in  the  Company’s  possession  until  such  time  as  all  conditions  or  restrictions  applicable  to  such  shares,  including  any
conditions or restrictions not constituting a substantial risk of forfeiture under Section 83 of the Code, are satisfied or have lapsed,
and the Participant shall execute in favor of the Company a blank stock power with respect to such shares of Restricted Stock.
Alternatively  or  additionally,  the  Company  may  cause  such  Restricted  Shares  to  bear  an  appropriate  legend  indicating  their
nontransferability, forfeitability, and any additional restrictions placed on them.
8.4 Voting and Dividend Rights. The holders of Restricted Shares awarded under the Plan shall have the same voting, dividend,
and  other  rights  as  the  Company’s  other  stockholders.  Any  dividends  or  other  distributions  paid  on  Restricted  Shares  may,  as
specified by the Committee in the applicable Award, be (a) accumulated and paid when such Restricted Shares vest, (b) invested in
additional  Restricted  Shares,  or  (c)  paid  currently  to  the  holder.  Any  dividends  not  paid  currently  shall  be  subject  to  the  same
conditions  and  restrictions,  including  risks  of  forfeiture,  as  the  Award  with  which  they  relate;  provided,  however,  that  dividend
equivalents  or  other  distributions  on  Common  Shares  underlying  Restricted  Shares  with  restrictions  that  lapse  as  a  result  of
achievement of performance targets will be deferred until and paid contingent upon the achievement of applicable performance
targets.
ARTICLE 9 STOCK UNITS.
9.1 Stock Units Agreement. Each grant of Stock Units shall be evidenced by a Stock Units Agreement between the Participant and
the Company. Awards of Stock Units shall be subject to all applicable terms of the Plan and may be subject to any other terms that
are not inconsistent with the Plan. The provisions of the various Stock Units Agreements entered into under the Plan need not be
identical.
9.2 Payment for Awards. To the extent that an Award is granted in the form of Stock Units, no cash consideration shall be required
of the Award recipients.
9.3 Performance and/or Vesting Conditions. Each Award of Stock Units will constitute the agreement by the Company to deliver
Common Shares or cash to the Participant in the future in consideration of the performance of services. Each Award of Stock Units
(other than with respect to the MIP Stock Units) may or may not be contingent on the satisfaction of performance targets, or subject to
vesting. Vesting shall occur, in full or in installments, upon satisfaction of the conditions specified in the Stock Units Agreement, and
such Stock Units Agreement may provide for accelerated vesting of the Stock Units, including in the event of the Participant’s death,
disability or other events; provided, that except as otherwise described in a Stock Units Agreement or otherwise described in this
Plan, no grant of Stock Units shall have the restrictions eliminated for a period of time shorter than three (3) years if based only on
the passage of time rather than performance targets, except that the restrictions may be removed ratably during the three-year period
as  determined  by  the  Committee.  If  the  Stock  Units  (other  than  the  MIP  Stock  Units)  specify  that  the  period  of  restriction  will
terminate only upon the achievement of performance targets or that the Stock Units will be earned based on the achievement of
performance targets, then, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Section 9.3, the period of
A-8
restriction may not be less than one (1) year. Other than with respect to the Stock Units that are MIP Awards, the Committee may
include as vesting conditions or as conditions for any Award of Stock Units the requirement that the performance of the Company or
a business unit of the Company for a specified period (not less than one (1) year) equal or exceed a target determined in advance by
the Committee. The Committee shall determine such performance metrics. If the Award is intended to satisfy the requirements of
Section 162(m) of the Code, such target shall be based on one or more of the criteria set forth in Appendix A. In no event shall the
number of Stock Units subject to the award and/or the vesting of which is or are subject to performance-based conditions intended to
satisfy the requirements of Section 162(m) of the Code that are granted to any single Participant in a single calendar year exceed
100,000  Common  Shares.  The  satisfaction  of  any  performance  target  and/or  vesting  condition  may  be  waived  in  the  case  of  a
Change in Control or the Participant’s death or disability.
9.4 Voting and Dividend Rights. The holders of Stock Units shall have no voting rights. Prior to settlement or forfeiture, any Stock
Unit awarded under the Plan may, at the Committee’s discretion, carry with it a right to dividend equivalents. Such right entitles the
holder to be credited with an amount equal to the dividends or other distributions paid on an equal number of Common Shares while
the Stock Units are outstanding. As specified by the Committee in the applicable Award, any cash dividend equivalents may be
either (a) paid currently, free of any vesting condition, or (b) accumulated and paid at the same time and in the same form as the
Stock Units to which they relate, but only if such Stock Units become vested; provided, however, that dividend equivalents or other
distributions  on  Common  Shares  underlying  Stock  Units  with  restrictions  that  lapse  as  a  result  of  achievement  of  performance
targets will be deferred until and paid contingent upon the achievement of applicable performance targets.
9.5 Form and Time of Settlement of Stock Units. Settlement of vested Stock Units may be made in the form of (a) cash,
(b) Common Shares, or (c) any combination of both, as determined by the Committee. The actual number of Stock Units
eligible for settlement may be larger or smaller than the number included in the original Award, based on predetermined
performance factors. Methods of converting Stock Units into cash may include (without limitation) a method based on the
average Fair Market Value of Common Shares over a series of trading days. Vested Stock Units may be settled in a lump
sum or in installments, and the distribution may occur or commence when all vesting conditions applicable to the Stock
Units have been satisfied or have lapsed, or it may be deferred to any later date; provided, however,  that  the  form  and
timing of payment of Stock Units shall satisfy the requirements of Section 409A of the Code in form and operation. The
amount of a deferred distribution may be increased by an interest factor or by dividend equivalents. Until an Award of
Stock Units is settled, the number of such Stock Units shall be subject to adjustment pursuant to Article 11.
9.6 Creditors’ Rights. A holder of Stock Units shall have no rights other than those of a general creditor of the Company.
Stock Units represent an unfunded and unsecured obligation of the Company, subject to the terms and conditions of the
applicable Stock Units Award Agreement.
ARTICLE 10 PERFORMANCE CASH AWARDS.
10.1 Performance Cash Award Agreement. Each grant of a Performance Cash Award shall be evidenced by a Performance
Cash Award Agreement between the Participant and the Company. Awards of Performance Cash Awards shall be subject
to  all  applicable  terms  of  the  Plan  and  may  be  subject  to  any  other  terms  that  are  not  inconsistent  with  the  Plan.  The
provisions of the various Performance Cash Award Agreements entered into under the Plan need not be identical.
10.2 Payment  for  Awards.  To  the  extent  that  an  Award  is  granted  in  the  form  of  a  Performance  Cash  Award,  no  cash
consideration shall be required of the Award recipients.
10.3 Performance and/or Vesting Conditions. Each Performance Cash Award shall be contingent on the satisfaction of a
performance target intended to satisfy the requirements of Section 162(m) of the Code. The Committee shall include as a
condition for a Performance Cash Award, the requirement that the performance of
A-9
the Company or a business unit of the Company for a specified period (not less than one (1) year) equal or exceed a target
determined  in  advance  by  the  Committee.  The  Committee  shall  determine  such  performance  metrics.  If  the  Award  is
intended  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  Section  162(m)  of  the  Code,  such  target  shall  be  based  on  one  or  more  of  the
criteria set forth in Appendix A. In no event shall the total amount of all Performance Cash Awards that are intended to
satisfy the requirements of Section 162(m) of the Code that are granted to any single Participant in a single calendar year
exceed $1,200,000. The satisfaction of any performance target and/or vesting condition may be waived in the case of a
Change in Control or the Participant’s death or disability.
10.4 Form and Time of Settlement of Performance Cash Awards. The form and timing of payment of Performance Cash
Awards  shall  satisfy  the  requirements  of  Section  409A  of  the  Code  in  form  and  operation.  The  amount  of  a  deferred
distribution may be increased by an interest factor or by dividend equivalents. Performance Cash Awards shall be settled
in cash in accordance with the terms of the applicable Performance Cash Award Agreement.
10.5 Creditors’ Rights. A holder of an unpaid Performance Cash Award shall have no rights other than those of a general
creditor  of  the  Company.  Unpaid  Performance  Cash  Awards  represent  an  unfunded  and  unsecured  obligation  of  the
Company, subject to the terms and conditions of the applicable Performance Cash Award Agreement.
ARTICLE 11 PROTECTION AGAINST DILUTION.
11.1 Adjustments.  In  the  event  of  a  subdivision  of  the  outstanding  Common  Shares,  stock  split,  reverse  stock  split,  a
declaration of a dividend payable in Common Shares, a combination or consolidation of the outstanding Common Shares
(by  reclassification  or  otherwise)  into  a  lesser  number  of  Common  Shares,  or  an  exchange  of  shares,  corresponding
adjustments shall automatically be made, without the necessity for Committee action in each of the following:
(a) The number of Options, SARs, Restricted Shares, and Stock Units available for future Awards under Article 3;
(b) The limitations set forth in Sections 5.3, 7.2, 8.3, 9.3, and 10.3;
(c) The number of Common Shares covered by each outstanding Option and SAR;
(d) The Exercise Price under each outstanding Option and SAR;
(e) The number of Stock Units included in any prior Award that has not yet been settled; and
(f) The number of Restricted Shares subject to any unvested Award.
In the event of a declaration of an extraordinary dividend payable in a form other than Common Shares in an amount that
has a material effect on the price of Common Shares, a recapitalization, a spin-off, or any other change in the Common
Shares  that  otherwise  would  result  from  any  split-off,  spin-out,  split-up  or  a  similar  occurrence,  issuance  of  rights  or
warrants to purchase securities or any other corporate transaction or event having an effect similar to any of the foregoing,
the Committee shall make such adjustments as it, in its sole discretion, deems appropriate in one or more of the foregoing.
Moreover, in the event of any such transaction or event or in the event of a Change in Control, the Committee shall provide
in substitution for any or all outstanding awards under this Plan such alternative consideration (including cash), if any, as
it, in good faith, shall determine to be equitable in the circumstances and may require in connection therewith the surrender
of all awards so replaced in manner that complies with Section 409A. In addition, for each Option or SAR with an Exercise
Price greater than the consideration offered in connection with any such transaction or event or Change in Control, the
Committee may, in its discretion, elect to cancel such Option or SAR. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any such adjustment
to the number specified in Section 4.1 will be made only if and to the extent that such adjustment would not cause any
Option intended to qualify as an ISO to fail to so qualify. Except as
A-10
provided in this Article 11, a Participant shall have no rights by reason of any issuance by the Company of stock of any
class or securities convertible into stock of any class, any subdivision or consolidation of shares of stock of any class, the
payment of any stock dividend, or any other increase or decrease in the number of shares of stock of any class.
11.2 Dissolution  or  Liquidation.  To  the  extent  not  previously  exercised  or  settled,  Options,  SARs,  Stock  Units  and
Performance Cash Awards shall terminate immediately before the dissolution or liquidation of the Company.
11.3 Reorganizations. In the event that the Company is a party to a merger, consolidation, or sale of fifty percent (50%) or
more  of  the  Company’s  stock  or  assets,  all  outstanding  Awards  shall  be  subject  to  the  agreement  of  merger  or
consolidation. Such agreement may provide for one or more of Section 11.3(a) through (g) set forth below.
(a) The continuation of such outstanding Awards by the Company (if the Company is the surviving corporation).
(b) The assumption of such outstanding Awards by the surviving corporation or its parent, provided that the assumption of
Options or SARs shall comply with Section 424(a) of the Code (whether or not the Options are ISOs).
(c) The substitution by the surviving corporation or its parent of new awards for such outstanding Awards, provided that
the substitution of Options or SARs shall comply with Section 424(a) of the Code (whether or not the Options are ISOs).
(d) Full exercisability of outstanding Options and SARs and full vesting of the Common Shares subject to such Options
and SARs, followed by the cancellation of such Options and SARs to the extent not exercised before the closing of the
merger or consolidation. The full exercisability of such Options and SARs and full vesting of such Common Shares shall
be contingent on the closing of such merger or consolidation. In this case, the Optionees shall be able to exercise such
Options and SARs during a period of not less than five (5) full business days preceding the closing date of such merger or
consolidation, unless (i) a shorter period is required to permit a timely closing of such merger or consolidation and (ii) such
shorter period still offers the Optionees a reasonable opportunity to exercise such Options and SARs. Any exercise of
such Options and SARs during such period shall be contingent on the closing of such merger or consolidation.
(e) The cancellation of outstanding Options and SARs and a payment to the Optionees equal to the excess of (i) the Fair
Market Value of the Common Shares subject to such Options and SARs (whether or not such Options and SARs are then
exercisable or such Common Shares are then vested) as of the closing date of such merger or consolidation over (ii) their
Exercise  Price.  Such  payment  shall  be  made  in  the  form  of  cash,  cash  equivalents,  or  securities  of  the  surviving
corporation or its parent with a Fair Market Value equal to the required amount. Such payment may be made in installments
and  may  be  deferred  until  the  date  or  dates  when  such  Options  and  SARs  would  have  become  exercisable  or  such
Common Shares would have vested. Such payment may be subject to vesting based on the Optionee’s continuing Service,
provided that the vesting schedule shall not be less favorable to the Optionee than the schedule under which such Options
and  SARs  would  have  become  exercisable  or  such  Common  Shares  would  have  vested.  If  the  Exercise  Price  of  the
Common Shares subject to such Options and SARs exceeds the Fair Market Value of such Common Shares, then such
Options and SARs may be cancelled without making a payment to the Optionees. For purposes of this Subsection (e), the
Fair Market Value of any security shall be determined without regard to any vesting conditions that may apply to such
security.
(f) The cancellation of outstanding Stock Units and a payment to the Participants equal to the Fair Market Value of the
Common Shares subject to such Stock Units (whether or not such Stock Units are then
A-11
vested) as of the closing date of such merger or consolidation. Such payment shall be made in the form of cash, cash
equivalents, or securities of the surviving corporation or its parent with a Fair Market Value equal to the required amount.
Such payment may be made in installments and may be deferred until the date or dates when such Stock Units would have
vested. Such payment may be subject to vesting based on the Participant’s continuing Service, provided that the vesting
schedule shall not be less favorable to the Participant than the schedule under which such Stock Units would have vested.
For purposes of this Subsection (f), the Fair Market Value of any security shall be determined without regard to any vesting
conditions that may apply to such security.
(g) Full vesting of the Common Shares subject to Restricted Shares Agreements. The full vesting of the Restricted Shares
shall be contingent on the closing of such merger or consolidation.
The provisions of this Section 11.3, as well as the provisions of Sections 8.3 and 9.3 and of any Stock Option Agreement,
SAR  Agreement,  Restricted  Shares  Agreement,  or  Stock  Units  Agreement  providing  for  exercisability,  transfer  or
accelerated vesting of any Option, SAR, Restricted Shares, or Stock Units shall be inapplicable to an Award granted within
six (6) months before the occurrence of a merger, acquisition, or other Change in Control if the holder of such Option, SAR,
Restricted Shares, or Stock Units is subject to the reporting requirements of Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act and no
exception from liability under Section 16(b) of the Exchange Act is available to such holder.
ARTICLE 12 AWARDS UNDER OTHER PLANS.
The  Company  may  grant  awards  under  other  plans  or  programs.  Such  awards  may  be  settled  in  the  form  of  Common
Shares issued under this Plan. Such Common Shares shall be treated for all purposes under the Plan like Common Shares
issued in settlement of Stock Units and shall, when issued, reduce the number of Common Shares available under Article
3.
ARTICLE 13 LIMITATION ON RIGHTS.
13.1 Retention Rights. Neither the Plan nor any Award granted under the Plan shall be deemed to give any individual a right
to remain an Employee or otherwise in the Company’s service. The Company and its Parents, Subsidiaries and Affiliates
reserve the right to terminate the Service of any Participant at any time, with or without cause, subject to applicable laws,
the Company’s certificate of incorporation and by-laws, and a written employment agreement (if any).
13.2 Stockholder Rights. Except as the Committee may provide in the applicable Award Agreement, a Participant shall have
no dividend rights, voting rights, or other rights as a stockholder with respect to any Common Shares covered by his or
her Award prior to the time when a stock certificate for such Common Shares is issued or ownership of such Common
Shares is noted on the transfer records of the Company or, if applicable, the time when he or she becomes entitled to
receive  such  Common  Shares  by  filing  any  required  notice  of  exercise  and  paying  any  required  Exercise  Price.  No
adjustment shall be made for cash dividends or other rights for which the record date is prior to such time, except as
expressly provided in the Plan or Award.
13.3 Regulatory Requirements. Any other provision of the Plan notwithstanding, the obligation of the Company to issue
Common Shares under the Plan shall be subject to all applicable laws, rules and regulations, and such approval by any
regulatory body as may be required. The Company reserves the right to restrict, in whole or in part, the delivery of Common
Shares pursuant to any Award prior to the satisfaction of all legal requirements relating to the issuance of such Common
Shares, to their registration, qualification, or listing, or to an exemption from registration, qualification, or listing.
13.4 No Fractional Shares. No fractional shares shall be issued or delivered pursuant to the Plan. The Committee shall
determine whether cash or other property shall be issued or paid in lieu of fractional shares or whether such fractional
shares or any rights thereto shall be forfeited or otherwise eliminated.
A-12
13.5 Clawback. Notwithstanding any other provisions in this Plan, any Award which is subject to recovery under any law,
government regulation or stock exchange listing requirement, will be subject to such deductions and clawback as may be
required to be made pursuant to such law, government regulation or stock exchange listing requirement (or any policy
adopted by the Company pursuant to any such law, government regulation or stock exchange listing requirement).
13.6 Investment Representations; Company Policy. The Committee may require each person acquiring shares of Common
Stock pursuant to a Stock Option or other award under the Plan to represent to and agree with the Company in writing that
the Participant is acquiring the shares for investment without a view to distribution thereof. Each person acquiring shares
of Common Stock pursuant to a Stock Option or other award under the Plan shall be required to abide by all policies of the
Company  in  effect  at  the  time  of  such  acquisition  and  thereafter  with  respect  to  the  ownership  and  trading  of  the
Company’s securities.
13.7 Non-Registered Stock. The Common Shares to be distributed under this Plan have not been, as of the date the Plan
was adopted by the Board, registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or any applicable state or foreign
securities  laws  and  the  Company  has  no  obligation  to  any  Participant  to  register  the  Common  Shares  or  to  assist  the
Participant  in  obtaining  an  exemption  from  the  various  registration  requirements,  or  to  list  the  Common  Shares  on  a
national securities exchange or any other trading or quotation system.
13.8 ISO Qualification. Except with respect to Section 13.9, to the extent that any provision of this Plan would prevent any
Option that was intended to qualify as an ISO from qualifying as such, that provision will be null and void with respect to
such Option. Such provision, however, will remain in effect for other Options and there will be no further effect on any
provision of this Plan.
13.9 Approved Leave. Absence on leave approved by a duly constituted officer of the Company or any of its Subsidiaries
will  not  be  considered  interruption  or  termination  of  service  of  any  employee  for  any  purposes  of  this  Plan  or  awards
granted hereunder.
13.10 Miscellaneous Provisions.
(a)  Except  with  respect  to  Options  and  SARs,  the  Committee  may  permit  Participants  to  elect  to  defer  the  issuance  of
Common Shares under the Plan pursuant to such rules, procedures or programs as it may establish for purposes of this
Plan  and  which  are  intended  to  comply  with  the  requirements  of  Section  409A.  The  Committee  also  may  provide  that
deferred issuances and settlements include the payment or crediting of dividend equivalents or interest on the deferral
amounts.
(b) If any provision of this Plan is or becomes invalid, illegal or unenforceable in any jurisdiction, or would disqualify this
Plan  or  any  award  under  any  law  deemed  applicable  by  the  Committee,  such  provision  will  be  construed  or  deemed
amended or limited in scope to conform to applicable laws or, in the discretion of the Committee, it will be stricken and the
remainder of this Plan will remain in full force and effect.
ARTICLE 14 WITHHOLDING TAXES.
14.1 General. To the extent required by applicable federal, state, local, or foreign law, a Participant or his or her successor
shall make arrangements satisfactory to the Company for the satisfaction of any withholding tax obligations that arise in
connection with the Plan. The Company shall not be required to issue any Common Shares or make any cash payment
under the Plan until such obligations are satisfied.
14.2 Share  Withholding.  To  the  extent  that  applicable  law  subjects  a  Participant  to  tax  withholding  obligations,  the
Committee may, in its discretion, permit such Participant to satisfy all or part of such obligations by having the Company
withhold all or a portion of any Common Shares that otherwise would be issued to him or her or by surrendering all or a
portion of any Common Shares that he or she previously acquired. Such
A-13
Common  Shares  shall  be  valued  at  their  Fair  Market  Value  on  the  date  when  they  are  withheld  or  surrendered.  This
Section 14.2 shall apply only to the minimum extent required by applicable tax laws.
ARTICLE 15 FUTURE OF THE PLAN.
15.1 Term of the Plan. The Plan, as set forth herein, shall become effective on the date of the effectiveness of the approval
of the Plan by the Company’s stockholders, provided that it is adopted by the Board before or concurrently with such
stockholder  approval.  The  Plan  shall  remain  in  effect  until  the  date  when  the  Plan  is  terminated  under  Section  15.2;
provided, however, that no ISO may be granted under the Plan after the date that is 10 years after the date when the Plan
was approved by the Company’s stockholders.
15.2 Amendment or Termination.
(a)  The  Board  may,  at  any  time  and  for  any  reason,  amend  the  Plan  in  whole  or  in  part;  provided,  however,  that  if  an
amendment  to  this  Plan  (i)  would  materially  increase  the  benefits  accruing  to  participants  under  this  Plan,  (ii)  would
materially  increase  the  number  of  securities  which  may  be  issued  under  this  Plan,  (iii)  would  materially  modify  the
requirements for participation in this Plan, or (iv) must otherwise be approved by the shareholders of the Company in order
to comply with applicable law or the rules of the Nasdaq Global Market or, if the Common Shares are not traded on the
Nasdaq Global Market, the principal national securities exchange upon which the Common Shares are traded or quoted,
then, such amendment will be subject to shareholder approval and will not be effective unless and until such approval has
been obtained.
(b) Except in connection with a corporate transaction or event described in Article 11 of this Plan, the terms of outstanding
awards may not be amended to reduce the Exercise Price of outstanding Options or SARs, or cancel outstanding Options
or SARs in exchange for cash, other awards or Options or SARs with an Exercise Price that is less than the Exercise Price
of the original Options or SARs, as applicable, without shareholder approval. This Section 15.2(b) is intended to prohibit
the  repricing  of  “underwater”  Options  and  SARs  and  will  not  be  construed  to  prohibit  the  adjustments  provided  for  in
Article 11 of this Plan. Notwithstanding any provision of this Plan to the contrary, this Section 15.2(b) may not be amended
without approval by the Company’s shareholders.
(c) If permitted by Section 409A and Section 162(m) of the Code, but subject to the paragraph that follows, including in the
case of termination of employment by reason of death, disability or retirement, or in the case of unforeseeable emergency
or other special circumstances or in the event of a Change in Control, to the extent a Participant holds an Option or SAR
not immediately exercisable in full, or any Restricted Shares as to which the substantial risk of forfeiture or the prohibition
or restriction on transfer has not lapsed, or any Stock Units as to which the restriction period has not been completed, or
any Stock Units or Performance Cash Awards which have not been fully earned, or who holds Common Shares subject to
any transfer restriction imposed pursuant to Section 3.4 of this Plan, the Committee may, in its sole discretion, accelerate
the time at which such Option, SAR or other award may be exercised or the time at which such substantial risk of forfeiture
or prohibition or restriction on transfer will lapse or the time when such restriction period will end or the time at which such
Stock  Units  or  Performance  Cash  Awards  will  be  deemed  to  have  been  fully  earned  or  the  time  when  such  transfer
restriction will terminate or may waive any other limitation or requirement under any such award, except in the case of a
Qualified Performance-Based Award where such action would result in the loss of the otherwise available exemption of the
award under Section 162(m) of the Code.
(d) Subject to Section 15.2(b) hereof, the Committee may amend the terms of any award theretofore granted under this Plan
prospectively or retroactively, except in the case of a Qualified Performance-Based Award (other than in connection with
the Participant’s death or disability, or a Change in Control) where such action would result in the loss of the otherwise
available  exemption  of  the  award  under  Section  162(m)  of  the  Code.  In  such  case,  the  Committee  will  not  make  any
modification of the performance targets or the
A-14
level or levels of achievement with respect to such Qualified Performance-Based Award. Subject to Article 11 above, no
such amendment will impair the rights of any Participant without his or her consent.
(e) The Board may, in its discretion, terminate this Plan at any time. Termination of this Plan will not affect the rights of
Participants  or  their  successors  under  any  awards  outstanding  hereunder  and  not  exercised  in  full  on  the  date  of
termination. No Awards shall be granted under the Plan after the termination thereof. The termination of the Plan, or any
amendment thereof, shall not affect any Award previously granted under the Plan.
(f) The terms of MIP Option Agreements and MIP Stock Units Agreements may only be amended with the consent of the
applicable Employee identified in the MIP Grant Allocation Schedule.
15.3 Stockholder Approval. An amendment of the Plan shall be subject to the approval of the Company’s stockholders
only  to  the  extent  required  by  applicable  laws  and  rules  and  regulations.  Among  such  applicable  laws  and  rules  and
regulations,  Section  162(m)  of  the  Code  requires  that  the  Company’s  stockholders  reapprove  the  list  of  available
performance criteria set forth in Appendix A not later than the first meeting of stockholders that occurs in the fifth (5th) year
following the year in which the Company’s stockholders previously approved such criteria.
ARTICLE 16 DEFINITIONS.
16.1 “Affiliate” means any entity other than the Company, a Parent, or a Subsidiary, if the Company and/or one or more
Parents and/or one or more Subsidiaries own, in the aggregate, not less than 50% of such entity.
16.2 “Award” means any award of an Option, a SAR, a Restricted Share, a Performance Cash Award, or a Stock Unit under
the Plan.
16.3 “Award Agreement” means a Stock Option Agreement, SAR Agreement, Restricted Shares Agreement, Performance
Cash Award Agreement or Stock Units Agreement.
16.4 “Board” means the Company’s Board of Directors, as constituted from time to time.
16.5 “Change in Control,” unless otherwise defined in an Award Agreement, shall mean the occurrence of one or more of
the following events that occurs after the Closing Date:
(a)  Change  in  Board  Composition.  Individuals  who  constitute  the  members  of  the  Board  as  of  the  date  hereof  (the
“Incumbent Directors”), cease for any reason to constitute at least a majority of members of the Board; provided that any
individual becoming a director of the Company subsequent to the date hereof shall be considered an Incumbent Director if
such individual’s appointment, election or nomination was approved by a vote of at least 50% of the Incumbent Directors;
provided further that any such individual whose initial assumption of office is in connection with an actual or threatened
election contest relating to the election of members of the Board or other actual or threatened solicitation of proxies or
contests by or on behalf of a “person” (within the meaning of Sections 13(d) and 14(d) of the Exchange Act) other than the
Board, including by reason of agreement intended to avoid or settle any such actual or threatened contest or solicitation,
shall not be considered an Incumbent Director;
(b) Business Combination. Consummation of (i) a reorganization, merger, consolidation, share exchange or other business
combination involving the Company or any of its subsidiaries or the disposition of all or substantially all the assets of the
Company, whether in one or a series of related transactions, or (ii) the acquisition of assets or stock of another entity by
the  Company  (either,  a  “Business  Combination”),  excluding,  however,  any  Business  Combination  pursuant  to  which:
(A)  individuals  who  were  the  “beneficial  owners”  (as  such  term  is  defined  in Rule  13d-3  under  the  Exchange  Act),
respectively,  of  the  then  outstanding  shares  of  common  stock  of  the  Company  (the  “Outstanding  Stock”)  and  the
combined voting power of the then outstanding securities entitled to vote generally in the election of directors of the
A-15
Company (the “Outstanding Company Voting Securities”) immediately prior to such Business Combination beneficially
own, upon consummation of such Business Combination, directly or indirectly, more than 50% of the then outstanding
shares of common stock (or similar securities or interests in the case of an entity other than a corporation) and more than
50% of the combined voting power of the then outstanding securities (or interests) entitled to vote generally in the election
of directors (or in the selection of any other similar governing body in the case of an entity other than a corporation) of the
Surviving  Corporation  (as  defined  below)  in  substantially  the  same  proportions  as  their  ownership  of  the  Outstanding
Stock and Outstanding Company Voting Securities, immediately prior to the consummation of such Business Combination
(that  is,  excluding  any  outstanding  voting  securities  of  the  Surviving  Corporation  that  such  beneficial  owners  hold
immediately  following  the  consummation  of  the  Business  Combination  as  a  result  of  their  ownership  prior  to  such
consummation  of  voting  securities  of  any  company  or  other  entity  involved  in  or  forming  part  of  such  Business
Combination  other  than  the  Company);  (B)  no  person  (other  than  the  Company,  any  subsidiary  of  the  Company,  any
employee benefit plan of the Company or any of its subsidiaries or any trustee or other fiduciary holding securities under
an employee benefit plan of the Company or any subsidiary of the Company) or group (as such term is defined in Rule 13d-
3  under  the  Exchange  Act)  becomes  the  beneficial  owner  of  50%  or  more  of  either  (x)  the  then  outstanding  shares  of
common  stock  (or  similar  securities  or  interests  in  the  case  of  an  entity  other  than  a  corporation)  of  the  Surviving
Corporation, or (y) the combined voting power of the then outstanding securities (or interests) entitled to vote generally in
the  election  of  directors  (or  in  the  selection  of  any  other  similar  governing  body  in  the  case  of  an  entity  other  than  a
corporation); and (C) individuals who were Incumbent Directors at the time of the execution of the initial agreement or of
the action of the Board providing for such Business Combination constitute at least a majority of the members of the board
of  directors  (or  of  any  similar  governing  body  in  the  case  of  an  entity  other  than  a  corporation)  of  the  Surviving
Corporation; where for purposes of this subsection (b), the term “Surviving Corporation” means the entity resulting from a
Business Combination or, if such entity is a direct or indirect subsidiary of another entity, the entity that is the ultimate
parent of the entity resulting from such Business Combination;
(c) Stock Acquisition. Any person (other than the Company, any subsidiary of the Company, any employee benefit plan of
the Company or any of its subsidiaries or any trustee or other fiduciary holding securities under an employee benefit plan
of the Company or any subsidiary of the Company) or group becomes the beneficial owner of 50% or more of either (x) the
Outstanding  Stock  or  (y)  the  Outstanding  Company  Voting  Securities;  provided,  however,  that  for  purposes  of  this
subsection (c) no Change in Control shall be deemed to have occurred as a result of any acquisition directly from the
Company; provided, further, however, no Change in Control shall be deemed to have occurred under this subsection (c) if
such acquisition would not have been a Change in Control under subsection (b) above; or
(d) Liquidation. Approval by the stockholders of the Company of a complete liquidation or dissolution of the Company (or,
if no such approval is required, the consummation of such a liquidation or dissolution).
A  transaction  shall  not  constitute  a  Change  in  Control  if  its  sole  purpose  is  to  change  the  state  of  the  Company’s
incorporation or to create a holding company that will be owned in substantially the same proportions by the persons who
held the Company’s securities immediately before such transaction.
16.6 “Closing Date” has the meaning set forth in that certain Restructuring Support Agreement dated as of June 13, 2016,
among  the  Company  and  certain  of  its  subsidiaries  and  such  other  parties  identified  therein  entered  into  whereby  the
parties thereto agreed to enter into certain transactions.
16.7 “Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
16.8 “Committee” means the committee of the Board, as further described in Article 2.
16.9 “Common Share” means one share of the common stock of the Company.
16.10 “Company” means SAExploration Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation.
A-16
16.11 “Covered Employee” means an Employee who is a “covered employee” within the meaning of Section 162(m)(3) of
the Code or any successor to such statute and regulation.
16.12  “Daily  VWAP”  means,  as  of  any  date,  the  dollar  volume-weighted  average  price  of  the  Common  Shares  on  the
Principal Market during the period beginning at 9:30:01 a.m., New York City time, and ending at 4:00:00 p.m., New York City
time,  as  reported  by  Bloomberg  through  its  “Volume  at  Price”  function  or,  if  the  foregoing  does  not  apply,  the  dollar
volume-weighted average price of the Common Shares in the over-the-counter market on the electronic bulletin board for
the Common Shares during the period beginning at 9:30:01 a.m., New York City time, and ending at 4:00:00 p.m., New York
City time, as reported by Bloomberg, or, if no dollar volume-weighted average price is reported for the Common Shares by
Bloomberg for such hours, the average of the highest closing bid price and the lowest closing ask price of any of the
market  makers  for  the  Common  Shares  as  reported  in  the  “pink  sheets”  by  Pink  Sheets  LLC  (formerly  the  National
Quotation Bureau, Inc.); provided, however, that if Daily VWAP cannot be calculated for the Common Shares on such date
on  any  of  the  foregoing  bases,  the  Daily  VWAP  on  such  date  shall  be  the  fair  market  value  as  determined  by  an
independent appraiser selected in good faith by the Committee. All such determinations shall be appropriately adjusted for
any stock dividend, stock split, stock combination or other similar transaction during such period.
16.13 “Director” means a member of the Company’s Board.
16.14 “Employee” means a common-law employee of the Company, a Parent, a Subsidiary, or an Affiliate.
16.15 “Exchange Act” means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
16.16 “Executive Officer” means an officer of the Company who is considered an executive officer under Section 16 of the
Exchange Act.
16.17 “Exercise Price,” in the case of an Option, means the amount for which one Common Share may be purchased upon
exercise of such Option, as specified in the applicable Stock Option Agreement. “Exercise Price,” in the case of a SAR,
means an amount, as specified in the applicable SAR Agreement, which is subtracted from the Fair Market Value of one
Common Share in determining the amount payable upon exercise of such SAR.
16.18 “Fair Market Value” means unless otherwise required by any applicable provision of the Code or any regulations
thereunder or by any applicable accounting standard for the Company’s desired accounting for Awards, a price that is
based on the opening, closing, actual, high, low or average selling prices, including, Daily VWAP, of a Common Share on
the established securities market (within the meaning of Treasury Regulation § 1.409A-1(k)) on which the Common Shares
are then readily tradable, on the applicable date, the preceding trading day, the next succeeding trading day, or an average
of  trading  days,  including  VWAP  (within  not  more  than  30  days  before  and  not  more  than  30  days  after  the  applicable
valuation date, and provided that any such averaging shall be in accordance with the provisions of Treasury Regulation §
1.409A-1(b)(5)(iv)(A)), as determined by the Committee in its discretion. In the event that the Common Shares are not readily
tradable on an established securities market (within the meaning of Treasury Regulation § 1.409A-1(k)), the Fair Market
Value shall be determined by the Committee by reasonable application of a reasonable method, taking into account factors
under Treasury Regulation § 1.409A-1(b)(5)(iv)(B) as the Committee deems appropriate. In all cases, Fair Market Value shall
be  determined  in  accordance  with  Treasury  Regulation  §  1.409A-1(b)(5)(iv).  Such  definition(s)  of  Fair  Market  Value  may
differ depending on whether Fair Market Value is in reference to the grant, exercise, vesting, settlement or payout of an
Award. The Committee’s determination shall be conclusive and binding on all persons.
16.19 “ISO” means a stock option that is intended to qualify as an “incentive stock option” described in Section 422 of the
Code or any successor provision.
16.20 “Non-Employee Director” means a Director who is a “non-employee director” within the meaning of Rule 16b-3 of the
Exchange Act or any successor to such regulation.
A-17
16.21 “NSO” means a stock option not described in Sections 422 or 423 of the Code.
16.22 “Option” means an ISO or NSO granted under the Plan and entitling the holder to purchase Common Shares.
16.23 “Optionee” means an individual or estate holding an Option or SAR.
16.24 “Outside Director” means a Director who is an “outside director” within the meaning of Section 162(m) of the Code
and Treasury Regulations Section 1.162-27(e)(3) or any successor to such statute and regulation.
16.25 “Parent” means any corporation (other than the Company) in an unbroken chain of corporations ending with the
Company, if each of the corporations other than the Company owns stock possessing 50% or more of the total combined
voting power of all classes of stock in one of the other corporations in such chain. A corporation that attains the status of a
Parent on a date after the adoption of the Plan shall be considered a Parent commencing as of such date.
16.26 “Participant” means an individual or estate holding an Award.
16.27 “Performance  Cash  Award”  means  an  Award  of  an  amount  of  cash  under  the  Plan,  subject  to  the  provisions  of
Article 10.
16.28  “Performance  Cash  Award  Agreement”  means  the  agreement  between  the  Company  and  the  recipient  of  a
Performance Cash Award that contains the terms, conditions and restrictions pertaining to such Performance Cash Award.
16.29 “Plan” means this SAExploration Holdings, Inc. 2016 Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended from time to time.
16.30 “Principal Market” means the principal securities exchange or securities market on which the Company’s Common
Shares are then traded.
16.31 “Qualified Performance-Based Award” means any Award of Restricted Shares, Stock Units or Performance Cash
Awards,  or  portion  of  such  Award,  to  a  Covered  Employee  that  is  intended  to  satisfy  the  requirements  for  “qualified
performance-based compensation” under Section 162(m) of the Code.
16.32 “Restricted Share” means a Common Share awarded under the Plan.
16.33 “Restricted Shares Agreement” means the agreement between the Company and the recipient of a Restricted Share
that contains the terms, conditions, and restrictions pertaining to such Restricted Share.
16.34 “SAR” means a stock appreciation right granted under the Plan.
16.35 “SAR Agreement” means the agreement between the Company and an Optionee that contains the terms, conditions,
and restrictions pertaining to his or her SAR.
16.36  “Service”  means  service  as  an  Employee,  provided  that  the  Committee  may,  in  determining  a  Participant’s
satisfaction  of  any  vesting  or  similar  requirement,  in  its  discretion  as  it  may  choose  to  exercise  from  time  to  time  with
respect to any Participant or Participants, aggregate with an Employee’s service as an employee his or her service as an
independent contractor (including as a Company director).
16.37 “Stock Option Agreement” means the agreement between the Company and an Optionee that contains the terms,
conditions, and restrictions pertaining to his or her Option, and with respect to such MIP Awards that are Options, the MIP
Option Agreement.
16.38 “Stock Unit” means a bookkeeping entry representing the equivalent of one Common Share, as awarded under the
Plan, and representing the right, upon the satisfaction of certain conditions, to receive a Common Share, or cash equal to
the value of a Common Share.
A-18
16.39 “Stock Units Agreement” means the agreement between the Company and the recipient of a Stock Unit that contains
the terms, conditions, and restrictions pertaining to such Stock Unit, and with respect to MIP Awards that are Stock Units,
the MIP Stock Units Agreement.
16.40 “Subsidiary” means any corporation (other than the Company) in an unbroken chain of corporations beginning with
the Company, if each of the corporations other than the last corporation in the unbroken chain owns stock possessing
50% or more of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock in one of the other corporations in such chain. A
corporation that attains the status of a Subsidiary on a date after the adoption of the Plan shall be considered a Subsidiary
commencing as of such date.
16.41 “VWAP” means the average of the Daily VWAP for each day during the 30-day period.
ARTICLE 17 STOCK-BASED AWARDS IN SUBSTITUTION FOR OPTIONS OR AWARDS GRANTED BY OTHER COMPANY.
Notwithstanding anything in this Plan to the contrary:
17.1 Awards may be granted under this Plan in substitution for or in conversion of, or in connection with an assumption of,
stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock, restricted stock units or other stock or stock-based awards held
by awardees of an entity engaging in a corporate acquisition or merger transaction with the Company or any Subsidiary.
Any conversion, substitution or assumption will be effective as of the close of the merger or acquisition, and, to the extent
applicable, will be conducted in a manner that complies with Section 409A of the Code. The awards so granted may reflect
the original terms of the awards being assumed or substituted or converted for and need not comply with other specific
terms of this Plan, and may account for Common Shares substituted for the securities covered by the original awards and
the number of shares subject to the original awards, as well as any exercise or purchase prices applicable to the original
awards, adjusted to account for differences in stock prices in connection with the transaction.
17.2 In the event that a company acquired by the Company or any Subsidiary or with which the Company or any Subsidiary
merges  has  shares  available  under  a  pre-existing  plan  previously  approved  by  stockholders  and  not  adopted  in
contemplation of such acquisition or merger, the shares available for grant pursuant to the terms of such plan (as adjusted,
to the extent appropriate, to reflect such acquisition or merger) may be used for awards made after such acquisition or
merger under the Plan; provided, however, that awards using such available shares may not be made after the date awards
or grants could have been made under the terms of the pre-existing plan absent the acquisition or merger, and may only be
made to individuals who were not employees or directors of the Company or any Subsidiary prior to such acquisition or
merger.
17.3  Any  Common  Shares  that  are  issued  or  transferred  by,  or  that  are  subject  to  any  awards  that  are  granted  by,  or
become obligations of, the Company under Sections 17.1 or 17.2 above will not reduce the Common Shares available for
issuance or transfer under the Plan or otherwise count against the limits contained in this Plan. In addition, no Common
Shares that are issued or transferred by, or that are subject to any awards that are granted by, or become obligations of,
the Company under Sections 17.1 or 17.2 above will be added to the aggregate plan limit contained in Article 3 of the Plan.
ARTICLE 18 EXECUTION.
To record the adoption of the Plan effective                     
execute this document in the name of the Company.
, 2016, the Company has caused its duly authorized officer to
SAEXPLORATION HOLDINGS, INC.
By:
Name:  Brent Whiteley
Title:    Secretary
A-19
APPENDIX A
Performance Criteria for Restricted Shares, Stock Units (Other than with respect to
the MIP Stock Units), and Performance Cash Awards
The Committee may establish award and/or vesting targets derived from all or any of the criteria set forth below, in any
combination,  which  may  be  (i)  described  in  terms  of  Company-wide  objectives  or  objectives  that  are  related  to  the
performance of the individual Participant or of one or more of the Subsidiaries, divisions, departments, regions, functions
or  other  organizational  units  within  the  Company  or  its  Subsidiaries;  (ii)  made  relative  to  the  performance  of  other
companies  or  subsidiaries,  divisions,  departments,  regions,  functions  or  other  organizational  units  within  such  other
companies; and (iii) made relative to an index or one or more of the performance objectives themselves, when it makes
Awards of Restricted Shares, Stock Units (other than with respect to the MIP Stock Units), or Performance Cash Awards on
the basis of performance. The Committee may grant awards subject to all or any of the criteria that are either Qualified
Performance-Based Awards or are not Qualified Performance-Based Awards. The performance targets applicable to any
Qualified Performance-Based Award to a Covered Employee will be based on one or more, or a combination, of the criteria
set forth below.
(a) Revenue (or any sub-component thereof);
(b) Revenue growth;
(c) Operating costs;
(d) Operating margin as a percentage of revenue;
(e) Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization;
(f)
Earnings before income taxes;
(g) Net operating profit after taxes;
(h) Net income;
(i) Net income as a percentage of revenue;
(j)
Free cash flow;
(k) Earnings per Common Share;
(l) Net operating profit after taxes per Common Share;
(m) Free cash flow per Common Share;
(n) Return on net assets employed before interest and taxes;
(o) Return on equity, investment, invested capital, net capital employed, assets, or net assets;
(p) Total stockholder return or relative total stockholder return (as compared with a peer group of the Company);
(q) Safety performance metrics, including relative to industry standards; or
(r)
Strategic team goals.
In the case of a Qualified Performance-Based Award, each performance target will be objectively determinable to the extent
required  under  Section  162(m)  of  the  Code,  and,  unless  otherwise  determined  by  the  Committee  and  to  the  extent
consistent with Code Section 162(m), will exclude the effects of certain designated items identified at the time of grant. If the
Committee determines that a change in the business, operations, corporate structure or capital structure of the Company,
or  the  manner  in  which  it  conducts  its  business,  or  other  events  or  circumstances  render  the  performance  targets
unsuitable, the Committee may in its discretion modify such performance targets or the related minimum acceptable level
of achievement, in whole or in part, as the Committee deems appropriate and equitable, except in the case of a Qualified
Performance-Based Award (other than in connection with a Change in Control) where such action would result in the loss
of the otherwise
A-1
available  exemption  of  the  award  under  Section  162(m)  of  the  Code.  In  such  case,  the  Committee  will  not  make  any
modification  of  the  performance  targets  or  minimum  acceptable  level  of  achievement  with  respect  to  such  Covered
Employee. Subject to the foregoing, and to the extent not inconsistent with Section 162(m) of the Code, the Committee
shall adjust the results under any performance criteria to exclude any of the following events, or any similar that occurs
during a performance measurement period: (a) asset write-downs; (b) litigation, claims, judgments or settlements; (c) the
effect of changes in tax law, accounting principles or periods, or other such laws or provisions affecting reported results;
(d)  accruals  for  reorganization  and  restructuring  programs;  (e)  fluctuations  in  foreign  exchange  rates;  and  (f)  any
extraordinary, unusual, or nonrecurring items.
Employee
Jeff Hastings
Brian Beatty
Brent Whiteley
Mike Scott
Darin Silvernagle
Ryan Abney
A-2
APPENDIX B
MIP Grant Allocation Schedule
MIP Stock Units
88,252
88,252
70,082
33,743
15,574
15,574
B-1
APPENDIX C
Form of MIP Option Agreement
[See attached.]
MIP Options
88,252
88,252
70,082
33,743
15,574
15,574
C-1
SAEXPLORATION HOLDINGS, INC.
2016 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
[FORM OF] NOTICE OF STOCK OPTION AWARD – MIP OPTIONS
The Compensation Committee (the “Committee”) of the Board of Directors of SAExploration Holdings, Inc., a Delaware
corporation (the “Company”) has granted to you an option set forth below (the “Option”) to purchase Common Shares,
$0.0001 par value per share, of the Company (the “Option Shares”) effective as of the Grant Date set forth below, pursuant
to the terms and conditions of the SAExploration Holdings, Inc. 2016 Long-Term Incentive Plan (the “Plan”), and as set
forth below and in the attached Agreement (as such term is defined below). Unless otherwise specified herein and in the
attached Agreement, capitalized terms have the meaning set forth in the Plan.
Name of Recipient:
Total Number of Option Shares:
Type of Option:
Exercise Price per Share:
Grant Date:
Vesting Schedule:
Expiration Date:
[                                ]
[                                ]
NSO
$[                ], which is equal to the VWAP per Common Share for the 30-day
period that ends on the Grant Date.
[                                ]
Subject  to  the  terms  and  conditions  set  forth  below  and  in  the  attached
Agreement, provided that you are continuously employed by the Company or a
Subsidiary  of  the  Company  on  each  vesting  date,  your  Option  shall  vest  and
become exercisable as follows:
(i)     one-third (1/3) of the Option on the earliest to occur of: (1) the date that
occurs after the Grant Date on which the Company shall have received Oil and
Gas  Production  Tax  Credit  Certificates  under  AS  43.55.023  or  AS  43.55.025
assigned to the Company by Alaska Seismic Ventures, LLC and issued by the
Tax Division of the State of Alaska, together with all such certificates received
after the Closing Date (as such term is defined in your employment agreement
with the Company), that are in an aggregate face amount of not less than US$25
million (the “Tax Credits”); (2) to the extent the Tax Credits have been received
on or prior to the Grant Date, the Grant Date; or (3) the first anniversary of the
Closing Date;
(ii)    one-third (1/3) of the Option on the second anniversary of the Closing Date;
and
(iii)  the remaining one-third (1/3) of the Option on the third anniversary of the
Closing Date;
provided, however, that if your employment is terminated by reason of your: (i)
death; (ii) Permanent Disability; (iii) termination by the Company other than for
Cause;  or  (iv)  termination  for  Good  Reason,  your  Options  shall  become  fully
vested upon such termination.
10  years,  the  Option  expires  earlier  if  your  Service  terminates  prior  to  the
Expiration Date, as described in the attached Stock Option Award Agreement.
You and the Company agree that the Option is granted under and governed by the terms and conditions of the Plan, your
employment agreement with the Company, and the Stock Option Award Agreement – MIP Options attached hereto and
made a part of this document (collectively with this Notice of Stock Option Award – MIP Options, the “Agreement”).
You  further  agree  that  the  Company  may  deliver  by  email  all  documents  relating  to  the  Plan  or  the  Option  (including
prospectuses  required  by  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission)  and  all  other  documents  that  the  Company  is
required to deliver to the holders of its securities (including annual reports and proxy statements). You also agree that the
Company may deliver these documents by posting them on a website maintained by or on behalf of the Company. If the
Company posts these documents on a website, it will notify you by email.
RECIPIENT’S SIGNATURE:
SAEXPLORATION HOLDINGS, INC.
CONSENT OF RECIPIENT’S SPOUSE
(IF REQUIRED):
By:
   Name:
 Title:
-2-
Type of Option:
Vesting:
SAEXPLORATION HOLDINGS, INC.
2016 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
[FORM OF] STOCK OPTION AWARD AGREEMENT – MIP OPTIONS
The Option is intended to be an incentive stock option under Section 422 of the
Internal Revenue Code, or a nonstatutory stock option under Section 83 of the
Internal Revenue Code, in either case, as provided in the foregoing Notice of
Stock Option Award – MIP Options (the “Notice of Stock Option Award”).
The  Option  becomes  exercisable  in  installments,  as  shown  in  the  Notice  of
Stock Option Award.
In  addition,  the  Option  vests  and  becomes  exercisable  in  full  if  either  (i)  your
Service  to  the  Company  (or  to  the  Subsidiary  of  the  Company  for  which  you
work)  terminates  because  of  your  Permanent  Disability  or  death,  (ii)  you  are
subject to an “Involuntary Termination,” or (iii) you terminate your employment
because 
for  Good  Reason.”
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Committee may, in its sole discretion, provide
for accelerated vesting of the Option at any time and for any reason.
the  definition  of  a  “Termination
it  meets
“Permanent Disability” (a) if you are a party to an employment agreement with
the Company or any of its Subsidiaries, and such term or words of similar import
(e.g.,  “disability”)  is  defined  in  your  employment  agreement,  shall  have  the
meaning set forth in your employment agreement; or (b) if you are not a party to
an employment agreement with the Company or any of its Subsidiaries or such
term  is  not  defined  in  your  employment  agreement,  shall  mean  that  you  are
either (i) unable, due to illness, disease, mental or physical disability, or similar
cause,  to  fulfill  your  obligations  as  an  employee  of  the  Company  (or  of  the
Subsidiary of the Company for which you work) either for three (3) consecutive
calendar  months  or  for  a  cumulative  period  of  six  (6)  months  out  of
12  consecutive  calendar  months,  or  (ii)  declared  by  a  court  of  competent
jurisdiction to be mentally incompetent or incapable of managing your affairs.
“Involuntary Termination” means your involuntary discharge by the Company (or
by  the  affiliate  of  the  Company  for  which  you  work)  for  reasons  other  than
Cause.  For  purposes  of  this  Agreement,  “Cause”  shall  have  the  meaning  set
forth in your employment agreement with the Company.
Term:
Termination of Service:
Death:
Disability or Retirement:
Risk of Clawback:
Leaves of Absence and Part-Time Work:
“Termination for Good Reason” shall mean your termination of your employment
for Good Reason (as such term is defined in your employment agreement with
the Company).
No Option Shares will vest after your Service terminates, except as expressly
provided in the Plan or in this Agreement.
-3-
The Option expires at 5:00 p.m., Central Time, on the Expiration Date shown in
the  Notice  of  Stock  Option  Award.  (It  may  expire  earlier  if  your  Service
terminates, as described in this Agreement.)
Except  as  otherwise  provided  below,  if  your  Service  terminates  prior  to  the
Expiration  Date  for  any  reason,  except  death  or  Permanent  Disability  or
retirement  at  or  after  age  65,  then  the  Option  will  expire  at  5:00  p.m.,  Central
Time,  on  the  date  that  is  three  (3)  months  after  your  termination  date  (or  the
Expiration  Date,  if  earlier).  The  Company  determines  when  your  Service
terminates for this purpose.
Notwithstanding  any  provisions  in  this  Agreement  to  the  contrary,  if  you
terminate your employment for any reason other than Good Reason prior to the
first anniversary of the Closing Date (as such term is defined in your employment
agreement), your Options granted hereunder (whether vested or unvested) will
be automatically forfeited, and you will be required to return and/or repay to the
Company any Common Shares or cash proceeds received in respect of such
Options or Option Shares.
If  your  Service  terminates  for  Cause,  your  Option  will  expire  on  the  date  of
termination of employment.
If you die before your Service terminates, then the Option will expire at 5:00 p.m.,
Central Time, on the earlier to occur of (i) the date 12 months after the date of
death, or (ii) the Expiration Date.
If  your  Service  terminates  because  of  your  total  and  permanent  disability  or
retirement  at  or  after  age  65,  then  the  Option  will  expire  at  5:00  p.m.,  Central
Time, on the earlier to occur of (i) the date 12 months after your termination date,
or (ii) the Expiration Date.
If  the  Option  or  Common  Shares  received  upon  exercise  of  the  Option  are
subject  to  recovery  under  any  law,  government  regulation  or  stock  exchange
listing  requirement,  your  Option  or  such  shares  will  be  subject  to  such
deductions and clawback as may be required to be made pursuant to such law,
government regulation or stock exchange listing requirement (or pursuant to any
policy  adopted  by  the  Company  pursuant  to  any  such  law,  government
regulation, or stock exchange listing requirement).
For purposes of the Option, your Service does not terminate when you go on a
military leave, a sick leave or any other bona fide leave of absence, if the leave
was approved by the Company in writing or required by law, and if continued
crediting  of  Service  is  required  by  the  terms  of  the  approved  leave  or  by
applicable  law.  However,  your  Service  terminates  when  the  approved  leave
ends, unless you immediately return to active Service.
If  you  go  on  a  leave  of  absence,  then  the  vesting  schedule  specified  in  the
Notice  of  Stock  Option  Award  may  be  adjusted  in  accordance  with  the
Company’s leave of absence policy or the terms of your
-4-
Restrictions on Exercise:
Notice of Exercise:
Form of Payment:
Taxes:
leave. If you commence working on a part-time basis, then the vesting schedule
specified in the Notice of Stock Option Award may be adjusted in accordance
with the Company’s part-time work policy or the terms of an agreement between
you and the Company pertaining to your part-time schedule.
The Company will not permit exercise of the Option if the issuance of Shares at
that time would violate any law or regulation.
When you wish to exercise the Option, you must notify the Company by filing the
proper “Notice of Exercise” form at the address given on the form. Your notice
must  specify  how  many  Shares  you  wish  to  purchase.  Your  notice  must  also
specify how your Shares should be registered. The notice will be effective when
the  Company  receives  it.  You  may  obtain  the  form  of  notice  of  exercise  by
contacting Human Resources.
If another person wants to exercise the Option after your death, that person must
prove to the Company’s satisfaction that he or she is entitled to do so.
When  you  submit  your  Notice  of  Exercise,  you  must  include  payment  of  the
Exercise  Price  specified  in  the  Notice  of  Stock  Option  Award  for  the  Option
Shares  that  you  are  purchasing.  To  the  extent  permitted  by  applicable  law,
payment may be made in one (or a combination of two or more) of the following
forms:
By  delivering  to  the  Company  your  personal  check,  a  cashier’s  check  or  a
money order.
By delivering to the Company certificates for Shares of Company stock that you
own,  along  with  any  forms  needed  to  effect  a  transfer  of  those  Shares  to  the
Company. The value of the Option Shares, determined as of the effective date of
the  Option  exercise,  will  be  applied  to  the  Option  Exercise  Price.  Instead  of
surrendering Shares of Company stock, you may attest to the ownership of those
Shares  on  a  form  provided  by  the  Company  and  have  the  same  number  of
Shares subtracted from the Option Shares issued to you.
By giving to a securities broker approved by the Company irrevocable directions
to sell all or part of your option Shares and to deliver to the Company, from the
sale  proceeds,  an  amount  sufficient  to  pay  the  Option  Exercise  Price  for  the
Options you are exercising and any withholding taxes. (The balance of the sale
proceeds,  if  any,  will  be  delivered  to  you.)  The  directions  must  be  given  in
accordance with the instructions of the Company and the broker. This exercise
method is sometimes called a “same-day sale.”
You understand that you (and not the Company) are responsible for your own
federal, state, local, or foreign tax liability with respect to the Option Shares, as
well as for any other tax consequences that you
-5-
may have as a result of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement. You
must rely solely on the determinations of your own tax advisors, and not on any
statements or representations by the Company or any of its agents, with regard
to all such tax matters.
You  will  not  be  allowed  to  exercise  the  Option  unless  you  have  made  an
acceptable  arrangement  to  pay  any  withholding  taxes  that  may  be  due  as  a
result of such exercise. Subject to the Company’s consent, such an arrangement
may include (i) you making a cash payment to the Company of an amount equal
to the withholding taxes, (ii) the Company withholding an amount equal to the
withholding  taxes  from  other  cash  compensation  payable  to  you  by  the
Company,  (iii)  the  Company  withholding  shares  of  the  Company’s  Common
Stock  that  otherwise  would  have  been  issued  to  you  when  you  exercise  the
Option in an amount having a value equal to the withholding taxes, or (iv) you
surrendering  shares  of  the  Company’s  Common  Stock  that  you  previously
acquired.
The Company intends that the Option will be exempt from or comply with the
requirements  of  Section  409A,  and  this  Agreement  shall  be  interpreted  and
administered in accordance with such intent. In particular, to the extent required
to  comply  with  Section  409A  and  notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  this
Agreement  to  the  contrary:  (i)  the  phrase  “termination  of  employment,”
involuntary termination or discharge” or words of similar import shall mean your
“separation from service” with the Company within the meaning of Section 409A;
and (ii) if all or any portion of the payments under this Agreement are determined
to  be  “nonqualified  deferred  compensation”  subject  to  Section  409A,  and  you
are  a  “specified  employee”  at  the  time  of  such  separation  from  service,  as
determined pursuant to procedures adopted by the Company in compliance with
Section 409A, then any such payment shall be made on the earlier of (a) the fifth
business  day  of  the  seventh  month  after  the  date  of  your  “separation  from
service” with the Company and its Subsidiaries within the meaning of Section
409A  or  (b)  your  death.  Although  the  Company  will  use  reasonable  efforts  to
avoid the imposition of taxation, interest and penalties under Section 409A, the
tax  treatment  of  the  Option  is  not  warranted  or  guaranteed.  You  expressly
acknowledge  and  agree  that  neither  the  Company,  its  Subsidiaries  nor  their
respective directors, officers, employees or advisers shall be held liable for any
taxes, interest, penalties or other monetary amounts owed by you (or any other
individual claiming a benefit through you) as a result of this Agreement or the
Option  granted  hereunder.  Each  payment  subject  to  Section  409A  shall  be
considered  a  separate  payment  and  not  one  of  a  series  of  payments  for
purposes of Section 409A.
You agree not to sell any Common Shares received upon exercise of the Option
at a time when applicable laws, Company policies or an agreement between the
Company and its underwriters prohibit such sale. This restriction will apply as
long as your Service continues and for such period of time after the termination
of your Service as the Company may specify.
-6-
Prior to your death, only you may exercise the Option. You cannot transfer or
assign the Option. For instance, you may not sell the Option or use it as security
for a loan. If you attempt to do any of these things, the Option will immediately
become invalid. You may, however, dispose of the Option in your will or in any
beneficiary designation.
Regardless of any marital property settlement agreement, the Company is not
obligated  to  honor  a  notice  of  exercise  from  your  former  spouse,  nor  is  the
Company obligated to recognize your former spouse’s interest in your Option in
any other way.
Your right, if any, to continue in the Service of the Company or any of its affiliates
is not enlarged or otherwise affected by your designation as a participant under
the  Plan  or  the  grant  of  the  Option  Shares  hereunder,  and  does  not  limit  or
Section 409A:
Restrictions on Resale:
Transfer of Option:
No Right to Remain in Service:
restrict any right the Company or any of its Subsidiaries otherwise may have to
terminate  your  employment.  Furthermore,  the  Option  and  your  participation  in
the Plan will not be interpreted to form an employment contract or relationship
with the Company or any subsidiary or affiliate.
Nature of Grant:
In accepting the Option, you acknowledge the following:
the Plan is established voluntarily by the Company, it is discretionary in nature
and it may be modified, amended, suspended or terminated by the Company at
any time as provided in the Plan;
the grant of this Option is voluntary, discretionary and occasional and does not
create any contractual or other right to receive future grants of awards of stock
options,  or  benefits  in  lieu  of  Options,  even  if  Options  have  been  granted
repeatedly to you in the past;
all decisions with respect to future awards of options, if any, will be at the sole
discretion of the Company;
your participation in the Plan shall not create a right to further employment with
the  Company  or  any  Subsidiary  and  shall  not  interfere  with  the  ability  of  the
Company  or  the  Subsidiary  to  terminate  your  employment  relationship  at  any
time;
you are voluntarily participating in the Plan;
the  Option  and  the  Option  Shares  are  not  part  of  normal  or  expected
compensation  or  salary  for  any  purposes,  including,  but  not  limited  to,
calculating any severance, resignation, termination, redundancy, dismissal, end
of  service  payments,  bonuses,  long-service  awards,  pension  or  retirement  or
welfare benefits or similar payments and in no event should be considered as
compensation for, or relating in any way to, past services for the Company or
any Subsidiary or Affiliate;
the Option and the Option Shares are not intended to replace any pension rights
or compensation;
-7-
the future value of the Option Shares is unknown and cannot be predicted with
certainty; further, neither the Company, nor any Affiliate is responsible for any
foreign  exchange  fluctuation  between  local  currency  and  the  United  States
Dollar that may affect the value of the Option; and
in  consideration  of  the  grant  of  the  Option,  no  claim  or  entitlement  to
compensation or damages shall arise from forfeiture of the Option in accordance
with  the  terms  and  conditions  of  this  Agreement  resulting  from  termination  of
your Service with the Company or any Subsidiary (for any reason whatsoever
and whether or not in breach of local labor laws), and you irrevocably release
Stockholder Rights:
Adjustments:
Effect of Dissolution or Reorganization:
The Plan and Other Agreements:
Spousal Consent:
Data Privacy and Data Protection:
the  Company  and  its  Subsidiaries  from  any  such  claim  that  may  arise;  if,
notwithstanding the foregoing, any such claim is found by a court of competent
jurisdiction to have arisen, you shall be deemed irrevocably to have waived your
entitlement to pursue such claim.
You have no rights as a stockholder of the Company with respect to the Option
Shares  until  you  have  exercised  the  Option  by  giving  the  required  Notice  of
Exercise  to  the  Company  and  paying  the  Exercise  Price.  No  adjustments  are
made for dividends or other rights if the applicable record date occurs before the
Option is exercised, except as described in the Plan.
In the event of a stock split, a stock dividend, a combination or consolidation, a
similar  change  in  the  Company’s  Common  Shares  (by  reclassification  or
otherwise),  an  extraordinary  dividend  payable  in  a  form  other  than  the
Company’s Common Shares, or a similar occurrence, the number of Common
Shares covered by the Option and the Exercise Price per share will be adjusted
as provided in the Plan.
If the Company is dissolved or liquidated, to the extent not previously exercised
or  settled,  the  Option  will  terminate  immediately  before  the  dissolution  or
liquidation of the Company.
If the Company is a party to a merger, consolidation or sale of 50% or more of
the Company’s stock or assets, each outstanding Option will be subject to the
agreement  of  merger  or  consolidation  which  will  provide  for  treatment  of  the
Option in accordance with the Plan.
The  award  of  the  Option  Shares  is  subject  to  all  applicable  provisions  of  the
Plan, and the Plan is hereby incorporated in this Agreement. In the event of any
conflict between the provisions of the Plan and this Agreement, the provisions of
the Plan shall control.
This Agreement, the Plan and your employment agreement with the Company
constitute the entire understanding between you and the Company regarding the
Option and Option Shares. Any prior agreements, commitments, or negotiations
concerning  the  award  of  the  Option  with  respect  to  the  Option  Shares  are
superseded.  This  Agreement  may  be  amended  only  by  another  written
agreement between you and the Company.
-8-
If you are married, your spouse must also execute the Notice of Stock Option
Award that serves as the cover page of this Agreement. In doing so, your spouse
acknowledges that he or she is fully aware of, understands, and fully consents
and  agrees  to,  the  provisions  of  this  Agreement  and  the  Agreement’s  binding
effect,  and  your  spouse  hereby  acknowledges,  stipulates,  confesses,  and
agrees that the unvested Option granted to you as of the date of this Agreement
are either (i) your separate property, or (ii) community property subject to your
sole management and control.
You hereby explicitly and voluntarily consent to the collection, use, processing
and  transfer,  in  electronic  or  other  form,  of  your  personal  data,  including  your
Data (as such term is defined below), as described in this Agreement, and in any
other  award  materials  by  and  among,  as  applicable,  your  employer,  the
Company, and its Subsidiaries and affiliates, as well as third parties acting on
their  behalf,  for  the  exclusive  purpose  of  implementing,  administering  and
managing your eligibility for and participation in the Plan.
You understand that the Company and your employer may hold certain personal
data  about  you,  including  but  not  limited  to,  your  name,  home  address  and
telephone number, date of birth, social insurance number or other identification
number, salary, benefit eligibility, nationality, job title, any Common Shares or
directorships held in the Company, details of all awards or any other entitlement
to  Common  Shares  granted,  canceled,  exercised,  vested,  unvested  or
outstanding 
implementing,
administering and managing the Plan (collectively, the “Data”).
the  exclusive  purpose  of
for
in  your
favor,
You  understand  that  Data  will  be  transferred  to  and  processed  and  stored  by
third parties assisting the Company with the implementation, administration and
management  of  the  Plan,  and  you  consent  to  such  transfer,  processing  and
storage. You understand that the Data may be transferred to and processed and
stored  outside  of  your  country  of  residence,  including  the  United  States  of
America, and that the recipients’ country (including the United States) may have
different data privacy laws and protections than your country of residence, and
you nevertheless consent to the transfer, processing and storage of your data in
those nations. You understand that you may request a list with the names and
addresses of any potential recipients of the Data by contacting your local human
resources representative. You authorize the Company and any other possible
recipients  that  may  assist  the  Company  (presently  or  in  the  future)  with
implementing, administering and managing the Plan to receive, possess, store,
process, use, retain and transfer the Data, in electronic or other form, for the sole
purpose of implementing, administering and managing your participation in the
Plan.  You  understand  that  Data  will  be  held  only  as  long  as  is  necessary  to
implement, administer and manage your participation in the Plan or as otherwise
may be required by applicable law. You understand that you may, at any time,
view Data, request additional information about the storage and processing of
Data, require any
-9-
necessary  and  appropriate  amendments  to  Data  or  refuse  or  withdraw  the
consents  herein,  in  any  case  without  cost,  by  contacting  in  writing  your  local
human  resources  representative.  You  understand,  however,  that  refusing  or
withdrawing your consent may affect your ability to participate in the Plan. For
more information on the consequences of your refusal to consent or withdrawal
of  consent,  you  understand  that  you  may  contact  your  local  human  resources
representative.
This Agreement is made under, and will be construed in accordance with, the
internal substantive laws of the State of Delaware, except any such laws that
require the application of another jurisdiction.
In  the  event  that  one  or  more  of  the  provisions  of  this  Agreement  shall  be
invalidated for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, any provision so
invalidated will be deemed to be separable from the other provisions hereof, and
the remaining provisions hereof will continue to be valid and fully enforceable.
Notwithstanding  any  provisions  in  this  Agreement,  the  Option  shall  also  be
subject  to  the  special  terms  and  conditions  set  forth  below  if  you  reside  in
Canada. Moreover, if you relocate to Canada, the special terms and conditions
set forth below will apply to you, to the extent the Company determines that the
application of such terms and conditions is necessary or advisable in order to
comply with local law or facilitate the administration of the Plan.
The information is based on the securities, exchange control, and other laws in
effect in the respective countries as of [                        ]. Such laws are often
complex and change frequently. As a result, it is strongly recommended that you
not rely on the information below as the only source of information relating to the
consequences of your participation in the Plan because the information may be
out of date at the time you vest in your Option or sell Common Shares acquired
under the Plan.
Governing Law:
Severability:
Canada-Specific Special Terms and
Conditions:
In  addition,  the  information  set  forth  below  is  general  in  nature  and  may  not
apply to your particular situation, and the Company and its Subsidiaries are not
in a position to assure you of a particular result. Accordingly, you are advised to
seek appropriate professional advice as to how the relevant laws may apply to
your situation.
Finally, if you are a citizen or resident of a country other than the one in which
you are currently working, transferred employment after the Option was granted
to you, or are considered a resident of another country for local law purposes,
the information contained herein may not apply.
Form of Payment. Due to legal restrictions in Canada and notwithstanding any
language  to  the  contrary  in  the  Plan,  award  recipients  are  prohibited  from
surrendering shares that they already own or from attesting to the ownership of
shares to pay the exercise
-10-
price or any tax withholding in connection with options granted to such award
recipients.
The  following  provision  will  apply  if  you  are  a  resident  of  Quebec:  Language
Consent.  The  parties  acknowledge  that  it  is  their  express  wish  that  this
Agreement, as well as all  documents,  notices,  and  legal  proceedings  entered
into, given or instituted pursuant hereto or relating directly or indirectly hereto, be
drawn up in English.
Les  parties  reconnaissent  avoir  exigé  la  rédaction  en  anglais  de  cette
convention,  ainsi  que  de  tous  documents,  avis  et  procédures  judiciaires,
exécutés, donnés ou intentés en vertu de, ou liés directement ou indirectement à
la présente convention.
Notifications
Additional Restrictions on Resale. In addition to the restrictions on resale and
transfer  noted  in  Plan  materials,  securities  purchased  under  the  Plan  may  be
subject  to  certain  restrictions  on  resale  imposed  by  Canadian  provincial
securities laws. You are encouraged to seek legal advice prior to any resale of
such  securities.  In  general,  participants  resident  in  Canada  may  resell  their
securities in transactions carried out on exchanges outside of Canada.
Tax Reporting.  The  Income  Tax  Act  (Canada)  and  the  regulations  thereunder
require  a  Canadian  resident  individual  (among  others)  to  file  an  information
return disclosing prescribed information where, at any time in a tax year, the total
cost  amount  of  such  individual’s  “specified  foreign  property”  (which  includes
shares,  options  and  stock  units)  exceeds  Cdn.$100,000.  You  should  consult
your own tax advisor regarding this reporting requirement.
By signing the Notice of Stock Option Award attached as the cover page to this Agreement, you agree to all of the terms
and conditions described above and in the Plan.
-11-
APPENDIX D
Form of MIP Stock Units Agreement
[See attached.]
D-1
SAEXPLORATION HOLDINGS, INC.
2016 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
[FORM OF] NOTICE OF STOCK UNITS AWARD – MIP STOCK UNITS
The Compensation Committee (the “Committee”) of the Board of Directors of SAExploration Holdings, Inc., a Delaware
corporation (the “Company”) has granted to you the award of stock units set forth below, subject to certain restrictions
(the  “Stock  Units”),  effective  as  of  the  Grant  Date  set  forth  below,  pursuant  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the
SAExploration  Holdings,  Inc.  2016  Long-Term  Incentive  Plan  (the  “Plan”),  and  as  set  forth  below  and  in  the  attached
Agreement (as such term is defined below). Each Stock Unit is equivalent in value to the market value of one (1) Common
Share, $0.0001 par value per share, of the Company. Unless otherwise specified herein and in the attached Agreement,
capitalized terms have the meaning set forth in the Plan.
Name of Recipient:
Total Number of Stock Units:
Grant Date:
Vesting Schedule:
[                    ]
[                    ]
[                    ]
Subject  to  the  terms  and  conditions  set  forth  below  and  in  the  attached
Agreement, provided that you are continuously employed by the Company or a
Subsidiary of the Company on each vesting date (each, a “Vesting Date”), your
Stock Units shall vest as follows:
(i)     one-third (1/3) of the Stock Units on the earliest to occur of: (1) the date that
occurs after the Grant Date on which the Company shall have received Oil and
Gas  Production  Tax  Credit  Certificates  under  AS  43.55.023  or  AS  43.55.025
assigned to the Company by Alaska Seismic Ventures, LLC and issued by the
Tax Division of the State of Alaska, together with all such certificates received
after the Closing Date (as such term is defined in your employment agreement
with the Company), that are in an aggregate face amount of not less than US$25
million (the “Tax Credits”); (2) to the extent the Tax Credits have been received
on or prior to the Grant Date, the Grant Date; or (3) the first anniversary of the
Closing Date;
(ii)    one-third (1/3) of the Stock Units on the second anniversary of the Closing
Date; and
(iii)  the remaining one-third (1/3) of the Stock Units on the third anniversary of
the Closing Date;
provided, however, that if your employment is terminated by reason of your: (i)
death; (ii) Permanent Disability; (iii) termination by the Company other than for
Cause; or (iv) termination for Good Reason, your Stock Units shall become fully
vested upon such termination.
You and the Company agree that this award of Stock Units (the “Award”) is granted under and governed by the terms and
conditions of the Plan, your employment agreement with the Company and the Stock Units Agreement – MIP Stock Units
attached hereto and made a part of this document (collectively with this Notice of Stock Units Award – MIP Stock Units, the
“Agreement”).
You  further  agree  that  the  Company  may  deliver  by  email  all  documents  relating  to  the  Plan  or  this  Award  (including
prospectuses  required  by  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission)  and  all  other  documents  that  the  Company  is
required to deliver to the holders of its securities (including annual reports and proxy statements). You also agree that the
Company may deliver these documents by posting them on a website maintained by or on behalf of the Company. If the
Company posts these documents on a website, it will notify you by email.
RECIPIENT’S SIGNATURE:
SAEXPLORATION HOLDINGS, INC.
CONSENT OF RECIPIENT’S SPOUSE
(IF REQUIRED):
Stock Units Award:
By: 
  Name:
Title:
-2-
SAEXPLORATION HOLDINGS, INC.
2016 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
[FORM OF] STOCK UNITS AGREEMENT – MIP STOCK UNITS
You acknowledge that, as of the Grant Date set forth on your Notice Stock Units
Award – MIP Stock Units (the “Notice of Stock Units Award”), the Stock Units
have  been  awarded  to  you,  with  vesting  and  transferability  of  the  Common
Shares  to  be  delivered  with  respect  to  the  Stock  Units  contingent  on  the
continuation  of  your  service  with  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  as
provided herein. Subject to the terms of this Agreement, each Stock Unit entitles
you to receive one Common Share upon the applicable Vesting Date. Except as
otherwise provided in the Plan, your employment agreement with the Company
or this Agreement, the Stock Units shall be forfeited and immediately cancelled if
your  employment  with  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  is  terminated
under  any  circumstances  whatsoever  prior  to  the  applicable  Vesting  Date,
including  without  limitation  dismissal,  resignation,  divestiture  of  operations  or
retirement.  This  possibility  of  forfeiture  shall  lapse  according  to  the  vesting
schedule set forth in your Notice of Stock Units Award. You will not be entitled to
any  payment  of  cash  or  Common  Shares  in  respect  of  any  Stock  Units  so
forfeited.
You  will  not  have  the  rights  of  a  shareholder  with  respect  to  the  Stock  Units,
except as provided in this Agreement.
Payment by you for Stock Units:
No payment by you is required for the Stock Units.
Vesting:
The Stock Units will vest in installments, as set forth in the Notice of Stock Units
Award.
In  addition,  the  Stock  Units  will  vest  in  full  if  either:  (i)  your  Service  to  the
Company (or to the Subsidiary of the Company for which you work) terminates
because  of  your  Permanent  Disability  or  death,  (ii)  you  are  subject  to  an
“Involuntary Termination,”  or  (iii)  you  terminate  your  employment  because  it
meets the definition of a “Termination for Good Reason” (any such termination
date, a “Vesting Date”). Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Committee may, in
its sole discretion, provide for accelerated vesting of the Stock Units at any time
and for any reason.
If your Service terminates for any other reason, except as provided above, then
your unvested Stock Units will be immediately forfeited to the extent that they
have not vested before the date of termination of your employment and do not
vest  as  a  result  of  the  termination.  You  will  not  be  entitled  to  any  payment  of
cash or Common Shares in respect of any Stock Units so forfeited.
“Permanent Disability” (a) if you are a party to an employment agreement with
the Company or any of its Subsidiaries, and such term or words of similar import
(e.g.,  “disability”)  is  defined  in  your  employment  agreement,  shall  have  the
meaning set forth in your employment agreement; or (b) if you are not a party to
an employment agreement with the Company or any of its Subsidiaries or such
term  is  not  defined  in  your  employment  agreement,  shall  mean  that  you  are
either (i) unable, due to illness, disease, mental or physical disability, or similar
cause,  to  fulfill  your  obligations  as  an  employee  of  the  Company  (or  of  the
Subsidiary of the Company for which you work) either for three (3) consecutive
calendar  months  or  for  a  cumulative  period  of  six  (6)  months  out  of
12  consecutive  calendar  months,  or  (ii)  declared  by  a  court  of  competent
jurisdiction to be mentally incompetent or incapable of managing your affairs.
“Involuntary Termination” means your involuntary discharge by the Company
(or by the affiliate of the Company for which you work) for reasons other than
Cause.  For  purposes  of  this  Agreement,  “Cause”  shall  have  the  meaning  set
forth in your employment agreement with the Company.
“Termination  for  Good  Reason”  shall  mean  your  termination  of  your
employment  for  Good  Reason  (as  such  term  is  defined  in  your  employment
agreement with the Company).
No  Stock  Units  will  vest  after  your  Service  terminates,  except  as  expressly
provided in the Plan or in this Agreement.
Notwithstanding  any  provisions  in  this  Agreement  to  the  contrary,  if  you
terminate your employment for any reason other than Good Reason prior to the
first anniversary of the Closing Date (as such term is defined in your employment
agreement), your Stock Units granted hereunder (whether vested or unvested)
will be automatically forfeited, and you will be required to return and/or repay to
the  Company  any  Common  Shares  or  cash  proceeds  received  in  respect  of
such Stock Units.
Subject  to  the  terms  and  provisions  of  this  Agreement,  payment  for  the  Stock
Units, after and to the extent they have become vested, shall be made by issuing
one Common Share in settlement for each Stock Unit (either by delivering one
or  more  certificates  for  such  Common  Shares  or  by  entering  such  Common
Shares in book entry form, as determined by the Company in its discretion) on
each of the earliest of the following dates (i.e., within 15 days of such date) on:
(i)     the applicable Vesting Date;
(ii)    the date of your death;
(iii)    the  date  of  your  separation  from  service  with  the  Company  and  its
Subsidiaries (determined in accordance with Section 409A); provided, however,
Termination of Service:
Time of Payment of the Stock Units:
that if all or any portion of the payments under this Agreement are
-2-
determined to be “nonqualified deferred compensation” subject to Section
409A, and you are a “specified employee” at the time of such separation from
service,  as  determined  pursuant  to  procedures  adopted  by  the  Company  in
compliance with Section 409A, then payment for the Stock Units shall be made
by  issuing  one  Common  Share  in  settlement  for  each  Stock  Unit  (either  by
delivering one or more certificates for such Common Shares or by entering such
Common  Shares  in  book  entry  form,  as  determined  by  the  Company  in  its
discretion) on the earlier of (a) the fifth business day of the seventh month after
the date of your “separation from service” with the Company and its Subsidiaries
within the meaning of Section 409A or (b) your death.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Committee, in its discretion, accelerates the
vesting of the balance, or some lesser portion of the balance, of the Stock Units,
the payment of such accelerated portion of the Stock Units nevertheless shall be
made at the same time or times as if such Stock Units had vested in accordance
with the vesting schedule set forth on the Notice of Stock Units Award (whether
or not you remain employed by the Company or by one of its Affiliates as of such
date(s)); provided, however, if the Committee, in its discretion, accelerates the
vesting of the balance, or some lesser portion of the balance, of the Stock Units
in connection with your “separation from service” within the meaning of Section
409A),  and  if  all  or  any  portion  of  such  balance  (or  portion  thereof)  are
determined to be “nonqualified deferred compensation” subject to Section 409A,
and you are a “specified employee” within the meaning of Section 409A at the
time  of  such  separation  from  service,  then  any  such  accelerated  Stock  Units
otherwise payable within the six (6) month period following your separation from
service instead will be then paid by issuing one Common Share in settlement for
each  such  Stock  Unit  (either  by  delivering  one  or  more  certificates  for  such
Common  Shares  or  by  entering  such  Common  Shares  in  book  entry  form,  as
determined  by  the  Company  in  its  discretion)  on  the  earlier  of  (a)  the  fifth
business  day  of  the  seventh  month  after  the  date  of  your  “separation  from
service” with the Company and its Subsidiaries within the meaning of Section
409A or (b) your death. Thereafter, such Stock Units shall continue to be paid in
accordance  with  the  requirements  set  forth  above  in  this  sentence.  The
foregoing  shall  only  apply  to  the  extent  necessary  to  avoid  taxation  under
Section 409A.
If  your  Stock  Units  award  is  subject  to  recovery  under  any  law,  government
regulation,  or  stock  exchange  listing  requirement,  your  Stock  Units  will  be
subject  to  such  deductions  and  clawback  as  may  be  required  to  be  made
pursuant  to  such  law,  government  regulation,  or  stock  exchange  listing
requirement (or pursuant to any policy adopted by the Company pursuant to any
such law, government regulation, or stock exchange listing requirement).
-3-
For purposes of the Stock Units award, your Service does not terminate when
you go on a military leave, sick leave, or any other bona fide leave of absence, if
the leave was approved by the Company in writing or required by law, and if
continued crediting of Service is required by the terms of the approved leave or
by applicable law. However, your Service terminates when the approved leave
ends, unless you immediately return to active Service.
If  you  go  on  a  leave  of  absence,  then  the  vesting  schedule  specified  in  the
Notice of Stock Units Award may be adjusted in accordance with the Company’s
leave of absence policy or the terms of your leave. If you commence working on
a  part-time  basis,  then  the  vesting  schedule  specified  in  the  Notice  of  Stock
Risk of Clawback:
Leaves of Absence and Part-Time Work:
Stock Certificates:
Voting and Other Rights as a Stockholder:
Dividends:
Taxes:
Units Award may be adjusted in accordance with the Company’s part-time work
policy or the terms of an agreement between you and the Company pertaining to
your part-time schedule.
You  will  not  receive  any  certificates  for  your  Stock  Units,  but  if  you  become
vested  in  all  or  a  portion  of  your  Stock  Units,  then  you  will  receive  stock
certificates for the Common Shares transferred to you in respect of such vested
Stock Units, unless the Company chooses only to record the issuance of such
Common Shares in the Company’s transfer records.
Since  your  Stock  Units  are  not  Common  Shares,  but  only  an  unsecured
agreement by the Company to transfer Common Shares to you in the future if
your  Stock  Units  become  vested,  your  Stock  Units  do  not  confer  any  voting
rights or other privileges as a stockholder of the Company on you or any person
claiming under or through you. If a portion of your Stock Units becomes vested,
following the transfer and recording on the records of the Company or its transfer
agents or registrars and delivery of the Common Shares to you, you will have all
the rights of a stockholder of the Company with respect to voting rights of such
Common Shares generally and receipt of dividends and distributions on such
Common Shares.
If the Company declares and pays cash dividends with respect to its outstanding
Common Shares while all or a portion of the Stock Units is outstanding, on the
date such dividend is paid, the Company will provide for an additional number of
Stock Units equal to the result of dividing (i) the product of the total number of
Stock  Units  for  this  Award  remaining  outstanding  on  the  record  date  for  such
dividend  (other  than  previously  settled  or  forfeited  Stock  Units)  times  the  per
Common  Share  amount  of  such  dividend,  by  (ii)  the  fair  market  value  of  one
Common Share on the record date for such dividend. The additional Stock Units
shall be or become vested and be settled to the same extent as the Stock Units
that resulted in the crediting of such Stock Units.
-4-
Any  additional  Common  Shares,  share  rights  or  other  securities  that  you
become entitled to receive pursuant to a stock dividend, stock split, combination
of shares, recapitalization, merger, consolidation, separation or reorganization or
any other change in the capital structure of the Company shall be subject to the
same restrictions as the Stock Units covered by this Agreement.
To  the  extent  that  the  Stock  Units  covered  by  this  Agreement  are  forfeited
pursuant to terms and conditions of this Agreement, all Stock Units in respect of
the dividend equivalents sequestered with respect to such Stock Units shall also
be forfeited. Under no circumstances, will the Company issue Common Shares
in  respect  of  dividend  equivalents  paid  on  Stock  Units  prior  to  the  applicable
Vesting Date.
You understand that you (and not the Company) are responsible for your own
federal, state, local, or foreign tax liability with respect to your Stock Units, as
well  as  for  any  other  tax  consequences  that  you  may  have  as  a  result  of  the
transactions  contemplated  by  this  Agreement.  You  must  rely  solely  on  the
determinations  of  your  own  tax  advisors,  and  not  on  any  statements  or
representations by the Company or any of its agents, with regard to all such tax
matters.  The  Company  does  not  make  any  representation  or  undertaking
regarding the tax treatment or treatment of any tax withholding in connection with
the grant or vesting of the Stock Units or the subsequent sale of the Common
Shares. The Company does not commit and is under no obligation to structure
the Stock Units to reduce or eliminate your tax liability.
Prior  to  any  event  in  connection  with  the  Stock  Units  that  the  Company
determines  may  result  in  any  domestic  or  foreign  tax  withholding  obligation,
whether  national,  federal,  state  or  local,  including  any  social  insurance
contributions (the “Tax Withholding Obligation”), you are  required  to  arrange
for  the  satisfaction  of  the  amount  of  such  Tax  Withholding  Obligation  in  a
manner  acceptable  to  the  Company.  Your  acceptance  of  this  Agreement
constitutes  your  instruction  and  authorization  to  the  Company  to  withhold  on
your  behalf  the  number  of  Common  Shares  from  those  Common  Shares
issuable  to  you  at  the  time  when  the  Stock  Units  become  vested  as  the
Company determines to be sufficient to satisfy the Tax Withholding Obligation.
The value of the Common Shares withheld for such purposes shall be based on
the fair market value of the Common Shares on the date of vesting. To the extent
that the Company or a Subsidiary withholds in Common Shares, it will do so at
the  minimum  statutory  rate  to  the  extent  necessary,  as  determined  by  the
Company, to avoid negative accounting treatment. Should the Company or the
Subsidiary  withhold  an  amount  in  excess  of  your  actual  Tax  Withholding
Obligation, the Company and/or your employer will refund the excess within a
reasonable period and without any interest. You agree (i) to pay the Company,
the  Subsidiary  and/or  the  affiliate  employing  you  any  amount  of  the  Tax
Withholding Obligation that is not satisfied by the means described
-5-
herein or (ii) to the extent permitted by applicable law, for the Company and/or
the Subsidiary employing you to deduct cash from your regular salary payroll to
cover  such  additional  amounts.  If  you  fail  to  comply  with  your  obligations  in
connection with the Tax Withholding Obligation as described in this section, the
Company may refuse to allow the vesting or the transferability of the Common
Shares.
If  you  are  subject  to  tax  in  a  country  outside  the  United  States  of  America
(“Foreign Country”) and if pursuant to the tax rules in such Foreign Country,
you will be subject to tax prior to the date that you are issued Common Shares
pursuant  to  this  Agreement,  the  Committee,  in  its  discretion,  may  accelerate
vesting and settlement of a portion of the Stock Units to the extent necessary to
pay the foreign taxes due (and any applicable U.S. income taxes due as a result
of the acceleration of vesting and settlement) but only if such acceleration does
not  result  in  adverse  consequences  under  Section  409A  (as  permitted  under
Treasury Regulation Section 1.409A-3(j)(4)(xi)).
The Company intends that the Stock Units will be exempt from or comply with
the requirements of Section 409A, and this Agreement shall be interpreted and
administered in accordance with such intent. In particular, to the extent required
to  comply  with  Section  409A  and  notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  this
Agreement to the contrary, the phrase “termination of employment,” involuntary
termination or discharge” or words of similar import shall mean your “separation
from service” with the Company within the meaning of Section 409A. Although
the  Company  will  use  reasonable  efforts  to  avoid  the  imposition  of  taxation,
interest and penalties under Section 409A, the tax treatment of the Stock Units is
not warranted or guaranteed. You expressly acknowledge and agree that neither
the Company, its Subsidiaries nor their respective directors, officers, employees
or  advisers  shall  be  held  liable  for  any  taxes,  interest,  penalties  or  other
monetary  amounts  owed  by  you  (or  any  other  individual  claiming  a  benefit
through you) as a result of this Agreement or the Stock Units granted hereunder.
Each payment subject to Section 409A shall be considered a separate payment
and not one of a series of payments for purposes of Section 409A.
You agree not to sell any Common Shares that you receive that are attributable
to  your  Stock  Units  at  a  time  when  applicable  laws,  Company  policies  or  an
agreement between the Company and its underwriters prohibit such sale. This
restriction will apply as long as your Service continues and for such period of
time after the termination of your Service as the Company may specify.
The Stock Units and any Common Shares to be delivered with respect to the
Stock Units shall be non-transferable until such time as the Common Shares are
Section 409A:
Restrictions on Resale:
Transferability:
delivered  to  you  hereunder.  You  agree  not  to  make,  or  attempt  to  make,  any
sale,  assignment,  transfer  or  pledge  of  any  of  the  Stock  Units  or  Common
Shares prior to the date on
-6-
Effect of Dissolution or Reorganization:
No Right to Remain in Service:
which the Common Shares are delivered to you. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
you are permitted to designate one or more primary and contingent beneficiaries
to  whom  the  Stock  Units  will  be  transferred  in  the  event  of  your  death.  The
Company in its sole discretion, when and as permitted by the Plan, may waive
the restrictions on transferability with respect to all or a portion of the Stock Units
subject to this Agreement.
If the Company is dissolved or liquidated, any unvested portion of this Award will
terminate.
If the Company is a party to a merger, consolidation, or sale of fifty percent (50%)
or  more  of  the  Company’s  stock  or  assets,  each  outstanding  Award  will  be
subject to the agreement of merger, sale, or reorganization, which will provide
for treatment of unvested Stock Units in accordance with the Plan.
Your right, if any, to continue in the Service of the Company or any of its affiliates
is not enlarged or otherwise affected by your designation as a participant under
the Plan or the grant of the Stock Units hereunder, and does not limit or restrict
any  right  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  otherwise  may  have  to
terminate your employment. Furthermore, the Stock Units and your participation
in the Plan will not be interpreted to form an employment contract or relationship
with the Company or any subsidiary or affiliate.
Nature of Grant:
In accepting this Award, you acknowledge the following:
the Plan is established voluntarily by the Company, it is discretionary in nature
and it may be modified, amended, suspended or terminated by the Company at
any time as provided in the Plan;
the grant of this Award is voluntary, discretionary and occasional and does not
create any contractual or other right to receive future grants of awards of Stock
Units, or benefits in lieu of Stock Units, even if Stock Units have been granted
repeatedly to you in the past;
all decisions with respect to future awards of Stock Units, if any, will be at the
sole discretion of the Company;
your participation in the Plan shall not create a right to further employment with
the  Company  or  any  Subsidiary  and  shall  not  interfere  with  the  ability  of  the
Company  or  the  Subsidiary  to  terminate  your  employment  relationship  at  any
time;
you are voluntarily participating in the Plan;
the Stock Units and the Common Shares subject to the Stock Units are not part
of normal or expected compensation or salary for any purposes, including, but
not limited to, calculating any severance, resignation, termination, redundancy,
dismissal, end of service
Adjustments:
The Plan and Other Agreements:
Spousal Consent:
-7-
payments,  bonuses,  long-service  awards,  pension  or  retirement  or  welfare
benefits  or  similar  payments  and  in  no  event  should  be  considered  as
compensation for, or relating in any way to, past services for the Company or
any Subsidiary or Affiliate;
the  Stock  Units  and  the  Common  Shares  subject  to  the  Stock  Units  are  not
intended to replace any pension rights or compensation;
the future value of the underlying Common Shares is unknown and cannot be
predicted  with  certainty;  further,  neither  the  Company,  nor  any  Affiliate  is
responsible for any foreign exchange fluctuation between local currency and the
United States Dollar that may affect the value of the Stock Units; and
in  consideration  of  the  grant  of  the  Stock  Units,  no  claim  or  entitlement  to
compensation  or  damages  shall  arise  from  forfeiture  of  the  Stock  Units  in
accordance  with  the  terms  and  conditions  of  this  Agreement  resulting  from
termination of your Service with the Company or any Subsidiary (for any reason
whatsoever  and  whether  or  not  in  breach  of  local  labor  laws),  and  you
irrevocably release the Company and its Subsidiaries from any such claim that
may arise; if, notwithstanding the foregoing, any such claim is found by a court of
competent jurisdiction to have arisen, you shall be deemed irrevocably to have
waived your entitlement to pursue such claim.
In the event of a stock split, a stock dividend, a combination or consolidation, a
similar  change  in  the  Company’s  Common  Shares  (by  reclassification  or
otherwise),  an  extraordinary  dividend  payable  in  a  form  other  than  the
Company’s  Common  Shares,  or  a  similar  occurrence,  your  outstanding
unvested Stock Units will be adjusted as provided in the Plan.
This Award is subject to all applicable provisions of the Plan, and the Plan is
hereby incorporated in this Agreement. In the event of any conflict between the
provisions  of  the  Plan  and  this  Agreement,  the  provisions  of  the  Plan  shall
control.
This Agreement, the Plan and your employment agreement with the Company
constitute the entire understanding between you and the Company regarding the
Stock  Units  covered  by  this  Award.  Any  prior  agreements,  commitments,  or
negotiations  concerning  this  Award  are  superseded.  This  Agreement  may  be
amended only by another written agreement between you and the Company.
If  you  are  married,  your  spouse  must  also  execute  the  Notice  of  Stock  Units
Award that serves as the cover page of this Agreement. In doing so, your spouse
acknowledges that he or she is fully aware of, understands, and fully consents
and  agrees  to,  the  provisions  of  this  Agreement  and  the  Agreement’s  binding
effect,  and  your  spouse  hereby  acknowledges,  stipulates,  confesses,  and
agrees that the Stock Units covered by the Award are either (i) your separate
property,  or  (ii)  community  property  subject  to  your  sole  management  and
control.
Data Privacy and Data Protection:
You hereby explicitly and voluntarily consent to the collection, use, processing
-8-
You hereby explicitly and voluntarily consent to the collection, use, processing
and  transfer,  in  electronic  or  other  form,  of  your  personal  data,  including  your
Data (as such term is defined below), as described in this Agreement, and in any
other  award  materials  by  and  among,  as  applicable,  your  employer,  the
Company, and its Subsidiaries and affiliates, as well as third parties acting on
their  behalf,  for  the  exclusive  purpose  of  implementing,  administering  and
managing your eligibility for and participation in the Plan.
You understand that the Company and your employer may hold certain personal
data  about  you,  including  but  not  limited  to,  your  name,  home  address  and
telephone number, date of birth, social insurance number or other identification
number, salary, benefit eligibility, nationality, job title, any Common Shares or
directorships held in the Company, details of all awards or any other entitlement
to  Common  Shares  granted,  canceled,  exercised,  vested,  unvested  or
outstanding 
implementing,
administering and managing the Plan (collectively, the “Data”).
the  exclusive  purpose  of
for
in  your
favor,
You  understand  that  Data  will  be  transferred  to  and  processed  and  stored  by
third parties assisting the Company with the implementation, administration and
management  of  the  Plan,  and  you  consent  to  such  transfer,  processing  and
storage. You understand that the Data may be transferred to and processed and
stored  outside  of  your  country  of  residence,  including  the  United  States  of
America, and that the recipients’ country (including the United States) may have
different data privacy laws and protections than your country of residence, and
you nevertheless consent to the transfer, processing and storage of your data in
those nations. You understand that you may request a list with the names and
addresses of any potential recipients of the Data by contacting your local human
resources representative. You authorize the Company and any other possible
recipients  that  may  assist  the  Company  (presently  or  in  the  future)  with
implementing, administering and managing the Plan to receive, possess, store,
process, use, retain and transfer the Data, in electronic or other form, for the sole
purpose of implementing, administering and managing your participation in the
Plan.  You  understand  that  Data  will  be  held  only  as  long  as  is  necessary  to
implement, administer and manage your participation in the Plan or as otherwise
may be required by applicable law. You understand that you may, at any time,
view Data, request additional information about the storage and processing of
Data, require any necessary and appropriate amendments to Data or refuse or
withdraw the consents herein, in any case without cost, by contacting in writing
your  local  human  resources  representative.  You  understand,  however,  that
refusing or withdrawing your consent may affect your ability to participate in the
Plan. For more information on the consequences of your refusal to consent or
withdrawal of consent, you understand that you may contact your local human
resources representative.
-9-
This Agreement is made under, and will be construed in accordance with, the
internal substantive laws of the State of Delaware, except any such laws that
require the application of another jurisdiction.
In  the  event  that  one  or  more  of  the  provisions  of  this  Agreement  shall  be
invalidated for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, any provision so
invalidated will be deemed to be separable from the other provisions hereof, and
the remaining provisions hereof will continue to be valid and fully enforceable.
Notwithstanding any provisions in this Agreement, the Stock Units shall also be
subject  to  the  special  terms  and  conditions  set  forth  below  if  you  reside  in
Canada. Moreover, if you relocate to Canada, the special terms and conditions
set forth below will apply to you, to the extent the Company determines that the
application of such terms and conditions is necessary or advisable in order to
comply with local law or facilitate the administration of the Plan.
Governing Law:
Severability:
Canada-Specific Special Terms and
Conditions:
The information is based on the securities, exchange control, and other laws in
effect in the respective countries as of [                    ]. Such laws are often
complex and change frequently. As a result, it is strongly recommended that you
not rely on the information below as the only source of information relating to the
consequences of your participation in the Plan because the information may be
out  of  date  at  the  time  you  vest  in  your  Stock  Units  or  sell  Common  Shares
acquired under the Plan.
In  addition,  the  information  set  forth  below  is  general  in  nature  and  may  not
apply to your particular situation, and the Company and its Subsidiaries are not
in a position to assure you of a particular result. Accordingly, you are advised to
seek appropriate professional advice as to how the relevant laws may apply to
your situation.
Finally, if you are a citizen or resident of a country other than the one in which
you  are  currently  working,  transferred  employment  after  the  Stock  Units  were
granted  to  you,  or  are  considered  a  resident  of  another  country  for  local  law
purposes, the information contained herein may not apply.
Stock Units Settled in Common Shares Only.  Notwithstanding  anything  to  the
contrary in the Plan, the Stock Units awarded to you hereunder shall be paid in
shares only and do not provide any right to receive a cash payment.
The  following  provision  will  apply  if  you  are  a  resident  of  Quebec:  Language
Consent.  The  parties  acknowledge  that  it  is  their  express  wish  that  this
Agreement, as well as all  documents,  notices,  and  legal  proceedings  entered
into, given or instituted pursuant hereto or relating directly or indirectly hereto, be
drawn up in English.
-10-
Les  parties  reconnaissent  avoir  exigé  la  rédaction  en  anglais  de  cette
convention,  ainsi  que  de  tous  documents,  avis  et  procédures  judiciaires,
exécutés, donnés ou intentés en vertu de, ou liés directement ou indirectement à
la présente convention.
Notifications
Additional Restrictions on Resale. In addition to the restrictions on resale and
transfer  noted  in  Plan  materials,  securities  purchased  under  the  Plan  may  be
subject  to  certain  restrictions  on  resale  imposed  by  Canadian  provincial
securities laws. You are encouraged to seek legal advice prior to any resale of
such  securities.  In  general,  participants  resident  in  Canada  may  resell  their
securities in transactions carried out on exchanges outside of Canada.
Tax Reporting.  The  Income  Tax  Act  (Canada)  and  the  regulations  thereunder
require  a  Canadian  resident  individual  (among  others)  to  file  an  information
return disclosing prescribed information where, at any time in a tax year, the total
cost  amount  of  such  individual’s  “specified  foreign  property”  (which  includes
shares,  options  and  stock  units)  exceeds  Cdn.$100,000.  You  should  consult
your own tax advisor regarding this reporting requirement.
By signing the Notice of Stock Units Award attached as the cover page to this Agreement, you agree to all of the terms and
conditions described above and in the Plan.
-11-