
FORM 51-102F3
MATERIAL CHANGE REPORT
Name and Address of Company
Toscana Energy Income Corporation (“Toscana Energy” or the “Company”) 
Suite 3410, 421 – 7th Avenue SW 
Calgary, Alberta  T2P 4K9
Date of Material Change
August 22, 2016
News Release
A  news  release  disclosing  the  material  change  was  disseminated  on  August  22,  2016 
through the services of GlobeNewswire.
Summary of Material Change
On August 22, 2016, Toscana Energy announced the completion of the semi-annual review 
of its credit facilities.  As a result of the review, the Company agreed to certain amendments 
to its credit facilities which have been reduced from $48 million to $43 million with the next 
review scheduled to occur on October 1, 2016.
On August 22, 2016, Toscana Energy announced the completion of the semi-annual review 
of its credit facilities.  As a result of the review, the Company agreed to certain amendments 
to its credit facilities which have been reduced from $48 million to $43 million with the next 
review scheduled to occur on October 1, 2016.   
 
Toscana Energy currently has $39.5 million drawn on its credit facilities which the Company 
expects to be reduced to approximately $27 million following the completion of the sale of its 
non-operated oil and natural gas assets in northwestern Alberta (the “Assets”) for total cash 
consideration  of  $12.5  million,  as  disclosed  in  the  press  release  of  the  Company  dated 
August 17, 2016.  Following the sale of the Assets, the Company expects the credit facilities 
to be adjusted to reflect the loss in loan value accorded to the Assets at closing.
Item 1
Item 2
Item 3
Item 4
Item 6
Item 7
Item 5.1   Full Description of Material Change
Item 5.2   Disclosure for Restructuring Transaction
Not applicable.
Reliance on subsection 7.1(2) of National Instrument 51-102
Not applicable.
Omitted Information
Not applicable.
Item 8
Item 9
August 26, 2016
Forward-Looking Statements:
Executive Officer
For further information, contact Mr. Joseph Durante, Chief Executive Officer, by telephone at 
(403) 410-6793. 
 
Date of Report
the expected completion and resulting reduction to the amount drawn under the credit facilities as a result of the sale of the Assets
are  based  on  certain  key  expectations  and  assumptions  made  by  management  of  the  Company,  including  expectations  and 
assumptions concerning applicable post-closing adjustments in relation to the sale of the Assets and general business, economic 
and  market  conditions.    Although  management  of  the  Company  believes  that  the  expectations  and  assumptions  on  which  such
securities laws.  These statements relate to future events or future performance.  All statements other than statements of historical
identified by the use of words such as "appear", "seek", "anticipate", "plan", "continue", "estimate", "approximate", "expect", "may", 
"will", "project", "predict", "potential", "targeting", "intend", "could", "might", "should", "believe", "would" and similar expressions.
This material change report contains forward‐looking statements and forward‐looking information within the meaning of applicable 
fact  may  be  forward‐looking  statements  or  information.    Forward‐looking  statements  and  information  are  often,  but  not  always, 
More particularly and without limitation, this material change report contains forward‐looking statements and information concerning 
and the expected adjustment to the credit facilities following the sale of the Assets.  The forward‐looking statements and information 
forward-looking statements and information are based are reasonable, undue reliance should not be placed on the forward‐looking 
information may not be appropriate for other purposes, such as making investment decisions.  Since forward‐looking statements 
limited to tax laws, royalties and environmental regulations.  Accordingly, readers should not place undue reliance on the forward‐
The forward‐looking statements and information contained in this material change report are made as of the date hereof and no 
undertaking  is  given  to  update  publicly  or  revise  any  forward‐looking  statements  or  information,  whether  as  a  result  of  new
and  information  address  future  events  and  conditions,  by  their  very  nature  they  involve  inherent  risks  and  uncertainties.    Actual 
results  could  differ  materially  from  those  currently  anticipated  due  to  a  number  of  factors  and  risks.    These  include,  but  are  not 
limited  to,  the  risk  that  the  disposition  of  the  Assets  will  not  be  completed  on  the  terms  anticipated  or  at  all;  general  business, 
economic and market conditions; the risks associated with the oil and gas industry in general; incorrect assessment of the value of 
the disposition of the Assets; failure to obtain required regulatory and other approvals and changes in legislation, including but not
statements and information since no assurance can be given that they will prove to be correct. 
Forward-looking statements and information are provided for the purpose of providing information about the current expectations 
and  plans  of  management  of  the  Company  relating  to  the  future.    Readers  are  cautioned  that  reliance  on  such  statements  and
looking statements, timelines and information contained in this material change report.  Readers are cautioned that the foregoing list 
of factors is not exhaustive.
information,  future  events  or  otherwise,  unless  so  required  by  applicable  securities  laws  or  the  Toronto  Stock  Exchange.    The 
forward-looking  statements  or  information  contained  in  this  material  change  report  are  expressly  qualified  by  this  cautionary 
statement.
2