
10-Q 1 v81116010q.htm FOR THE QUARTERLY PERIOD ENDED JUNE 30, 2016
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-Q
ý
QUARTERLY REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES
EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the quarterly period ended June 30, 2016
or
☐TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES
EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from
_______________________to____________________________
Commission File No. 000-53178
Ridgewood Energy V Fund, LLC
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
20-5941122
 
(State or other jurisdiction of
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification No.)
incorporation or organization)
14 Philips Parkway, Montvale, NJ  07645
(Address of principal executive offices) (Zip code)
(800) 942-5550
(Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by
Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or
for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.
  Yes ☒    No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its
corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted
pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12
months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files).
  Yes ☒     No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a
non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated
filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer
Non-accelerated filer
(Do not check if a smaller reporting company)
☐Accelerated filer
☐Smaller reporting company
☐
☒
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the
Exchange Act).
 Yes ☐     No ☒
As of August 11, 2016 the Fund had 513.1226 shares of LLC Membership Interest outstanding.
Table of Contents
 
 
Table of Contents
PART I - FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Item 1. Financial Statements
Item 2.
Unaudited Condensed Balance Sheets as of June 30, 2016 and December 31,
 
2015
Unaudited Condensed Statements of Operations for the three and six months
 
ended
June 30, 2016 and 2015
Unaudited Condensed Statements of Cash Flows for the six months ended
 
June 30, 2016 and 2015
 Notes to Unaudited Condensed Financial Statements
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations
Item 3. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
Item 4. Controls and Procedures
 
PART II - OTHER INFORMATION
Item 1. Legal Proceedings
Item
1A.
Item 2. Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities and Use of Proceeds
Item 3. Defaults Upon Senior Securities
Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures
Item 5. Other Information
Item 6. Exhibits
Risk Factors
PAGE
 
1
1
2
3
4
10
16
16
 
 
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
SIGNATURES
18
Table of Contents
 
 
PART I – FINANCIAL INFORMATION
ITEM 1.  FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
RIDGEWOOD ENERGY V FUND, LLC
UNAUDITED CONDENSED BALANCE SHEETS
(in thousands, except share data)
June 30, 2016  December 31, 2015 
 
 
  
Assets
  
 
Current assets:
 
 $ 2,795
Cash and cash equivalents
 
   132
Production receivable
   -
 
Salvage fund
 
   2,927
Total current assets
 
   2,528
Salvage fund
  
 
Oil and gas properties:
 
Proved properties
   46,876
)
Less:  accumulated depletion and amortization   (25,315
Total oil and gas properties, net
   21,561
 
 
 $ 27,016
Total assets
 
  
 
 
  
Liabilities and Members' Capital
Current liabilities:
  
 
 
 $ 702
Due to operators
 
   1,234
Accrued expenses
Asset retirement obligations
   -
 
 
   1,693
Current portion of long-term borrowings
 
   3,629
Total current liabilities
Long-term borrowings
   10,856
 
 
   3,082
Asset retirement obligations
 
   17,567
Total liabilities
Commitments and contingencies (Note 4)
  
 
 
  
Members' capital:
 
  
Manager:
Distributions
   (6,415
)
 
   5,864
Retained earnings
)
   (551
Manager's total
Shareholders:
  
 
 
  
Capital contributions (850 shares authorized;
$ 4,122
    73
    285
    4,480
    2,242
   
    44,651
)  
(25,191
    19,460
  $ 26,182
   
   
   
  $ 333
    722
    285
    11
    1,351
    12,438
    2,797
    16,586
   
 
   
 
   
 
)  
(6,415
    5,867
(548
)
513.1226 issued and outstanding)
Syndication costs
Distributions
Accumulated deficit
Shareholders' total
Total members' capital
Total liabilities and members' capital
76,006
   (8,675
   (36,350
   (20,981
   10,000
   9,449
 $ 27,016
76,006
)  
(8,675
(36,350
)  
)  
(20,837
    10,144
    9,596
  $ 26,182
)
)
)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these unaudited condensed financial statements.
 
 
1
Table of Contents
 
 
RIDGEWOOD ENERGY V FUND, LLC
UNAUDITED CONDENSED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
(in thousands, except per share data)
Revenue
Oil and gas revenue
Expenses
Depletion and amortization
Impairment of oil and gas properties   
Management fees to affiliate (Note 2)  
Operating expenses
General and administrative
expenses
Total expenses
Income (loss) from operations
Interest income
Net income (loss)
 
Manager Interest
Net income (loss)
 
Shareholder Interest
Net income (loss)
Net income (loss) per share
-
-
58
   201
   16
   1
 $ 17
  
  
 $ 11
 
  
 
  
 $ 6
 $ 13
Three months ended June 30,  Six months ended June 30, 
 2016
 
 
  
 
 $ 217
  
 
)
   50
2015
     
    $ 1,070
     
     
     
      518
      426
2016
   
  $ 297
   
)   68
    56
   
    211
2015
     
    $ 566
     
     
     
      259
      239
(155
-
(82
-
93
-
33
      376
      190
      1
    $ 191
     
     
    $ 13
     
     
    $ 178
    $ 346
111
    446
   
(149
    2
  $ (147
 
   
 
   
  $ (3
 
   
   
 
  $ (144
  $ (280
68
      930
)     140
      2
)   $ 142
     
     
)   $ 16
     
     
)   $ 126
)   $ 245
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these unaudited condensed financial statements.
 
 
2
Table of Contents
 
 
RIDGEWOOD ENERGY V FUND, LLC
UNAUDITED CONDENSED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(in thousands)
Cash flows from operating activities
Net (loss) income
Adjustments to reconcile net (loss) income to net cash  
  
   (used in) provided by operating activities:
   68
Depletion and amortization
Impairment of oil and gas properties
   56
   -
Accretion expense
  
Changes in assets and liabilities:
 
(Increase) decrease in production receivable
   (109
   -
Decrease in other current assets
   28
Increase (decrease) in due to operators
Increase in accrued expenses
   28
   (76
Net cash (used in) provided by operating activities
  
 
Cash flows from investing activities
  
   (1,250
Capital expenditures for oil and gas properties
   (1
Investments in salvage fund
Net cash used in investing activities
   (1,251
 
  
 
  
Cash flows from financing activities
 
   -
Long-term borrowings
   -
Distributions
   -
Net cash provided by financing activities
 
  
 
   (1,327
Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents
   4,122
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period
Cash and cash equivalents, end of period
 $ 2,795
(82
-
Six months ended June 30, 
 
 2016
  
 
 
  
 
 $ (147
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
)
)
)
 
 
 
)
 
 
)
2015
    
    
)  $ 142
    
    
    
    
     63
    
)    329
     22
    
(3
     18
)    489
    
    
)   
)   
)   
    
    
     1,650
    
(248
     1,402
 
    
)   
(140
     1,168
   $ 1,028
(2,030
(1
(2,031
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these unaudited condensed financial statements.
 
 
3
Table of Contents
 
 
RIDGEWOOD ENERGY V FUND, LLC
NOTES TO UNAUDITED CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
1.Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Organization
The Ridgewood Energy V Fund, LLC (the “Fund”), a Delaware limited liability company, was
formed on November 21, 2006 and operates pursuant to a limited liability company agreement
(the “LLC Agreement”) dated as of January 3, 2007 by and among Ridgewood Energy
Corporation (the “Manager”) and the shareholders of the Fund, which addresses matters such as
the authority and voting rights of the Manager and shareholders, capitalization, transferability of
membership interests, participation in costs and revenues, distribution of assets and dissolution
and winding up.  The Fund was organized to primarily acquire interests in oil and gas properties
located in the United States offshore waters of Texas, Louisiana and Alabama in the Gulf of
Mexico.
The Manager has direct and exclusive control over the management of the Fund’s operations. 
With respect to project investments, the Manager locates potential projects, conducts due
diligence, and negotiates and completes the transactions.  The Manager performs, or arranges
for the performance of, the management, advisory and administrative services required for Fund
operations.  Such services include, without limitation, the administration of shareholder accounts,
shareholder relations and the preparation, review and dissemination of tax and other financial
information.  In addition, the Manager provides office space, equipment and facilities and other
services necessary for Fund operations.  The Manager also engages and manages the
contractual relations with unaffiliated custodians, depositories, accountants, attorneys, broker-
dealers, corporate fiduciaries, insurers, banks and others as required.  See Notes 2, 3 and 4.
Basis of Presentation
These unaudited interim condensed financial statements have been prepared by the Fund’s
management in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America (“GAAP”) and in the opinion of management, contain all adjustments (consisting of only
normal recurring adjustments) necessary to present fairly the Fund’s financial position, results of
operations and cash flows for the periods presented.  Certain information and note disclosures
normally included in annual financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP have been
omitted in these unaudited interim condensed financial statements.  The results of operations,
financial position, and cash flows for the periods presented herein are not necessarily indicative
of future financial results.  These unaudited interim condensed financial statements should be
read in conjunction with the Fund’s December 31, 2015 financial statements and notes thereto
included in the Fund’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission (“SEC”).  The year-end condensed balance sheet data was derived from audited
financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2015, but does not include all disclosures
required by GAAP.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements and the
reported amounts of revenue and expense during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, the
Manager reviews its estimates, including those related to the fair value of financial instruments,
net property balances, determination of proved reserves, impairment of long-lived assets and
asset retirement obligations. Actual results may differ from those estimates.
Fair Value Measurements
The fair value measurement guidance provides a hierarchy that prioritizes and defines the types
of inputs used to measure fair value.  The fair value hierarchy gives the highest priority to Level 1
inputs, which consists of unadjusted quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets. 
Level 2 inputs consist of quoted prices for similar instruments.  Level 3 inputs are unobservable
inputs and include situations where there is little, if any, market activity for the instrument; hence,
these inputs have the lowest priority.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
All highly liquid investments with maturities, when purchased, of three months or less, are
considered cash equivalents.  These balances, as well as cash on hand, are included in “Cash
and cash equivalents” on the balance sheet. As of June 30, 2016, the Fund had no cash
equivalents.  At times, deposits may be in excess of federally insured limits, which are $250
thousand per insured financial institution.  As of June 30, 2016, the Fund’s bank balances were
maintained in uninsured bank accounts at Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.
 
 
4
Table of Contents
 
 
Salvage Fund
The Fund deposits in a separate interest-bearing account, or salvage fund, money to provide for
the dismantling and removal of production platforms and facilities and plugging and abandoning
its wells at the end of their useful lives in accordance with applicable federal and state laws and
regulations.  Interest earned on the account will become part of the salvage fund.   There are no
restrictions on withdrawals from the salvage fund.
Debt Discounts and Deferred Financing Costs
Debt discounts and deferred financing costs include lender fees and other costs of acquiring debt
(see Note 3. “Credit Agreement – Beta Project Financing”) such as the conveyance of override
royalty interests related to the Beta Project. These costs are deferred and amortized over the term
of the debt period or until the redemption of the debt. During the first quarter of 2016, the Fund
adopted the accounting guidance issued in April 2015 related to the presentation of debt
issuance costs on the balance sheet as a direct reduction from the carrying amount of the debt
liability, rather than as an asset. As a result, the unamortized debt discounts and deferred
financing costs of $0.3 million as of June 30, 2016 and $0.4 million as of December 31, 2015 are
presented as a reduction of “Long-term borrowings” on the balance sheets.  Amortization
expense was $50 thousand during each of the three months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015. 
Amortization expense was $0.1 million during each of the six months ended June 30, 2016 and
2015.  During the period of asset construction, amortization expense, as a component of interest,
is capitalized and included on the balance sheet within “Oil and gas properties”.
Oil and Gas Properties
The Fund invests in oil and gas properties, which are operated by unaffiliated entities that are
responsible for drilling, administering and producing activities pursuant to the terms of the
applicable operating agreements with working interest owners. The Fund’s portion of exploration,
drilling, operating and capital equipment expenditures is billed by operators.
Exploration, development and acquisition costs are accounted for using the successful efforts
method. Costs of acquiring unproved and proved oil and natural gas leasehold acreage,
including lease bonuses, brokers’ fees and other related costs are capitalized. Costs of drilling
and equipping productive wells and related production facilities are capitalized. The costs of
exploratory wells are capitalized pending determination of whether proved reserves have been
found. If proved commercial reserves are not found, exploratory well costs are expensed as dry-
hole costs.  At times, the Fund receives adjustments to certain wells from their respective
operators upon review and audit of the wells’ costs.  Interest costs related to the Credit
Agreement (see Note 3. “Credit Agreement – Beta Project Financing”) are capitalized during the
period of asset construction.  Annual lease rentals and exploration expenses are expensed as
incurred.  All costs related to production activity and workover efforts are expensed as incurred.
Once a well has been determined to be fully depleted or upon the sale, retirement or
abandonment of a property, the cost and related accumulated depletion and amortization, if any,
is eliminated from the property accounts, and the resultant gain or loss is recognized.
As of June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015, amounts recorded in due to operators totaling $0.5
million and $0.2 million, respectively, related to capital expenditures for oil and gas properties.
Advances to Operators for Working Interests and Expenditures
The Fund may be required to advance its share of the estimated succeeding month’s
expenditures to the operator for its oil and gas properties.  As the costs are incurred, the
advances are reclassified to proved properties.
Asset Retirement Obligations
For oil and gas properties, there are obligations to perform removal and remediation activities
when the properties are retired. Upon the determination of a property to be either proved or dry, a
retirement obligation is incurred. The Fund recognizes the fair value of a liability for an asset
retirement obligation in the period incurred. Plug and abandonment costs associated with
unsuccessful projects are expensed as dry-hole costs.  As indicated above, the Fund maintains a
salvage fund to provide for the funding of asset retirement obligations.
Syndication Costs
Syndication costs are direct costs incurred by the Fund in connection with the offering of the
Fund’s shares, including professional fees, selling expenses and administrative costs payable to
the Manager, an affiliate of the Manager and unaffiliated broker-dealers, which are reflected on
the Fund’s balance sheet as a reduction of shareholders’ capital.
 
 
5
Table of Contents
Revenue Recognition and Imbalances
Oil and gas revenues are recognized when oil and gas is sold to a purchaser at a fixed or
determinable price, when delivery has occurred and title has transferred, and collectability of the
revenue is reasonably assured.  The Fund uses the sales method of accounting for gas
production imbalances. The volumes of gas sold may differ from the volumes to which the Fund
is entitled based on its interests in the properties. These differences create imbalances that are
recognized as a liability only when the properties’ estimated remaining reserves net to the Fund
will not be sufficient to enable the underproduced owner to recoup its entitled share through
production. The Fund’s recorded liability, if any, would be reflected in other liabilities. No
receivables are recorded for those wells where the Fund has taken less than its share of
production.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
The Fund reviews the carrying value of its oil and gas properties annually and when
management determines that events and circumstances indicate that the recorded carrying value
of properties may not be recoverable.  Impairments are determined by comparing estimated
future net undiscounted cash flows to the carrying value at the time of the review.  If the carrying
value exceeds the estimated future net undiscounted cash flows, the carrying value of the asset
is written down to fair value, which is determined using estimated future net discounted cash
flows from the asset.  The fair value determinations require considerable judgment and are
sensitive to change.  Different pricing assumptions, reserve estimates or discount rates could
result in a different calculated impairment.  Given the volatility of oil and natural gas prices, it is
reasonably possible that the Fund’s estimate of discounted future net cash flows from proved oil
and natural gas reserves could change in the near term.
Significant declines in oil and natural gas prices since fourth quarter 2014 have impacted the fair
value of the Fund’s oil and gas properties. During the six months ended June 30, 2016, the Fund
recorded impairments of oil and gas properties of $56 thousand, which represented the carrying
value of Eugene Island 346/347.  The impairment was primarily attributable to declines in future
oil and gas prices.  There were no impairments of oil and gas properties during the three months
ended June 30, 2016 and during the three and six months ended June 30, 2015.  If oil and
natural gas prices continue to decline, even if only for a short period of time, it is possible that
additional impairments of oil and gas properties will occur.
Depletion and Amortization
Depletion and amortization of the cost of proved oil and gas properties are calculated using the
units-of-production method. Proved developed reserves are used as the base for depleting
capitalized costs associated with successful exploratory well costs, development costs and
related facilities. The sum of proved developed and proved undeveloped reserves is used as the
base for depleting or amortizing leasehold acquisition costs. During the three and six months
ended June 30, 2015, the Fund recorded credits to depletion expense totaling $0.3 million
related to adjustments to asset retirement obligations for fully depleted properties.
Income Taxes
No provision is made for income taxes in the financial statements.  The Fund is a limited liability
company, and as such, the Fund’s income or loss is passed through and included in the tax
returns of the Fund’s shareholders.  The Fund files U.S. Federal and State tax returns and the
2013 through 2015 tax returns remain open for examination by tax authorities.
Income and Expense Allocation
Profits and losses are allocated to shareholders and the Manager in accordance with the LLC
Agreement.
Distributions
Distributions to shareholders are allocated in proportion to the number of shares held. The
Manager determines whether available cash from operations, as defined in the LLC Agreement,
will be distributed. Such distributions are allocated 85% to the shareholders and 15% to the
Manager, as required by the LLC Agreement.
Available cash from dispositions, as defined in the LLC Agreement, will be paid 99% to
shareholders and 1% to the Manager until the shareholders have received total distributions
equal to their capital contributions. After shareholders have received distributions equal to their
capital contributions, 85% of available cash from dispositions will be distributed to shareholders
and 15% to the Manager.
 
 
6
Table of Contents
 
 
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In April 2015, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued accounting guidance
related to the presentation of debt issuance costs on the balance sheet as a direct reduction from
the carrying amount of the debt liability, consistent with debt discounts, rather than as an asset. 
Amortization of debt issuance costs will continue to be reported as interest expense.  In August
2015, the FASB issued accounting guidance related to the presentation and subsequent
measurement of debt issuance costs associated with line-of-credit arrangements which clarifies
that companies may continue to present unamortized debt issuance costs associated with line of
credit arrangements as an asset.  These pronouncements are effective for fiscal years, and
interim periods within those years, beginning after December 15, 2015, with early adoption
permitted.  The Fund adopted the accounting guidance in first quarter 2016, resulting in a one-
time reclassification of $0.4 million of unamortized debt discounts and deferred financing costs
from "Other assets" to "Long-term borrowings" on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2015.
Long-term borrowings are presented net of $0.3 million of unamortized debt discounts and
deferred financing costs as of June 30, 2016. The adoption of these pronouncements did not
impact the Fund’s results of operations or cash flows.
In 2014, the FASB issued accounting guidance on revenue recognition, which provides for a
single five-step model to be applied to all revenue contracts with customers. In 2015, the FASB
issued a deferral of the effective date of the guidance to 2018, with early adoption permitted in
2017. In May 2016, the FASB issued final amendments which provided narrow scope
improvements and practical expedients related to the implementation of the guidance. The Fund
is currently evaluating the impact of this guidance on its financial statements.
2.Related Parties
Pursuant to the terms of the LLC Agreement, the Manager renders management, administrative
and advisory services to the Fund.  For such services, the Manager is entitled to an annual
management fee, payable monthly, of 2.5% of total capital contributions, net of cumulative dry-
hole and related well costs incurred by the Fund.  Effective October 1, 2015, the Manager waived
its management fee for the remaining life of the Fund.  Upon waiver of the management fee, the
Fund began recording costs, totaling $20 thousand per quarter, representing reimbursements to
the Manager, related to services provided by the Manager for accounting and investor relations.
Such costs are included within general and administrative expenses.  Management
reimbursement costs during the three and six months ended June 30, 2016 were $20 thousand
and $40 thousand, respectively.  Management fees during the three and six months ended June
30, 2015 were $0.3 million and $0.5 million, respectively.
The Manager is entitled to receive a 15% interest in cash distributions from operations made by
the Fund.  The Fund did not pay distributions during the three and six months ended June 30,
2016 and during the three months ended June 30, 2015.  Distributions paid to the Manager
during the six months ended June 30, 2015 were $37 thousand.
At times, short-term payables and receivables, which do not bear interest, arise from transactions
with affiliates in the ordinary course of business.
None of the amounts paid to the Manager have been derived as a result of arm’s length
negotiations.
The Fund has working interest ownership in certain projects to acquire and develop oil and
natural gas projects with other entities that are likewise managed by the Manager.
3.Credit Agreement – Beta Project Financing
In November 2012, the Fund entered into a credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with Rahr
Energy Investments LLC, as Administrative Agent and Lender (and any other banks or financial
institutions that may in the future become a party thereto, collectively “Lenders”) that provides for
an aggregate loan commitment to the Fund of approximately $13.6 million (“Loan”), to provide
capital toward the funding of the Fund’s share of development costs on the Beta Project. Except
in cases of fraud and breach of certain representations, the Loan is non-recourse to the Fund’s
other assets and secured solely by the Fund’s interests in the Beta Project. Certain other funds
managed by Ridgewood (“Ridgewood Funds”, and when used with the Fund the “Ridgewood
Participating Funds”) have also executed the Credit Agreement. Pursuant to the Credit
Agreement, each Ridgewood Participating Fund has a separate loan commitment from the
Lenders and amounts borrowed are not joint and several obligations. Each of the Ridgewood
Participating Funds’ borrowings is secured solely by its separate interest in the Beta Project.
Therefore, the Fund is liable for the repayment of its Loan and is not liable to the Lenders to
repay any loan made to any other Ridgewood Funds. The Manager serves as the manager for
each of the Ridgewood Participating Funds.
The Fund anticipates it will borrow approximately $13.6 million over the development period of
the Beta Project. The Loan bears interest at 8% compounded annually and accrues only on Loan
proceeds as they are drawn.  Principal and interest will not be payable until such time that initial
production has commenced for the Beta Project, which commenced production in third quarter
2016. At that time, if certain revenue production levels are met, principal and interest will be
repaid at a monthly rate of 1.25% of the Fund’s total principal outstanding at the date the Beta
Project commences production for the first seven months of production, and a monthly rate of
4.5% of the Fund’s total principal outstanding at the date the Beta Project commences production
thereafter until the Loan is repaid in full, in no event later than December 31, 2020.  The Loan
may be prepaid by the Fund without premium or penalty.
 
 
7
Table of Contents
 
 
As of June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015, the Fund had borrowings of $12.9 million, under
the Credit Agreement.  During the first quarter of 2016, the Fund adopted the accounting
guidance issued in April 2015, related to the presentation of debt issuance costs on the balance
sheet as a direct reduction from the carrying amount of the debt liability, rather than as an asset.
As a result, the unamortized debt discounts and deferred financing costs of $0.3 million as of
June 30, 2016 and $0.4 million as of December 31, 2015, are presented as a reduction of “Long-
term borrowings” on the balance sheets.  As of June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015, interest
costs of $1.2 million and $0.6 million, respectively, were capitalized and included on the balance
sheet within “Oil and gas properties”.  Such amounts are accrued on the balance sheet within
“Accrued expenses” as of June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015.
As additional consideration to the Lenders, the Fund has agreed to convey an overriding royalty
interest (“ORRI”) in its working interest in the Beta Project to the Lenders.  The Credit Agreement
contains customary covenants, for which the Fund believes it was in compliance as of June 30,
2016 and December 31, 2015.
4.Commitments and Contingencies
Capital Commitments
The Fund has entered into multiple agreements for the acquisition, drilling and development of its
oil and gas properties. The estimated capital expenditures associated with these agreements
vary depending on the stage of development on a property-by-property basis.  As of June 30,
2016, the Fund had one property, the Beta Project, for which additional development costs must
be incurred in order to commence production.  The Fund currently expects to spend an additional
$6.8 million (which includes asset retirement obligations) related to the development of the Beta
Project, which the Fund anticipates will include the development of four wells with related
platform and pipeline infrastructure.  During third quarter 2016, one well in the Beta Project
commenced production.
As of June 30, 2016, the Fund’s estimated capital commitments related to its oil and gas
properties were $9.8 million (which include asset retirement obligations for the Fund’s projects of
$4.1 million and projected interest costs of $0.1 million for the Beta Project), of which $4.4 million
is expected to be spent during the next twelve months. These expected capital commitments
exceed available working capital and salvage fund by $7.9 million as of June 30, 2016.  The
Fund has entered into the Credit Agreement to provide capital for funding of the Beta Project. 
See Note 3. “Credit Agreement – Beta Project Financing” for additional information.
Based upon its current cash position, its current reserve estimates and its current development
plan of the Beta Project, the Fund expects cash flow from operations and borrowings to be
sufficient to cover its commitments, as well as ongoing operations. Reserve estimates are
projections based on engineering data that cannot be measured with precision, require
substantial judgment, and are subject to frequent revision.  However, if cash flow from operations
is not sufficient to meet the Fund’s capital commitments, the Manager will take action, which may
include acquiring short-term debt to accommodate the Fund’s short-term capital commitments.
Environmental Considerations
The exploration for and development of oil and natural gas involves the extraction, production
and transportation of materials which, under certain conditions, can be hazardous or cause
environmental pollution problems. The Manager and operators of the Fund’s properties are
continually taking action they believe appropriate to satisfy applicable federal, state and local
environmental regulations and do not currently anticipate that compliance with federal, state and
local environmental regulations will have a material adverse effect upon capital expenditures,
results of operations or the competitive position of the Fund in the oil and gas industry. However,
due to the significant public and governmental interest in environmental matters related to those
activities, the Manager cannot predict the effects of possible future legislation, rule changes, or
governmental or private claims. As of June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015, there were no
known environmental contingencies that required adjustment to, or disclosure in, the Fund’s
financial statements.
During the past several years, the United States Congress, as well as certain regulatory
agencies with jurisdiction over the Fund’s business, have considered or proposed legislation or
regulation relating to the upstream oil and gas industry both onshore and offshore.  If any such
proposals were to be enacted or adopted they could potentially materially impact the Fund’s
operations.  It is not possible at this time to predict whether such legislation or regulation, if
proposed, will be adopted as initially written, if at all, or how legislation or new regulation that
may be adopted would impact the Fund’s business. Any such future laws and regulations could
result in increased compliance costs or additional operating restrictions, which could have a
material adverse effect on the Fund’s operating results and cash flows.
 
 
8
Table of Contents
 
 
Insurance Coverage
The Fund is subject to all risks inherent in the exploration for and development of oil and natural
gas. Insurance coverage as is customary for entities engaged in similar operations is maintained,
but losses may occur from uninsurable risks or amounts in excess of existing insurance
coverage.  The occurrence of an event that is not insured or not fully insured could have a
material adverse impact upon earnings and financial position.  Moreover, insurance is obtained
as a package covering all of the funds managed by the Manager.  Claims made by other funds
managed by the Manager can reduce or eliminate insurance for the Fund.
 
 
9
Table of Contents
 
 
ITEM 2.          MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION
AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
Certain statements in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q (“Quarterly Report”) and the documents
Ridgewood Energy V Fund, LLC (the “Fund”) has incorporated by reference into this Quarterly
Report, other than purely historical information, including estimates, projections, statements
relating to the Fund’s business plans, strategies, objectives and expected operating results, and
the assumptions upon which those statements are based, are “forward-looking statements” within
the meaning of the US Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 that are based on current
expectations and assumptions and are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual
results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements. You are therefore cautioned
against relying on any such forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements can
generally be identified by words such as “believe,” “project,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,”
“intend,” “strategy,” “plan,” “target,” “pursue,” “may,” “will,” “will likely result,” and similar
expressions and references to future periods.  Examples of events that could cause actual results
to differ materially from historical results or those anticipated include weather conditions, such as
hurricanes, changes in market conditions affecting the pricing and production of oil and natural
gas, the cost and availability of equipment, and changes in governmental regulations.  Examples
of forward-looking statements made herein include statements regarding projects, investments,
insurance, capital expenditures and liquidity.  Forward-looking statements made in this document
speak only as of the date on which they are made.  The Fund undertakes no obligation to update
or revise publicly any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future
events or otherwise, except as required by law.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of the Fund’s financial condition and results of operations are based
upon the Fund’s financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”).  In preparing these
financial statements, the Fund is required to make certain estimates, judgments and
assumptions. These estimates, judgments and assumptions affect the reported amounts of the
Fund’s assets and liabilities, including the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, at the
date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of its revenues and expenses during
the periods presented.  The Fund evaluates these estimates and assumptions on an ongoing
basis. The Fund bases its estimates and assumptions on historical experience and on various
other factors that the Fund believes to be reasonable at the time the estimates and assumptions
are made. However, future events and actual results may differ from these estimates and
assumptions and such differences may have a material impact on the results of operations,
financial position or cash flows. See Note 1 of “Notes to Unaudited Condensed Financial
Statements” - “Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” contained in Item
1. “Financial Statements” within Part I of this Quarterly Report for a discussion of the Fund’s
significant accounting policies. No changes have been made to the Fund’s critical accounting
policies and estimates disclosed in its 2015 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview of the Fund’s Business
The Fund is a Delaware limited liability company formed on November 21, 2006 to primarily
acquire interests in oil and natural gas properties located in the United States offshore waters of
Texas, Louisiana and Alabama in the Gulf of Mexico.  The Fund’s primary investment objective is
to generate cash flow for distribution to its shareholders by generating returns across a portfolio
of exploratory or development oil and natural gas projects.  Distributions to shareholders are
made in accordance with the Fund’s limited liability company agreement (the “LLC Agreement”). 
The Fund does not expect in the future to investigate or invest in any additional projects other
than those in which it currently has a working interest.  The Fund’s remaining capital has been
fully allocated to complete such projects.
Ridgewood Energy Corporation (the “Manager” or “Ridgewood Energy”) is the Manager, and as
such, has direct and exclusive control over the management of the Fund’s operations.  The
Manager performs or arranges for the performance of, the management, advisory and
administrative services required for Fund’s operations.  As compensation for its services, the
Manager is entitled to an annual management fee, payable monthly, equal to 2.5% of the total
capital contributions made by the Fund’s shareholders, net of cumulative dry-hole and related
well costs incurred by the Fund.  Effective October 1, 2015, the Manager waived its management
fee for the remaining life of the Fund. Upon the waiver of the management fee, the Fund began
recording costs related to services provided by the Manager for accounting and investor
relations.  The Fund does not currently, nor is there any plan to, operate any project in which the
Fund participates.  The Manager enters into operating agreements with third-party operators for
the management of all exploration, development and producing operations, as appropriate.  The
Manager also participates in distributions.
 
10
Table of Contents
 
 
Commodity Price Changes
Changes in commodity prices may significantly affect liquidity and expected operating results. 
Reductions in oil and gas prices not only reduce revenues and profits, but could also reduce the
quantities of reserves that are commercially recoverable.  Significant declines in prices could
result in non-cash charges to earnings due to impairment.
Since fourth quarter 2014, there has been a significant decline in oil and natural gas prices.  See
“Results of Operations” under this Item 2. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
Condition and Results of Operations” of this Quarterly Report for more information on the average
oil and natural gas prices received by the Fund during the three and six months ended June 30,
2016 and 2015 and the effect of such decreased average prices on the Fund’s results of
operations.  If oil and natural gas prices continue to decline, even if only for a short period of time,
the Fund’s results of operations and liquidity will continue to be adversely impacted.
Market pricing for oil and natural gas is volatile, and is likely to continue to be volatile in the
future.  This volatility is caused by numerous factors and market conditions that the Fund cannot
control or influence. Therefore, it is impossible to predict the future price of oil and natural gas
with any certainty.  Factors affecting market pricing for oil and natural gas include:
·weather conditions;
·economic conditions, including demand for petroleum-based products;
·actions by OPEC, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries;
·political instability in the Middle East and other major oil and gas producing regions;
·governmental regulations, both domestic and foreign;
·domestic and foreign tax policy;
the pace adopted by foreign governments for the exploration, development, and production of
·
their national reserves;
·the price of foreign imports of oil and gas;
·the cost of exploring for, producing and delivering oil and gas;
·the discovery rate of new oil and gas reserves;
·the rate of decline of existing and new oil and gas reserves;
·available pipeline and other oil and gas transportation capacity;
·the ability of oil and gas companies to raise capital;
·the overall supply and demand for oil and gas; and
·the availability of alternate fuel sources.
Business Update
Information regarding the Fund’s current projects, all of which are located in the offshore waters
of the Gulf of Mexico, is provided in the following table.  See “Liquidity Needs” under this Item 2.
“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of
this Quarterly Report for information regarding the funding of the Fund’s capital commitments.
 
 
11
Table of Contents
 
 
 
  
Project
 
Producing
Properties
Total Spent
Working through
 Interest  June 30, 2016  Budget  Status
(in thousands)
Total
  Fund
The Beta Project is expected to include the
development of four wells.  Well #1 commenced
production during third quarter 2016.  Well #2, which
3.0%
$ 20,537
$27,331
Beta
Project
22.0%
$ 18,469
$19,917
Eugene
Island
346/347
5.0%
$ 5,578
$6,830
Liberty
Project
Fully
Depleted
Properties
25.0%
$ 4,989
$5,268
West
Cameron
149
Results of Operations
is currently drilling, is expected to commence
production in fourth quarter 2016.  Wells #3 and #4
are expected to commence production in 2017. The
Fund expects to spend $5.4 million for additional
development costs and $1.4 million for asset
 
retirement obligations.
Eugene Island 346/347 consists of two wells, which
commenced production in 2008.   Both wells were
shut-in periodically throughout 2015 and continue to
be shut-in periodically. The wells' current zones are
nearing the end of their productive lives, however it
is possible that a recompletion will be done in late-
2016 at an estimated cost of $0.1 million to  recover
potential commercial reserves in a new zone.  The
Fund expects to spend $1.3 million for asset
 
retirement obligations.
The Liberty Project, a single-well project,
commenced production in 2010.  After various shut-
ins in late-2015 and early-2016, due to third-party
facilities' repair and maintenance activities, the well
resumed production in early-May 2016.  A
recompletion is planned for 2017 at an estimated
cost of $0.2 million.  The Fund expects to spend $1.1
 
million for asset retirement obligations.
West Cameron 149, a single-well project,
commenced production in 2008.  During 2013, the
well's producing zone was determined to be fully
depleted.  The well was recompleted by the
operator, at no cost to the fund, and resumed
production, however the recompleted zone did not
have a significant amount of remaining reserves.
The well reached the end of its productive life in third
quarter 2015. The Fund expects to spend $0.3
 
million for asset retirement obligations.
The following table summarizes the Fund’s results of operations during the three and six months
ended June 30, 2016 and 2015, and should be read in conjunction with the Fund’s financial
statements and notes thereto included within Item 1.  “Financial Statements” in Part I of this
Quarterly Report.
 
 
12
Table of Contents
Revenue
Oil and gas revenue
Expenses
Depletion and amortization
Impairment of oil and gas properties   
  
Management fees to affiliate
Operating expenses
   93
General and administrative
expenses
Total expenses
Income (loss) from operations
Interest income
Net income (loss)
58
   201
   16
   1
 $ 17
-
-
2015
2015
Three months ended June 30,  Six months ended June 30, 
 
 2016
 
 (in thousands)
  
 
 
 $ 217
 
  
   50
)
$ 1,070
     
     
     
      518
      426
$ 566
     
     
     
      259
      239
$ 297
   
)   68
    56
   
    211
(155
-
(82
-
2016
-
33
      376
      190
      1
    $ 191
111
    446
   
(149
    2
  $ (147
68
      930
)     140
      2
)   $ 142
Overview.  The following table provides information related to the Fund’s oil and gas production
and oil and gas revenue during the three and six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015. Natural
gas liquid (“NGL”) sales are included within gas sales.
Three months ended June 30,  Six months ended June 30, 
 
 
 2016
 
 
Number of wells producing
   3
Total number of production days    99
 
 
Oil sales (in thousands of barrels)   5
 
Average oil price per barrel
 $ 41
Gas sales (in thousands of mcfs)    12
 
 
Average gas price per mcf
2015
      4
      208
      9
    $ 58
      28
    $ 2.49
2015
      4
      403
      16
    $ 52
      91
    $ 2.66
2016
    3
    163
    7
  $ 38
    17
  $ 1.52
$ 1.67
The decreases noted in the above table primarily related to the Liberty Project, which has been
shut-in for the majority of 2016 and West Cameron 149, which reached the end of its productive
life in third quarter 2015. See additional discussion in “Business Update” section above.
Oil and Gas Revenue.  Oil and gas revenue during the three months ended June 30, 2016 was
$0.2 million, a decrease of $0.3 million from the three months ended June 30, 2015.  Oil and gas
revenue during the six months ended June 30, 2016 was $0.3 million, a decrease of $0.8 million
from the six months ended June 30, 2015.  The decreases were primarily attributable to
decreased sales volume.  See “Overview” above for factors that impact the oil and gas revenue
volume and rate variances.
Depletion and Amortization.  Depletion and amortization during the three months ended June 30,
2016 was $50 thousand, an increase of $0.2 million from the three months ended June 30, 2015. 
Depletion and amortization during the six months ended June 30, 2016 was $68 thousand, an
increase of $0.2 million from the six months ended June 30, 2015.
The increases resulted from adjustments to asset retirement obligations of $0.3 million related to
West Cameron 149, a fully depleted property, which were recorded in second quarter 2015,
partially offset by decreased production volumes during second quarter 2016.  See “Overview”
above for certain factors that impact the depletion and amortization volume and rate variances.
Depletion and amortization rates may also be impacted by changes in reserve estimates
provided annually by the Fund’s independent petroleum engineers.
 
Impairment of Oil and Gas Properties. During the six months ended June 30, 2016, the Fund
recorded impairments of oil and gas properties of $56 thousand, related to Eugene Island
346/347, which was primarily attributable to declines in future oil and gas prices.  The Fund did
not record any impairments of oil and gas properties during the three months ended June 30,
2016 and during the three and six months ended June 30, 2015.
 
Management Fees to Affiliate.  An annual management fee, totaling 2.5% of total capital
contributions, net of cumulative dry-hole and related well costs incurred by the Fund, is paid
monthly to the Manager.  Effective October 1, 2015, the Manager waived its management fee for
the remaining life of the Fund. Upon waiver of the management fee, the Fund began recording
costs related to services provided by the Manager for accounting and investor relations. Such
costs are included within general and administrative expenses.
 
 
13
Table of Contents
 
 
Operating Expenses.  Operating expenses represent costs specifically identifiable or allocable to
the Fund’s wells, as detailed in the following table.
2015
2016
2015
Lease operating expense $
  
Insurance expense
Accretion expense
  
  
Other
 
 $
Three months ended June 30,  Six months ended June 30, 
 
 2016
 (in thousands)
 
 
 
 
)
$ 174
18
     
     
63
     
(16
    $ 239
$ 351
      28
      63
     
(16
    $ 426
$ 175
    22
   
)   14
  $ 211
-
61
21
-
11
93
Lease operating expense relates to the Fund’s producing properties.  Insurance expense
represents premiums related to the Fund’s properties, which vary depending upon the number of
wells producing or drilling.  Accretion expense related to the asset retirement obligations
established for the Fund’s proved properties.
 
The average production cost, which includes lease operating expense and insurance expense,
was $12.13 per barrel of oil equivalent (“BOE”) and $20.95 per BOE during the three and six
months ended June 30, 2016, respectively, compared to $14.35 per BOE and $11.75 per BOE
during the three and six months ended June 30, 2015, respectively.  The increase during the six
months ended June 30, 2016 was due to ongoing costs incurred for West Cameron 149, which
reached the end of its productive life in third quarter 2015.
 
General and Administrative Expenses.  General and administrative expenses represent costs
specifically identifiable or allocable to the Fund, such as accounting and professional fees and
insurance expenses.
Interest Income.  Interest income is comprised of interest earned on cash and cash equivalents
and salvage fund.
Capital Resources and Liquidity
Operating Cash Flows
Cash flows used in operating activities during the six months ended June 30, 2016 were $0.1
million, related to operating expenses of $0.2 million and general and administrative expenses of
$0.1 million, partially offset by revenue received of $0.2 million.
Cash flows provided by operating activities during the six months ended June 30, 2015 were
$0.5 million, related to revenue received of $1.4 million, partially offset by management fees of
$0.5 million and operating expenses of $0.4 million.
Investing Cash Flows
Cash flows used in investing activities during the six months ended June 30, 2016 were $1.3
million, primarily related to capital expenditures for oil and gas properties.
Cash flows used in investing activities during the six months ended June 30, 2015 were $2.0
million, primarily related to capital expenditures for oil and gas properties.
Financing Cash Flows
There were no cash flows from financing activities during the six months ended June 30, 2016.
Cash flows provided by financing activities during the six months ended June 30, 2015 were $1.4
million, related to proceeds from long-term borrowings of $1.7 million, partially offset by manager
and shareholder distributions totaling $0.2 million.
Estimated Capital Expenditures
Capital Commitments
The Fund has entered into multiple agreements for the acquisition, drilling and development of its
oil and gas properties. The estimated capital expenditures associated with these agreements
vary depending on the stage of development on a property-by-property basis.  As of June 30,
2016, the Fund had one property, the Beta Project, for which additional development costs must
be incurred in order to commence production.  The Fund currently expects to spend an additional
$6.8 million (which includes asset retirement obligations) related to the development of the Beta
Project, which the Fund anticipates will include the development of four wells with related
platform and pipeline infrastructure. During third quarter 2016, one well in the Beta Project
commenced production. See “Business Update” under this Item 2. “Management’s Discussion
and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of this Quarterly Report for
information regarding the Fund’s current projects. See “Liquidity Needs” below for additional
information.
 
 
14
Table of Contents
 
 
Capital expenditures for oil and gas properties have been funded with the capital raised by the
Fund in its private placement offering, and in certain circumstances, through debt financing.  The
number of projects in which the Fund could invest was limited, and each unsuccessful project the
Fund experienced exhausted its capital and reduced its ability to generate revenue.
Liquidity Needs
The Fund’s primary short-term liquidity needs are to fund its operations and capital expenditures
for its oil and gas properties.  Such needs are funded utilizing operating income, existing cash
on-hand and borrowings.
As of June 30, 2016, the Fund’s estimated capital commitments related to its oil and gas
properties were $9.8 million (which include asset retirement obligations for the Fund’s projects of
$4.1 million and projected interest costs of $0.1 million for the Beta Project), of which $4.4 million
is expected to be spent during the next twelve months.  These expected capital commitments
exceed available working capital and salvage fund by $7.9 million as of June 30, 2016. The
Fund has entered into a credit agreement to provide capital for the Beta Project.  See “Credit
Agreement” below for additional information.
Based upon its current cash position, its current reserve estimates and its current development
plan of the Beta Project, the Fund expects cash flow from operations and borrowings to be
sufficient to cover its commitments, as well as ongoing operations. Reserve estimates are
projections based on engineering data that cannot be measured with precision, require
substantial judgment, and are subject to frequent revision.  However, if cash flow from operations
is not sufficient to meet the Fund’s capital commitments, the Manager will take action, which may
include acquiring short-term debt to accommodate the Fund’s short-term capital commitments.
 
Distributions, if any, are funded from available cash from operations, as defined in the LLC
Agreement, and the frequency and amount are within the Manager’s discretion. Due to the
significant capital required to develop the Beta Project, distributions have been impacted, and
will be impacted in the future, by amounts reserved to provide for its ongoing development costs,
debt service costs, and funding its estimated asset retirement obligations.
Credit Agreement
In November 2012, the Fund entered into a credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with Rahr
Energy Investments LLC, as administrative agent and lender (and any other banks or financial
institutions that may in the future become a party thereto), that provides for an aggregate loan
commitment to the Fund of approximately $13.6 million, to provide capital toward the funding of
the Fund’s share of development costs on the Beta Project.  As of June 30, 2016 and December
31, 2015, the Fund had borrowed $12.9 million under the Credit Agreement.  During the first
quarter of 2016, the Fund adopted the accounting guidance issued in April 2015 related to the
presentation of debt issuance costs on the balance sheet as a direct reduction from the carrying
amount of the debt liability, rather than as an asset. As a result, the unamortized debt discounts
and deferred financing costs of $0.3 million as of June 30, 2016 and $0.4 million as of December
31, 2015 are presented as a reduction of “Long-term borrowings” on the balance sheets.  
Principal and interest amounts are contracted to be repaid upon the onset of production of the
Beta Project, which commenced in the third quarter 2016, over a period not to extend beyond
December 31, 2020.  The Fund expects operating income from the Beta Project will be sufficient
to cover the principal and interest payments required under the Credit Agreement.  See Note 3 of
“Notes to Unaudited Condensed Financial Statements” – “Credit Agreement – Beta Project
Financing” contained in Item 1. “Financial Statements” within Part I of this Quarterly Report for
more information regarding the Credit Agreement.
The Credit Agreement contains customary negative covenants including covenants that limit the
Fund’s ability to, among other things, grant liens, change the nature of its business, or merge into
or consolidate with other persons. The events which constitute events of default are also
customary for credit facilities of this nature and include payment defaults, breaches of
representations, warrants and covenants, insolvency and change of control. Upon the occurrence
of a default, in some cases following a notice and cure period, the Lenders under the Credit
Agreement may accelerate the maturity of the Loan and require full and immediate repayment of
all borrowings under the Credit Agreement. The Fund believes it is in compliance with all
covenants under the Credit Agreement as of June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015.
 
 
15
Table of Contents
 
 
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Fund had no off-balance sheet arrangements as of June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015
and does not anticipate the use of such arrangements in the future.
Contractual Obligations
The Fund enters into participation and joint operating agreements with operators.  On behalf of
the Fund, an operator enters into various contractual commitments pertaining to exploration,
development and production activities.  The Fund does not negotiate such contracts.  No
contractual obligations exist as of June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015, other than those
discussed in “Estimated Capital Expenditures” and “Liquidity Needs – Credit Agreement” above.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 of “Notes to Unaudited Condensed Financial Statements” - “Organization and
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” contained in Item 1. “Financial Statements” within
Part I of this Quarterly Report for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
ITEM 3.QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
Not required.
ITEM 4.CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
 
In accordance with Rules 13a-15 and 15d-15 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended (the “Exchange Act”), the Fund’s management, including its Chief Executive Officer
and Chief Financial Officer, evaluated the effectiveness of the Fund’s disclosure controls and
procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Exchange Act) as of the end
of the period covered by this report.  Based on that evaluation, the Chief Executive Officer and
Chief Financial Officer concluded that the Fund’s disclosure controls and procedures were
effective as of June 30, 2016.
There has been no change in the Fund’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred
during the three months ended June 30, 2016 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely
to materially affect, the Fund’s internal control over financial reporting.
 
 
16
Table of Contents
 
 
PART II – OTHER INFORMATION
ITEM 1.LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
None.
ITEM 1A.RISK FACTORS
Not required.
ITEM 2.UNREGISTERED SALES OF EQUITY SECURITIES AND USE OF PROCEEDS
None.
ITEM 3.DEFAULTS UPON SENIOR SECURITIES
None.
ITEM 4.MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES
None.
ITEM 5.OTHER INFORMATION
None.
TITLE OF EXHIBIT
METHOD OF FILING
ITEM 6.EXHIBITS
EXHIBIT
NUMBER
31.1
31.2
32
Certification of Robert E. Swanson, Chief Executive Officer of
the Fund, pursuant to Exchange Act Rule 13a-14(a)
 
 
Certification of Kathleen P. McSherry, Executive Vice President
and Chief Financial Officer of the Fund, pursuant to Exchange
Act Rule 13a-14(a)
 
Certifications pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted
pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002,
signed by Robert E. Swanson, Chief Executive Officer of the
Fund and Kathleen P. McSherry, Executive Vice President and
Chief Financial Officer of the Fund
101.INS XBRL Instance Document
 
101.SCH XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema
 
101.CAL XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase
 
101.DEF XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document
 
101.LAB XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase
 
101.PRE XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase
Filed herewith
Filed herewith
Filed herewith
Filed herewith
 
Filed herewith
 
Filed herewith
 
Filed herewith
 
Filed herewith
 
Filed herewith
17
Table of Contents
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned thereunto duly authorized.
Dated:August 11, 2016By:/s/
Name:  Robert E. Swanson
  Title:
Chief Executive Officer
RIDGEWOOD ENERGY V FUND, LLC
  
 
  ROBERT E. SWANSON
(Principal Executive Officer)
   
   
  KATHLEEN P. MCSHERRY
Name:  Kathleen P. McSherry
  Title:
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
  (Principal Financial and Accounting Officer)
Dated:August 11, 2016By:/s/
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18