
Stanmore Coal Limited 
and its controlled entities
ABN 27 130 920 968
Annual Financial Report
For the year ended 30 June 2016
This page has been left blank intentionally
Contents 
 
Corporate Information 
Appendix 4E Key Information 
Directors' Report 
Operating and Financial Review 
Auditor’s Independence Declaration 
Shareholder Information 
Interests in Tenements 
Corporate Governance Statement 
Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income for the 
year ended 30 June 2016 
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as at 30 June 2016 
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity for the year ended 30 June 2016 
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for the year ended 30 June 2016 
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016 
Declaration by Directors 
Independent Audit Report to the Members of Stanmore Coal Limited
2 
3 
5 
10 
29 
30 
33 
34 
40
41 
42 
43 
44 
83 
84
Marketable Reserves Note:  
The Isaac Plains Marketable Coal Reserve of 3.7 Mt is derived from a run of mine (ROM) Coal Reserve of 5.0 Mt that is JORC compliant based with a predicted yield of 73%. The 3.7 Mt Marketable 
Reserve is included in the 48.2 Mt JORC Resource (15.2 Mt Measured + 23.0 Mt Indicated + 10.0 Mt Inferred Resource).
The production target of 1.1 Mtpa for 10 years (equivalent to 1.5Mtpa run of mine production) is underpinned solely by total Marketable Reserves of 11.9Mt (10.8 years equivalent) within Isaac 
Plains and Isaac Plains East, as announced on 6 April 2016, titled “Significant JORC Reserves Increase for Isaac Plains Complex”.
The Isaac Plains East Marketable Coal Reserve of 8.3 Mt is derived from a run of mine (ROM) Coal Reserve of 10.3 Mt that is JORC compliant based with a predicted yield of 81%. The 8.3 Mt 
Marketable Reserve is included in the 28.7 Mt JORC Resource for Isaac Plains East (18.7 Mt Indicated + 10.0 Mt Inferred Resource).
Production Target: 
 
 
The Company confirms that it is not aware of any new information or data that materially affects the information included in the announcement made on 6 April 2016 and that all material 
 
assumptions and technical parameters underpinning the estimates in the announcement made on 6 April 2016 continue to apply and have not materially changed. 
 
Competent Persons Statement:
The information in this report relating to coal reserves for Isaac Plains and Isaac Plains East was announced on 6 April 2016, titled “Significant JORC Reserve Increase for Isaac Plains Complex”, 
and is based on information compiled by Mr Ken Hill who is a full-time employee of Xenith Consulting Pty Ltd.  Mr Hill is the Managing Director of Xenith Consulting Pty Ltd, is a qualified civil 
engineer, a member of the Australian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy (AusIMM) and has the relevant experience (30+ years) in relation to the mineralisation being reported to qualify as a 
Competent Person as defined in the “Australasian Code for Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves (The JORC Code 2012 Edition)”.
The Company confirms that it is not aware of any new information or data that materially affects the information included in the announcement made on 6 April 2016 and that all material 
assumptions and technical parameters underpinning the estimates in the announcement made on 6 April 2016 continue to apply and have not materially changed.
The information in this report relating to coal resources for Isaac Plains and Isaac Plains East was announced on 6 April 2016, titled “Significant JORC Resource Increase for Isaac Plains Coking Coal 
Complex”, and is based on information compiled by Mr Troy Turner who is a full-time employee of Xenith Consulting Pty Ltd. Mr Turner is a qualified geologist and a member of the Australian 
Institute of Mining and Metallurgy (AusIMM) and has sufficient experience in relation to the style of mineralisation and type of deposit being reported to qualify as a Competent Person as 
defined in the “Australasian Code for Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves (The JORC Code 2012 Edition)”.
The Company confirms that it is not aware of any new information or data that materially affects the information included in the announcement made on 6 April 2016 and that all material 
assumptions and technical parameters underpinning the estimates in the announcement made on 6 April 2016 continue to apply and have not materially changed.
The information in this report relating to the Clifford Project exploration results and coal resources is based on information compiled by Mr Oystein Naess who is a member of the Australian 
Institute of Mining and Metallurgy and is a full time employee of Xenith Consulting Pty Ltd.  Mr Naess is a qualified geologist and has sufficient experience which  is relevant to the style of 
mineralisation and type of deposit under consideration and to the activity which he is undertaking, to qualify as Competent Person as defined in the 2012 Edition of the “Australasian Code for 
Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves”.
The Company confirms that it is not aware of any new information or data that materially affects the information included in the announcements and that all material assumptions and technical 
parameters underpinning the estimates in the announcements continue to apply and have not materially changed.
The information in this report relating to coal resources for all other projects was announced on the dates noted in the table within the Directors’ Report, and is based on information compiled 
by Mr Troy Turner who is a full-time employee of Xenith Consulting Pty Ltd. Mr Turner is a qualified geologist and a member of the Australian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy (AusIMM) and 
has sufficient experience in relation to the style of mineralisation and type of deposits being reported to qualify as a Competent Person as defined in the “Australasian Code for Reporting of 
Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves (The JORC Code 2012 Edition)”.
The Company confirms that it is not aware of any new information or data that materially affects the information included in the announcements and that all material assumptions and technical 
parameters underpinning the estimates in the announcements continue to apply and have not materially changed.
Corporate Information 
 
DIRECTORS 
Neville Sneddon 
Nicholas Jorss 
Chris McAuliffe 
Patrick O’Connor 
Stephen Bizzell 
Viv Forbes 
 
JOINT COMPANY SECRETARIES 
Duncan Cornish and Andrew Roach 
 
REGISTERED OFFICE AND PRINCIPAL 
BUSINESS OFFICE 
Level 8, 100 Edward Street 
Brisbane   QLD   4000 
Phone: + 61 7 3238 1000 
Fax: +61 7 3238 1098
COUNTRY OF INCORPORATION 
Australia 
 
SOLICITORS 
Corrs Chambers Westgarth 
L42, 111 Eagle St 
Brisbane QLD 4000  
Phone: + 61 7 3228 9333 
Fax: +61 7 3228 9444 
 
SHARE REGISTRY 
Link Market Services 
Level 15, 324 Queen St 
Brisbane Qld 4000 
Phone: 1300 554 474 
Fax: +61 2 8280 7662
AUDITORS 
BDO Audit Pty Ltd 
Level 10, 12 Creek Street 
Brisbane   QLD   4000 
Phone: +61 7 3237 5999 
Fax: +61 7 3221 9227 
 
STOCK EXCHANGE LISTING 
Australian Securities Exchange  
ASX Code: SMR 
 
INTERNET ADDRESS 
www.stanmorecoal.com.au 
 
AUSTRALIAN BUSINESS NUMBER  
ABN 27 131 920 968
2
Change 
% 
N/A 
(63%) 
(63%)
2015 
$000 
- 
(12,148) 
(12,148)
2016 
$000 
12,700 
(19,746) 
(19,746)
Results for Announcement to Market 
 
Key information – year ending 30 June 2016 
 
 
 
Revenue from ordinary activities 
Profit after tax from ordinary activities 
attributed to members 
Net profit attributable to members 
 
Dividends paid and proposed  
No dividends paid or proposed for the year end ending 30 June 2016. There was no dividend 
reinvestment plan in operation during the financial year.  
 
 
Explanation of Key Information and Dividends 
Refer to accompanying Directors’ Report. 
 
Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and other Comprehensive Income with notes to 
the Statement 
Refer to page 40 of the 30 June 2016 financial report, and accompanying notes of Stanmore 
Coal Limited. 
 
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position with Notes to the Statement 
Refer to page 41 of the 30 June 2016 financial report, and accompanying notes of Stanmore 
Coal Limited. 
 
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows with Notes to the Statement 
Refer to page 43 of the 30 June 2016 financial report, and accompanying notes for Stanmore 
Coal Limited.
3
2015 
$000 
(30,766) 
(12,148) 
(42,914)
2016 
$000 
(42,914) 
(19,746) 
(62,660)
Statement of retained earnings showing movements 
 
 
 
 
Balance at beginning of the year 
Net profit attributable to members of the parent entity 
Closing balance at end of the year 
 
Control gained or lost over entities in the year 
 
On 27 November 2015, Stanmore Coal Limited completed the acquisition of the Isaac Plains 
Coal Mine which included 100% ownership of Isaac Plains Coal Management Pty Ltd and 
Isaac Plains Sales & Marketing Pty Ltd. 
 
Commentary on the Results for the Period 
Refer to the commentary on the results for the period contained in the “Review of 
Operations” included within the operating and financial review section of the annual report. 
 
Status of audit 
The 30 June 2016 financial statements and accompanying notes for Stanmore Coal Limited 
have been audited and are not subject to any dispute of qualifications. Refer to page 84 of 
the 30 June 2016 financial report for a copy of the auditor’s report.
4
Directors' Report  
 
Your Directors present their report for the year ended 30 June 2016. 
 
The following persons were Directors of Stanmore Coal Limited during the financial year and up to the date of 
this report, unless otherwise stated:   
 
Neville Sneddon  
B. Eng (Mining) (Hons), M. Eng, MAusIMM, Grad AICD 
Non-Executive Chairman  
 
A mining engineer with over 40 years’ experience in most facets of the Queensland and NSW resource sectors, 
Neville Sneddon brings  substantial Board and industry knowledge to Stanmore  Coal.  He has developed and 
operated both underground and open cut mines working for Coal & Allied in the Hunter Valley and from 1997 
worked in a senior role in the NSW Mines Inspectorate, covering operations in all forms of mining in the state.  
 
Moving to Queensland in 1999, Neville accepted the position of Chief Operating Officer with Shell Coal which 
was acquired by Anglo American’s Australian coal operations the following year. Leaving as CEO in 2007, he 
held several Board positions with mining and infrastructure companies including Chairman of the operating 
company at Dalrymple Bay Coal Terminal near Mackay and Director of Port Waratah Coal Services, a major 
coal export facility at Newcastle.  
 
Neville  has  also  been  a  member  of  the  Boards  of  the  Queensland,  NSW  and  National  Mining  Councils.  His 
expertise has been sought by several government committees such as the NSW Mine Subsidence Board, the 
NSW  Mines  Rescue  Board,  Queensland  Ministerial  Coal  Mine  Safety  Advisory  Committee  and  the  joint 
federal/state advisory committee which is developing nationally consistent mining safety legislation. Neville is 
a Non-Executive Director of CSM Energy Limited, Cobbora Coal Limited and Solid Energy Limited. 
 
Neville is Chairman of the Remuneration & Nominations Committee. 
 
During the past three years Neville has not served as a Director of any other listed companies. 
 
Nicholas Jorss  
BE (Hons) Civil, MBA, GDip App Fin (Sec Inst)   
Managing Director  
 
Nick  Jorss  is  a  founding  Director  and  shareholder  of  Stanmore  Coal  and  has  over  20  years’  experience  in 
investment banking, civil engineering, corporate finance and project management. In his roles in investment 
banking he has been involved in leading advisory mandates  with corporate, government and private equity 
clients  across  industry  sectors  ranging  from  resources  to  infrastructure.  Nick  was  previously  a  Director  of 
Pacific  Road  Corporate  Finance  and  was  an  engineer  with  Baulderstone  Hornibrook  prior  to  that  where  he 
delivered infrastructure and resource projects over a period of approximately 8 years.  
 
Nick is a founding shareholder and Director of St. Lucia Resources International, Kurilpa Uranium and Wingate 
Capital.    He  was  previously  a  Director  of  Vantage  Private  Equity  Growth,  Vantage  Asset  Management  and 
WICET Holdings Pty Ltd. During the past three years Nick has not served as a Director of any other ASX listed 
companies. 
 
Nick holds a Bachelor with Honours in Civil Engineering, a Masters of Business Administration and a Graduate 
Diploma of Applied Finance and Investment.
5
Chris McAuliffe  
LLB (Hons), MBA 
Non-Executive Director  
 
Chris  McAuliffe  is  co-founder  and  Managing  Director  of  Sprint  Capital,  a  Hong  Kong  based  private  equity 
investment management group. Chris has more than 20 years’ experience in private  equity and investment 
banking  with  significant  relationships  across  Asia.  Prior  to  co-founding  Sprint  Capital  in  2008,  Chris  was  a 
Managing Director and co-head of Asia Pacific Industrials Group at Citigroup in Hong Kong, prior to which he 
was a Managing Director and head of Asia Industrials and Services Group at Credit Suisse in Singapore. 
 
During the past three years Chris has also served as a Director of the following listed companies:
  Asian Bamboo AG (Germany) 
  Xplorer PLC * (London) 
  Chaswood Resources Holdings Limited * (SGX)
* denotes current directorship. 
 
Chris is a member of the Audit & Risk Committee and the Remuneration & Nominations Committee. 
 
 
Patrick O’Connor 
BCom, FAICD 
Non-Executive Director  
 
Mr  O'Connor  has  experience  in  a  wide  range  of  industries  including  mining,  oil  &  gas  exploration,  forestry, 
biotechnology  and  government  utilities  across  several  international  jurisdictions  (Australia,  Africa,  New 
Zealand, United Kingdom and USA). 
 
He is a non-executive director of Tech Mpire Limited. He was previously the non-executive chairman of TFS 
Corporation  Limited  (ASX:TFC)  and  a  non-executive  director  of  Optiscan  Imaging  Limited  (ASX:OIL)  and 
Buccaneer  Energy  Limited.  Mr  O'Connor  retired  as  non-executive  Deputy  Chairman  of  Perilya  Limited  in 
December 2013 upon its take-over by Shenzhen Zhongjin Lingnan Nonfemet Co. Ltd (China's third largest zinc 
producer) and retired as non-executive Chairman of Xceed Resources Limited in February 2014 upon its take-
over  by  Keaton  Energy  Limited  (JSE  listed).  Mr  O'Connor  also  spent  9  years  as  a  director  of  the  Water 
Corporation in Western Australia, four years as its Chairman and was prior to that the Managing Director of 
Macraes  Mining  Company  Limited,  during  which  time  he  oversaw  the  development  of  the  Macraes  Gold 
Project  and  the  acquisition  of  the  Reefton  Gold  Project  in  New  Zealand.  Mr  O'Connor  was  also  the  Chief 
Executive Officer for Oceanagold Corporation Limited at the time of its listing on the ASX and remained for a 
period as a non-executive director. 
 
During the past three years Patrick has also served as a Director of the following listed companies:
  Buccaneer Energy Limited 
  Optiscan Imaging Limited 
 
 
 

Perilya Limited 
Tech Mpire Limited* 
TFS Corporation Limited 
Xceed Resources Limited
* denotes current listed directorship. 
 
Patrick is a member of the Audit & Risk Committee and the Remuneration & Nominations Committee.
6
Stephen Bizzell 
BCom, MAICD 
Non-Executive Director  
 
Stephen is the Chairman of boutique corporate advisory and funds management group Bizzell Capital Partners 
Pty Ltd. Stephen was an Executive Director of Arrow Energy Ltd from 1999 until its acquisition in 2010 by Shell 
and  PetroChina  for  $3.5  billion.  He  was  instrumental  in  Arrow’s  corporate  and  commercial  success  and  its 
growth from a junior explorer to a large integrated energy company.  He was also a co-founder and director of 
Bow Energy Ltd until its $550 million takeover. 
 
Stephen qualified as a Chartered Accountant and early in his career was employed in the Corporate Finance 
division  of  Ernst  &  Young  and  the  Corporate  Tax  division  of  Coopers  &  Lybrand.  He  has  had  considerable 
experience and success in the fields of corporate restructuring, debt and equity financing, and mergers and 
acquisitions.  He  has  over  20  years’  corporate  finance  and  public  company  management  experience  in  the 
resources and energy sectors in Australia and Canada with various public companies. 
 
Stephen is the Chairman of the Audit & Risk Management Committee and a member of the Remuneration & 
Nominations Committee. 
 
During the past three years Stephen has also served as a Director of the following listed companies:
  Armour Energy Limited* 
  Dart Energy Ltd  
  Diversa Ltd* 
  Hot Rock Ltd 
  Renascor Resources Limited * 
 
Laneway Resources Limited * 
 
Titan Energy Services Limited 
  UIL Energy Ltd *
* denotes current listed directorship.
Viv Forbes 
BScApp (Geol), FAusIMM, FSIA 
Non-Executive Director  
 
Viv  Forbes  is  a  geologist,  financial  analyst  and  business  manager  with  more  than  40  years  of  coal-industry 
experience  including  government  service,  field  exploration,  mine  valuation  and  acquisition,  financing, 
development,  operations  and  successful  asset  sales.  Viv  has  been  involved  in  various  capacities  at  the 
Queensland  Geological  Survey  Office,  United  Uranium,  Burton  Coal,  Dalrymple  Bay  Coal  Terminal,  South 
Blackwater  Coal  Mine,  Tahmoor  Coal  Mine,  Newlands/Collinsville  Coal  Mines,  Utah  Goonyella/Saraji  coal 
exploration, and mining investment management at MIM Holdings and Consolidated Gold Fields. He has also 
directed  companies  in  oil  and  gas  exploration  and  metals  exploration.  He  has  a  degree  in  Applied  Science 
Geology and is a Fellow of the Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy. 
 
Viv is a member of the Remuneration & Nominations Committee. 
 
During the past 3 years Viv has not served as a Director of any other listed companies.
7
Andrew Martin 
B.Ec (Hons) 
Director (resigned 10 March 2014) 
Alternator Director (for Viv Forbes, appointed 10 March 2014) 
 
An investment banker with Deutsche Bank, Andrew Martin offers more than 15 years financial, advisory and 
corporate  experience  within  the  infrastructure,  utilities  and  natural  resources  industries.    In  recent  years, 
Andrew  has  advised  on  transactions  within  the  power  generation,  utilities,  gas,  water,  road,  rail  and  ports 
sectors.  
 
Holding a Bachelor of Economics (Honours) from the University of Sydney, Andrew is a founding Director and 
shareholder in St Lucia Resources International, Stanmore Coal and Kurilpa Uranium, which was acquired by 
Renaissance Uranium Ltd before its listing.  
 
Andrew was appointed as an Alternate Director for Mr Viv Forbes. 
 
Andrew also serves as a Director of Renascor Resources Limited. 
 
Andrew Roach 
B.Com, B Econ, CA, GDip App Fin, GDip CG 
Chief Financial Officer and Joint Company Secretary  
 
Andrew Roach was appointed as joint company secretary of Stanmore Coal Limited on 6 May 2014. Andrew 
has  held  the  position  of  Financial  Controller  for  2  years  and  was  appointed  as  Chief  Financial  Officer  on  4 
August 2014. 
 
Andrew  has  10  years  of  experience  in  accounting,  finance  and  mergers  &  acquisitions.  Prior  to  joining 
Stanmore  Coal  in  2012,  Andrew  worked  for  PricewaterhouseCoopers  within  the  corporate  finance  and 
financial  assurance  divisions.  Andrew  holds  a  Bachelor  Degree  in  Economics  and  Commerce,  a  Graduate 
Diploma in Applied Finance, a Graduate Diploma of Corporate Governance and is a Member of the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants. 
 
 
Duncan Cornish  
B.Bus (Acc), CA 
Joint Company Secretary 
 
Duncan Cornish held the position of joint company secretary up to 31 December 2013. He was reappointed as 
joint  company  secretary  of  Stanmore  Coal  Limited  on  8  August  2014.  Duncan  was  previously  the  Chief 
Financial Officer and Company Secretary for a number of years after the initial public offering of the Company. 
 
Duncan is an accomplished and highly efficient corporate administrator and manager. Duncan has more than 
20 years’ experience in the accountancy profession both in England and Australia, mainly with the accountancy 
firms  Ernst  &  Young  and  PricewaterhouseCoopers.  He  has  extensive  experience  in  all  aspects  of  company 
financial  reporting,  corporate  regulatory  and  governance  areas,  business  acquisition  and  disposal  due 
diligence, capital raising and company listings and company secretarial responsibilities, and serves as corporate 
secretary  and  chief  financial  officer  of  several  Australian  and  Canadian  public  companies.  Duncan  holds  a 
Bachelor of Business (Accounting) and is a member of the Australian Institute of Chartered Accountants.
8
DIRECTORS’ MEETINGS 
 
The number of meetings of Directors (including meetings of committees of Directors) held during the year and 
the number of meetings attended by each Director was as follows:
Remuneration & Nominations
Audit & Risk Management
Board
Committee
Committee
Number of
meetings held 
while in office
Meetings 
attended
Neville Sneddon  
Nicholas Jorss  
Stephen Bizzell  
Viv Forbes 
Chris McAuliffe 
Patrick O’Connor
13 
13 
13 
13 
13 
13
13 
13 
13 
13 
13 
13
Number of 
meetings
held while in
office 
n/a 
n/a 
4 
n/a 
4 
4
Meetings 
attended
Number of
meetings held 
while in office
Meetings 
attended
n/a 
n/a 
4 
n/a 
4 
4
1 
n/a 
1 
1 
1 
1
1 
n/a 
1 
1 
1 
1
INTERESTS IN SHARES AND OPTIONS 
 
As at the date of this report, the interests of the Directors in the shares and options of Stanmore Coal Limited 
are shown in the table below:
Neville Sneddon  
Nicholas Jorss 
Stephen Bizzell 
Viv Forbes 
Patrick O’Connor 
Chris McAuliffe
Ordinary Shares
Unlisted Options
500,000
32,263,375* 
7,372,514 
2,613,270 
500,000
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
-
* 31,700,270 shares are held by St Lucia Resources International Pty Ltd of which Nicholas Jorss has an interest in a trust which owns > 
20% and is a Director. 
 
PRINCIPAL ACTIVITIES 
 
During  the  financial  year  ended  30  June  2016,  the  principal  activity  of  Stanmore  Coal  Limited  and  its 
subsidiaries (“the Company”, “the Group” or “the Consolidated Entity”) was the development of operation of 
coal  mines  in  Queensland,  Australia.  The  Company  announced  and  completed  the  acquisition  of  the  Isaac 
Plains  Coal  Mine  during  the  year  ended  30  June  2016  with  first  commercial  production  and  export  sales 
occurring  before  year  end.  The  acquisition  of  the  Isaac  Plains  Coal  Mine  represents  a  transformational 
investment for the Company and has been detailed in the operating and financial review.
9
OPERATING AND FINANCIAL REVIEW 
 
Stanmore Coal during the year completed the acquisition of the Isaac Plains Coal Mine and transitioned from 
explorer  to  a  producing  coal  miner,  with  the  first  commercial  sale  of  product  coal  achieved  in  May  2016. 
Highlights for the year include: 
 
• 
•
Completion of the Isaac Plains East (formerly known as Wotonga) transaction in September 2015; 
Completion of the Isaac Plains transaction in November 2015 and recommencement of mining, leading to 
first coal sales in May 2016; 
Establishment of term coking coal sales contracts with premium steel-mill customers; 
Significant JORC Resource and Reserve upgrade on 6 April 2016, with an estimated 10 years of open cut 
coal mining underpinned by JORC Reserves within the Isaac Plains Complex1;
• 
•
•  Highwall mining commenced at Isaac Plains in June 2016; and 
•
Continuation of exploration activity at the Clifford Project, delivering an increase JORC Resource estimate 
from 370Mt to 620Mt (Indicated 190Mt, Inferred 430Mt)2.
The  transition  from  explorer  to  an  operating  coal  mining  business  is  significant  for  the  Company  at  a  time 
when coal markets are showing signs of improvement after several years of decline. Given the importance of 
the acquisition to driving long term shareholder value, the Company’s focus during the recent financial year 
has been heavily weighted to bedding down operations at the Isaac Plains Complex.  
 
In addition the Company is actively reviewing further potential acquisition opportunities that offer synergies 
with the existing Isaac Plains Complex and provide value adding growth for shareholders. 
 
Safety 
 
The Group undertook or managed over 170,000 hours of coal mining, drilling and exploration activity directly 
and  through  its  contractors  during  the  twelve  month  period  and  reported  no  lost  time  injuries.  The  Total 
Reportable Injury Frequency Rate at balance date was 5.3 per million hours. 
 
Safety  remains  of  critical  importance  in  the  planning,  organisation  and  execution  of  Stanmore  Coal’s 
exploration and operational activities.  Stanmore Coal is committed to providing and maintaining a working 
environment  in  which  its  employees  are  not  exposed  to  hazards  that  will  jeopardise  an  employee’s  health, 
safety or the health and safety of others associated with our business.
1 Refer ASX announcement 6 April 2016 titled “Significant JORC Reserve Increase for Isaac Plains Complex 
2 Refer ASX announcement 30 May 2016 titled “Clifford Project – Resource increase”
10
Resources and Reserves 
 
At the date of this report the Company has the following Reserves:
Project
Ownership %
Primary coal type
Isaac Plains 
Complex
The Range
Totals
100%
100%
Coking
Thermal
JORC Recoverable Coal 
Reserve3,4
Date of 
report
15.3
Apr-16
-*
Aug-11
15.3
* The Company has elected to adjust the JORC Reserve for The Range to nil to reflect the decision to recognise 
a provision for a material portion of the cost carried on the balance sheet. Refer to note 10(b). 
 
At the date of this report the Company has the following Resources:
Project
Ownership 
%
Isaac Plains 
Complex
JORC 
Measured 
Resource3
JORC 
Indicated 
Resource3
JORC 
Inferred 
Resource3
Total  
JORC 
Resource3
Date of 
report
100%
Coking
15.2
Belview
Clifford
100%
60%*
Coking
Thermal
-
-
The Range
100%
Thermal
18.0
Mackenzie
85%
Coking
Tennyson
100%
Thermal
-
-
41.7
50.0
190.0
187.0
25.7
-
20.0
76.9
Apr-16
280.0
430.0
82.0
117.5
161.0
330.0
Apr-15
620.0
May-16
287.0
143.2
161.0
Oct-12
Nov-11
Nov-12
Totals
33.2
494.4
1,090.5
1,618.1
* Joint venture partner JOGMEC has an option for to up to a 40% beneficial interest in the project
3 Refer Competent Person Statement page 1 
4 Refer Reserves Note page 1
11
Financial Performance and Financial Position 
 
The Company reports an operating loss of $19.746 million (2015: loss of $12.148 million) with first coal sales 
revenue  delivering  $12.700  million  in  the  financial  year  (2015:  nil).  The  loss  is  driven  in  part  by  one-off 
transaction and start-up costs and working capital requirement relating to the re-commencement of mining 
activities  at  Isaac  Plains.  The  mine  start-up  was  also  impacted  by  unseasonal  heavy  rain.  The  Company  re-
opened the initial section of the northern pits of the open cut mine using a dragline and truck shovel fleet. 
Initial overburden activities and strip preparation represent a period of significant working capital investment 
as the mine is re-established. The majority of this initial work was completed by end of the financial year. 
 
The loss includes a $13.883 million impairment provision against Development Assets in the Surat Basin during 
the year. The loss also includes corporate costs, overhead costs and financing charges, which are necessary to 
support the ongoing management of coal mining operations at Isaac Plains.
Coal sales revenue 
Cost of sales 
Gross margin 
Other income and expenses 
Finance income 
Finance expense 
Profit/(loss) before income tax 
benefit/(expense) 
Income tax benefit/(expense) 
Profit/(loss) after income tax expense
2016 
$ mill 
 
12.700 
(24.600) 
(11.900) 
(5.004) 
0.355 
(3.137) 
(19.746)
- 
(19.746)
2015 
$ mill 
 
- 
- 
- 
(12.709) 
0.561 
- 
(12.148)
- 
(12.148)
When compared against the prior year, the group’s cost structure has changed given the acquisition and re-
commencement of mining at Isaac Plains. After adjusting for non-cash items and movements in net working 
capital, the Company delivered an operating net cash outflow of $33.573 million.
2016 
$ mill 
 
(19.746)
2015 
$ mill 
 
(12.148)
0.073 
1.292 
13.883 
(0.565) 
(9.012) 
(11.376) 
(0.400) 
(7.722) 
(33.573)
0.206 
- 
8.630 
- 
- 
- 
- 
(0.145) 
(3.457)
Accounting profit/(loss) after income tax 
expense 
Amortisation of share based payments 
Depreciation 
Asset impairment adjustments 
Gain on bargain purchase 
Rehabilitation 
Onerous contracts 
Contingent consideration 
Net working capital adjustments 
Operating cash-flow
In the year to 30 June 2016, a total net cash outflow of $3.119 million was recorded. This outflow was largely 
attributed  to  pre-production  costs  and  recommissioning  capital  expenditure  at  Isaac  Plains,  balanced  with
12
compensation during the financial year of $43.416 million received from the vendors of the mine (recorded 
within Investing cash flow). This has enabled the Company to ramp-up operations toward steady state with 
several shipments made to coal customers prior to year-end.
Net cash at beginning of year 
 
Net cash from operating activities 
Net cash from investing activities 
Net cash from financing activities 
Net increase/(decrease) in cash held 
Net cash at end of year
2016 
$ mill 
 
15.199 
 
(33.573) 
30.454 
- 
(3.119) 
12.080
2015 
$ mill 
 
17.830 
 
(3.457) 
0.844 
(0.18) 
(2.631) 
15.199
The Group ended the year with gross assets of $112.274 million including $12.080 million of available cash. 
The  Group  has  a  strong  current  ratio  and  total  net  assets  of  $39.085  million  at  30  June  2016.  Other  than 
operating trade payables, at 30 June 2016 the Group has recognised provisions for onerous liabilities which 
relate  to  contracts  acquired  as  part  of  the  Isaac  Plains  acquisition.  The  onerous  nature  primarily  relates  to 
long-dated  contracts  where  the  Company  does  not  have  sufficient  Reserves  at  balance  date  to  cover 
production for the life of the contract.  
 
Operational Summary 
 
Isaac Plains Coking Coal Mine - Operation 
 
The Isaac Plains Coal Mine recommenced overburden removal operations in February 2016 with first coal 
exposed in March 2016. The ROM strip ratio (bcm per run of mine tonne) for FY2016 was 22.4:1. The FY2016 
ratio is substantially higher than the 3 year average ratio of 13:1 for the current Isaac Plains open cut area 
which has resulted from re-establishing overburden in advance to allow for steady state operations after the 
mine restart. The ROM strip ratio in following periods is expected to trend towards the forecast life of mine 
strip ratio of 13:1.   
 
Highwall mining activities were commenced in late June 2016, targeting additional low cost coal in the disused 
southern mining pits. 
 
The Company completed the recommissioning works for the coal handling and processing plant during the 
June quarter and handed operatorship to the site contractor. A number of additional capital works have been 
carried out since the handover due to noted issues with performance and reliability of the plant. 
 
The Company has contracted with top tier Asian steel mills on a term basis for 900,000 tonnes of coking coal. 
Revenue in FY2016 was adversely affected by the lower proportion of coking coal sold in the initial phase of 
production, leading to an average sale price achieved for the June quarter of US$60 per tonne. The lower 
proportion of coking coal in the start-up phase has resulted from issues with recommissioning the wash plant 
and commencing coal mining in a lower quality area of the pit, which has now been mined out.  
 
Recent coking coal price increases have yet to be reflected in the revenues of the Company. Spot hard coking 
coal prices have increased some 70% since the start of calendar 2016 and semi-soft prices have increased by 
approximately 31% in the same period. These increases are expected to add considerable strength to 
upcoming quarterly benchmark pricing settlements which drive the Company’s revenue. The Company is 
continually monitoring its optimal product mix in light of the recent strength in export coal markets.
13
Thousands  
Prime Overburden (bcm) 
ROM coal produced - Open cut (tonnes) 
ROM strip ratio (prime) 
ROM coal produced - Highwall (tonnes) 
CHPP Feed (tonnes) 
Saleable coal produced (tonnes)
-         Metallurgical 
-         Thermal
Product yield %
-         Metallurgical 
-         Thermal
Total coal sales (tonnes) 
-         Metallurgical 
-         Thermal
Coal product stockpiles (tonnes) 
Average sale price achieved (US$/t) 
Average sale price achieved (A$/t) 
Total free on board cost including pre-strip, 
royalties and interest (A$/t)
YTD 
Jun-16 
7,395.9 
330.8 
22.4 
13.9 
323.7 
231.0 
140.3 
90.8 
71.4% 
43.3% 
28.0% 
156.3 
88.8 
67.5 
74.3 
$60.0 
$81.2
$101.4
Operations for the year ending 30 June 2016 represent the re-commencement phase of open cut mining, with 
first overburden activity commenced in February 2016 and first coal mining in late March 2016. These initial 
activities primarily establish overburden in-advance of coal mining to enable efficient operation of the mine at 
future steady-state. This phase of re-establishment is therefore at a high cost on a per product tonne basis 
given the high initial strip ratio to develop the mine into the steady-state production phase. It should also be 
noted that the Company has not adopted a deferred stripping accounting policy, such that overburden mining 
costs are recognised as incurred rather than capitalised, resulting in higher initial costs on a per tonne basis. 
 
Wash plant yield performance was 71.4% due to reliability issues encountered at start-up. Further investment 
was made prior and post year-end to improve these areas.  The proportion of coking coal was lower than the 3 
year plan for open cut operations given initial mining in the lower quality N2 pit. The lower proportion of 
coking coal sales has reduced the average sale price achieved for the year. Following completion of the N2 pit, 
mining from the N1 pit indicates higher in-situ quality parameters with improved coking coal as a proportion of 
total product coal. 
 
Isaac Plains - Underground 
 
The JORC compliant open-cut Resource for the Isaac Plains Complex estimates 32.3Mt (10.3 Measured 22.0 
Indicated) within the target underground zone in the east of the mining lease. The Company has conducted 
initial concept-level investigations into a bord and pillar operation within this zone. A potential bord and pillar 
operation off the existing highwall would require modest capital expenditure and the Company will progress 
its assessment in FY17 and confirmatory exploration where necessary.
14
Isaac Plains East Project - Development 
 
The updated JORC compliant open-cut Reserve for the Isaac Plains Complex increases the total open cut 
mining life from 3 years to 10 years based on a steady state production rate of 1.5Mtpa run of mine (ROM) 
coal (at least 1.1Mtpa of product coal). The output of Reserves modelling indicated a 7 year average prime 
strip ratio (bcm/ROM tonnes) of 11:1, with the first 4 years at sub 10:1 (compared to the three year average 
strip ratio of approximately 13:1 within Isaac Plains). The nature of the deposit also supports a higher 
proportion of dragline movement which has a favourable impact on cost of extraction compared to Isaac 
Plains.  
 
Indicative coal quality demonstrates improved coal rank and yield for the coking product at Isaac Plains East 
relative to Isaac Plains. The improved coal quality characteristics may give rise to a higher value coking coal 
product which the Company will assess for marketability and optimal sales mix strategies in near term studies. 
 
Based on current coal pricing and normal business operation, Isaac Plains open cut is anticipated to be margin-
positive in FY17. 
 
Clifford Thermal Coal Project - Exploration 
 
The Company announced an upgrade to the JORC Resource for the Liberty and Grange deposits within the 
Clifford project in the Surat Basin. A total JORC Resource of 620Mt5 was estimated as coal intersections 
continue to be promising for a potential open cut deposit with early in-situ strip ratios of less than 7:1.
The Company has agreed a joint exploration initiative at the Clifford project with the Japanese Government 
agency  JOGMEC  to  develop  a  new,  long  term  source  of  high  quality  thermal  coal  suitable  for  Japanese 
electricity  generators.    JOGMEC  is  providing  up  to  $4.500  million  of  funding  to  cover  all  of  the  planned 
exploration expenditure over three years within the Clifford Project area. 
 
Outlook and developments 
 
Operations 
 
In FY16 the Company transitioned from an explorer to production through the acquisition of Isaac Plains. The 
Company  will  initially  target  production  of  around  1.1Mtpa in  FY17  and  continually  assess  opportunities  to 
augment production given the significant site-infrastructure capacity.  
 
Highwall  mining  will continue at Isaac Plains until around October  2016. The  system has recently improved 
performance after the initial phase of commissioning at site. 
 
Development 
 
The Company made strong progress on the approval process for a proposed Mining Lease within Isaac Plains 
East during the year. The Company will continue to work with its top tier consultants, community stakeholders 
and government departments to secure necessary approvals next calendar year and allow open cut mining to 
commence thereafter. 
 
The Company will continue to assess underground mining opportunities within the existing Isaac Plains mining 
lease. A series of studies and confirmatory exploration to support a potential bord & pillar operation will be 
undertaken in FY17.
5 Refer Competent Person Statement p1
15
Demand 
 
High quality coking coal from Isaac Plains is purchased by top tier steel mills from a range of countries. The 
company will continue to pursue high value selling opportunities and build new and further establish existing 
customers who have contracted for 900kt of coking coal in the first year of operation. 
 
Pricing  
 
Index and benchmark measures for both coking and thermal coal have experienced considerable improvement 
in  the  last  few  months.  Continued  supply  restraint  from  overseas  mining  regions  is  anticipated  to  provide 
further support for pricing in the short to medium term. 
 
Managing Risk 
 
Stanmore Coal is a producing coal Company in a market which has experienced significant downward pressure 
in  the  last  few  years.  Factors  specific  to  Stanmore  or  those  which  impact  the  market  more  broadly,  may 
individually or in combination affect the financial and operating performance of the Company. These events 
may be beyond the control of the Board or management of Stanmore. 
 
The major risks associated with an investment in the Company are summarised below. 
 
Operating Risks 
 
Stanmore  is  a  single-mine  producer  and  therefore  reliant  on  continued  performance  of  operations  at  Isaac 
Plains. There are numerous operating risks which may result in a reduction in performance that decreases the 
Company’s ability to produce high quality coal to meet customer shipping needs. The risks include, but are not 
limited  to,  factors  such  as  weather  conditions,  machinery  failure,  critical  infrastructure  failure  or  natural 
disasters.  
 
Market Risks 
 
The  key  driver  for  the  business’  financial  performance  is  commodity  price  and  foreign  currency  markets. 
Stanmore  is  not  of  size  to  have  influence  on  coal  prices  or  the  exchange  rate  for  Australian  dollars  and  is 
therefore a price-taker in general terms. 
 
Stanmore sells export coal in United States Dollars and is therefore exposed to adverse movement in currency 
rates. Stanmore uses forward exchange contracts to hedge a portion of its short and medium term currency 
risk in accordance with a Board approved hedging policy. 
 
The  market  price  for  Stanmore’s  coking  coal  and  thermal  coal  products  is  impacted  by  many  factors  which 
could be favourable or unfavourable for the Company.  
 
Geological Risk  
 
Resource  and  Reserve  estimates  are  prepared  by  external  experts  in  accordance  with  the  JORC  code  for 
reporting.  The  estimates  are  inherently  subjective  in  some  aspects  therefore  there  is  a  risk  that  the 
interpretation of data may not align with the future experienced conditions in the field. Due care is taken with 
each estimation. 
 
Safety 
 
The Board views safety as a critical element for the Company to be able to deliver on its strategy. Safety is of 
the  highest  importance  in  the  planning,  organisation  and  execution  of  Stanmore  Coal’s  operational  and 
development activities. The Board is also aware of the increased safety focus for the organisation as Stanmore 
Coal has transitioned to a coal producer in the last financial year.
16
Stanmore  Coal  remains  committed  to  providing  and  maintaining  a  working  environment  in  which  its 
employees  are  not  exposed  to  hazards  that  will  jeopardise  their  health,  safety  or  the  health  and  safety  of 
others associated with our business. Safety is both an individual and shared responsibility of all employees, 
contractors and other persons involved with the operation of the organisation. 
 
Regulatory risk 
 
The  Company  has  limited  influence  over  the  direction  and  development  of  government  policy.  Successive 
changes  to  the  Australian  resources  policy,  including  taxation  policy,  have  impacted  Australia’s  global 
competitiveness  and  reduced  the  attractiveness  of  Australian  coal  projects  to  foreign  investors.  The 
Company’s  view  is  that  whilst  there  is  currently  a  negative  perception  of  coal,  it  will  continue  to  play  an 
important role as an export commodity. Coking coal is critical for future steel production and thermal coal will 
continue  to  play  a  major  role  in  the  global  energy  mix  as  part  of  sustaining  global  growth,  particularly  in 
developing regions, through efficient electricity generation. 
 
Access to capital 
 
At  30  June  2016,  the  Company  remains  well  funded  with  cash  reserves  and  a  contingent  working  capital 
expected  to  be  sufficient  to  meet  the  businesses  operating  costs.  Stanmore  Coal’s  ability  to  effectively 
continue as a coal producing business may be dependent upon a number of factors including the success of 
the mine operations, or the successful exploration and subsequent exploitation of the Company’s tenements. 
Should these avenues be delayed or fail to materialise, the Group expects to have the ability to successfully 
raise additional funding through debt, equity or farmout / selldown to allow the Group to continue as a going 
concern and meet its debts as and when they fall due. 
 
Regulatory and Land Access Risk 
 
The  Company’s  operations  and  Projects  are  subject  to  State  and  Federal  laws  and  regulation  regarding 
environmental hazards. These laws and regulations set various standards regulating certain aspects of health 
and environmental quality, provide for penalties and other liabilities for the violation of such standards and 
establish, in certain circumstances, obligations to remediate current and former facilities and locations where 
operations are or were conducted. The ability to secure and undertake exploration and operational activities 
within  prospective  areas  is  also  reliant  upon  satisfactory  resolution  of  native  title  and  management  of 
overlapping tenure.  
 
To address these risks, the Company develops strong, long term effective relationships with landholders, with 
a  focus  on  developing  mutually  acceptable  access  arrangements  as  well  as  appropriate  legal  and  technical 
advice to ensure it manages its compliance obligations appropriately. The Company minimises these risks by 
conducting  its  activities  in  an  environmentally  responsible  manner,  in  accordance  with  applicable  laws  and 
regulations and where possible, by carrying appropriate insurance coverage. In addition the Company engages 
experienced consultants and other technical advisors to provide expert advice where necessary.
17
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016  |  18
Director’s Report 
 
REMUNERATION REPORT (AUDITED) 
 
This report details the nature and amount of remuneration for each Director of Stanmore Coal Limited, and for the 
Company’s  key  management  personnel  (“KMP”).    KMP  are  defined  as  those  persons  who  have  the  authority  and 
responsibility for planning, directing and controlling the activities of the Company. The Company’s KMP during the 
year were: 
 
Details of Key Management Personnel 
 
(i)
Non-Executive Chairman  
Managing Director  
Non-Executive Director 
Non-Executive Director 
Non-Executive Director  
Non-Executive Director
Directors 
Neville Sneddon 
Nicholas Jorss 
Chris McAuliffe 
Patrick O’Connor 
Stephen Bizzell 
Viv Forbes
Senior Management 
Michael McKee 
 
Andrew Roach
(ii)
Chief Operating Officer 
Chief Financial Officer and Joint Company Secretary
Response to vote Against 2015 Remuneration Report 
 
At  the  2015  Annual  General  Meeting,  the  Company  received  votes  against  its  Remuneration  Report  representing 
greater than 25% of the votes cast by persons entitled to vote. In other words, the Company received a “First Strike” 
against its 2015 Remuneration Report.  
 
In  these  circumstances,  the  Corporations  Act  2001  requires  that  the  Company include  in  this  year’s  Remuneration 
Report, an explanation of the Board’s proposed action in response to that First Strike or, alternatively, if the Board 
does not propose any action, the Board’s reason for such inaction. 
 
It  should  be  noted  that  due  to  the  high  concentration  of  ownership  in  the  Company’s  share  register,  a  significant 
number  of  shares  held  by  directors,  management  and  their  associates  were  excluded  from  voting  on  the 
remuneration  report.  The  First  Strike  arose  from  votes  against  the  remuneration  report  cast  by  a  relatively  small 
number of shareholders. 
 
The Company’s response to the First Strike was to meet with those investors to discuss and to understand the main 
reasons  why  the  Company  received  the  vote  against  the  2015  Remuneration  Report.  A  common  theme  identified 
through those discussions was continued poor performance of the company’s share price.  
 
In response to the First Strike, the Company provides the following commentary:
•
The Board has not issued any shares or options as remuneration to any employees in respect of the current 
financial year;
•  Board fees have remained fixed since the IPO in 2009; and 
•  Overheads have been reasonably stable despite significant increase in workload and responsibility as a result
of the acquisition of Isaac Plains Coal Mine.
The Board deems the above outcomes to be an appropriate response to the First Strike whilst enabling the Company 
to  retain  a  small,  highly  skilled  team,  able  to  execute  on  the  acquisition  of  Isaac  Plains  and  deliver  on  a  safe 
recommencement of mining.
18
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016  |  19
Director’s Report 
 
REMUNERATION REPORT (AUDITED) (continued) 
 
Remuneration policy overview 
 
Stanmore Coal’s business strategy of managing an operating coal business can only be achieved by identifying and 
retaining  high  calibre  employees  with  appropriate  experience  and  capability.  Developing  an  appropriate 
compensation  strategy  for  the  Company’s  employees  is  a  key  factor  in  ensuring  employees  are  engaged  and 
motivated  to  improve  the  Company’s  performance  over  the  long  term.    The  Board’s  intention  is  to  maximise 
stakeholder benefit from the retention of a high quality Board and Executive Team without creating an undue cost 
burden  for  the  Company,  but  allowing  the  Company  to  respond  to  opportunities  quickly  and  rapidly  progress 
development opportunities at the appropriate point in the cycle. 
 
The  Board regularly  reviews  the  appropriateness  of  employees’  fixed  compensation  in  light  of  the  Company’s  cost 
structure  and  the  practices  of  its  peers.  In  FY16,  as  the  Company  undertook  the  transition  from  coal  explorer  to 
producer, the Board established a short term incentive structure that aligned key operational milestones with driving 
value for shareholders. As with several previous years there were only limited changes to fixed compensation for key 
management personnel or any other employees of the Company. Very few employees have received any change to 
base remuneration arrangements since FY12. The short term incentive structure in FY16 was deemed necessary to 
align rewards with key performance outcomes associated with the recommencement of mining at Isaac Plains
19
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016  |  20
Director’s Report 
 
REMUNERATION REPORT (AUDITED) (continued) 
 
The  following  describes  the  Company’s  remuneration  arrangements  for  Key  Management  Personnel,  company 
Directors and Senior Management. A Short Term Incentive (“STI”) plan was introduced for FY16 to specifically deal 
with completion of the Isaac Plains transaction and operational milestones to recommence mining activity. The Long 
Term Incentive (“LTI”) scheme, suspended in FY14, remained suspended, however is proposed to be re-established in 
FY17.  
 
Fixed Remuneration 
 
Managing Director and senior management remuneration 
 
The Group aims to reward the Managing Director and senior management with a base level of remuneration which is 
both  appropriate  to  the  position  and  competitive  in  the  market.    Fixed  remuneration  is  reviewed  annually  by  the 
Remuneration  &  Nominations  Committee  and  the  Board.    The  Managing  Director  reviews  all  senior  management 
performance and remuneration and then makes recommendations to the Remuneration & Nominations Committee.  
The Remuneration & Nominations Committee reviews the Managing Director’s performance and remuneration. 
 
The process consists of a review of Company-wide and individual performance, relevant comparative remuneration in 
the market and internal, and where appropriate, external advice on policies and practices.  
 
There was no increase to fixed remuneration for the Managing Director or majority of senior management in FY16. 
There has been no change to base remuneration for most of the key management personnel since the last adjustment 
in FY12. The Remuneration Committee and the Board deemed this an appropriate outcome given the continued soft 
market conditions and focus on driving shareholder returns through the delivery of Isaac Plains. 
 
Non-executive Director fixed remuneration 
 
The Board seeks to set aggregate remuneration at a level which provides the Company with the ability to attract and 
retain Directors of the highest calibre, whilst incurring a cost which is acceptable to shareholders. 
 
The  Constitution  of  Stanmore  Coal  Limited  and  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  specify  that  the  non-executive  Directors  are 
entitled to remuneration as determined by the Consolidated Entity in a general meeting to be apportioned among 
them  in  such  manner  as  the  Directors  agree  and,  in  default  of  agreement,  equally.  The  maximum  aggregate 
remuneration  currently  determined  by  Stanmore  Coal  Limited  is  $350,000  per  annum.  Additionally,  non-executive 
Directors are also entitled to be reimbursed for indirect expenses associated with execution of their responsibilities 
(for example travel costs). Total non-executive Director remuneration for FY16 was $215,000 (FY15: $205,000). 
 
If a non-executive Director performs extra services, which in the opinion of the Directors are outside the scope of the 
ordinary  duties  of  the  Director,  the  Consolidated  Entity  may  remunerate  that  Director  by  payment  of  a  fixed  sum 
determined by the Directors in addition to or instead of the remuneration referred to above. However, no payment 
can be made if the effect would be to exceed the maximum aggregate amount payable to non-executive Directors. No 
such  payments  were  made  this  year.  A  non-executive  Director  is  entitled  to  be  paid  travel  and  other  expenses 
properly  incurred  by  them  in  attending  Directors’  or  general  meetings  of  Stanmore  Coal  Limited  or  otherwise  in 
connection with the business of the Consolidated Entity. 
 
The fixed remuneration of non-executive Directors for the year ending 30 June 2016 is detailed in this Remuneration 
Report.
20
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016  |  21
Director’s Report 
 
REMUNERATION REPORT (AUDITED) (continued) 
 
Short term and long term incentive plan structures 
 
The Board considers that the use of STI and LTI are a reasonable means of remunerating employees, on the basis that 
they:
encourage Senior Management to drive toward the realisation of shareholder value;
• 
•  provide flexibility to the Company to actively manage the way in which it remunerates and incentivises Senior
Management;
•  preserve the Company’s cash resources; and 
•
contribute toward the attraction and retention of skilled talent in a competitive employment market.
A  STI  plan  was  provided  in  FY16  for  key  management  personnel  which  aligned  rewards  with  key  performance 
outcomes associated with the recommencement of mining at Isaac Plains. No LTI was offered in FY16 and FY15. 
  
 
Incentive Outcomes for FY15 and FY16 
 
The below table illustrates the remuneration outcomes for both the STI and LTI schemes. 
 
Incentive 
FY 2016 - STI
Award Outcome 
Stage 1 Incentive – 1/3rd of target 
incentive paid to key management and 
personnel in December 2015 
 
Stage 2 incentive – 2/3rd of target 
subject to KPI weighting for each key 
management personnel.  
 
Range of earned outcomes from 90%-
103% (of individual entitlement 
relative to 2/3rd of calculated FY16 
target). Payable September 2016. 
 
Across all eligible key management 
personnel: 
Stage 1 total $260k 
Stage 2 total $518k 
FY16 STI total $778k
Discussion 
Total FY16 incentive for key management 
staff split into two components. Each key 
management personnel was allocated a 
target incentive value based on a percentage 
of their fixed remuneration. The target 
ranged from 10% (low) to 75% (high). 
 
Stage 1 incentive – payable as 1/3rd of 
calculated FY16 incentive amount following 
completion of Isaac Plains transaction in 
November 2015 
 
Stage 2 incentive – balance 2/3rd of calculated 
FY16 incentive measures against a range of 
KPIs including (but not limited) safety 
performance, first coal date, capital overhaul 
management of dragline and operating cost 
performance in June quarter. 
 
 
 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A
FY 2016- LTI 
FY 2015- STI 
FY 2015- LTI
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
21
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016  |  22
Director’s Report 
 
REMUNERATION REPORT (AUDITED) (continued) 
 
The Company does not intend to issue more than an aggregate of 5% of its share capital, from time to time, under the 
STI and LTI plans.  
 
In the year ended 30 June 2016 there were no fees paid to remuneration consultants (2015: nil). 
 
Relationship between remuneration and Company performance 
 
During  the  financial  year,  the  Company  transitioned  from  being  a  coal  explorer  to  a  coal  producer  through  the 
acquisition of the Isaac Plains Coal Mine. Given the ramp-up nature of operations and the fact that first revenue was 
achieved near year end (May 2016), the Company generated an accounting loss in FY16. Exploration and development 
activity for all other coal projects held by the Company was nominal during the financial year. 
 
On 9 December 2009, official quotation of the Stanmore Coal Limited’s shares on the ASX commenced at a price of 
$0.20. The share price at the end of the financial year ended 30 June 2016 was $0.28 (2015: $0.06).
2016 
12.700
2015 
-
2014 
-
2013 
-
2012 
-
Year 
Revenue 
($million) 
Profit / (loss) 
attributable to 
the Group 
($million) 
Share price at 
year end ($/sh) 
Basic EPS (c/sh) 
Diluted EPS 
(c/sh) 
Dividends (c/sh)
(19.746)
(12.148)
(11.864)
(7.203)
(7.682)
0.28
(8.9) 
(8.9)
0.06
(5.8) 
(5.8)
0.105
(5.7) 
(5.7)
0.115
(2.5) 
(2.5)
0.36
(5.3) 
(5.3)
-
-
-
-
-
There were no dividends paid during the year ended 30 June 2016. 
 
As the Company transitioned to operations in FY16, no formal remuneration framework has been established to align 
fixed compensation with short and long term incentives with financial performance of the Company and shareholder 
wealth. The Board is currently developing a remuneration framework for FY17 and beyond which is intended to reflect 
a more typical operational business. It is anticipated that the revised LTI framework will be presented to shareholders 
at the 2016 Annual General Meeting. 
 
Employment contracts and consultancy agreements 
 
It  is  the  Board’s  policy  that  employment  contracts  or  consultancy  agreements  are  entered  into  with  all  Executive 
Directors and senior management.  
 
Contracts do not provide for pre-determining compensation values or method of payment.   Rather the amount of 
compensation is determined by the Remuneration & Nominations Committee and the Board in accordance with the 
Company’s remuneration policies. 
 
The  current  consultancy  agreement  with  the  Joint  Company  Secretary  has  a  three  month  notice  period.  All  other 
employment  contracts  or  consultancy  agreements  have  three  month  (or  lower)  notice  periods.  No  current 
employment contracts contain early termination clauses.  All Non-Executive Directors have received letters outlining 
the key terms of their appointment.  The contracts have no specified duration. 
 
Key management personnel are entitled to their statutory entitlements of accrued annual leave and long service leave 
together with any superannuation on termination.
22
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016  |  23
Director’s Report 
 
REEMUNERATION REPORT (AUDITED) (continued) 
 
Managing Director 
 
Stanmore Coal Limited has an Employment Contract with Mr Nick Jorss for the position of Managing Director which 
commenced on 1 January 2012. Mr Jorss’ base remuneration is $380,000 per annum. The employment contract may 
be terminated by either party by providing 3 month’s written notice, or immediately in the case of gross negligence or 
serious misconduct. Mr Jorss is eligible to participate in the STI/LTI scheme which commenced in 2012 during the year 
pursuant  to  shareholder  approval.  Detail  of  instruments  issued  under  the  schemes  is  provided  on  page  25  of  this 
report. These include the following unlisted securities which were held at the date of this report:
•  On 26 October 2012 500,000 (expiry 30 June 2020) performance rights were granted following shareholder 
approval at the EGM 10 October 2012. 50% of these rights vest upon the grant of the Mining Lease for The 
Range  Project  and  the  balance  of  50%  vest  upon  achieving  an  annualised  production  rate  of  5Mtpa  of 
product coal at The Range Project. At the date of this report none of these rights have vested.
Senior Management 
 
Chief Financial Officer  
 
Andrew Roach  
 
Stanmore Coal Limited has an Employment Contract with Mr Andrew Roach for the position of Chief Financial Officer 
which commenced on 4 August 2014. Prior to this role, Mr Roach performed the role of Financial Controller since July 
2012. Mr Roach receives a salary of $250,000 per annum effective from 1 August 2015. The employment contract may 
be terminated by either party by providing 3 month’s written notice, or immediately in the case of gross negligence or 
serious misconduct. 
 
Mr Roach was previously granted 693,000 unlisted options, expiring 4 September 2017, exercisable as follows:

693,000 at $0.22 (vesting 4 September 2015)
Mr Roach is eligible to participate in the STI/LTI scheme which commenced in 2012 pursuant to shareholder approval. 
Detail of instruments issued  under the schemes is provided on page 25 of this report. These include the  following 
unlisted securities which were held at the date of this report:
•
450,000  performance  rights  (expiry  30  June  2020).  50%  of  these  rights  vest  upon  the grant  of  the  Mining 
Lease for The Range Project and the balance of 50% vest upon achieving an annualised production rate of 
5Mtpa  of  product  coal  at  The  Range  Project.  At  the  date  of  this  report  none  of  these  rights  have  vested 
(2015: Nil).
Chief Operations Officer 
 
Stanmore  Coal  Limited  has  an  Employment  Contract  with  Mr  Michael  McKee  for  the  position  of  Chief  Operations 
Officer (formerly the General Manager – Operations) which commenced on 1 February 2011. Mr McKee receives a 
salary of $353,200 per annum. The employment contract may be terminated by either party by providing 2 month’s 
written notice, or immediately in the case of gross negligence or serious misconduct. 
 
Under the terms of the contract, on 16 March 2011, Mr McKee was issued 20,000 ordinary shares and on 27 April 
2011 granted 2,000,000 unlisted options, expiring 31 December 2015, exercisable as follows:
  500,000 at $1.75 (vesting 27 April 2012) 
  500,000 at $2.00 (vesting 27 April 2013) 
  500,000 at $2.25 (vesting 27 April 2014) 
  500,000 at $2.50 (vesting 27 April 2015)
On  12  October  2012  Mr  McKee  was  issued  250,000  ordinary  shares  upon  being  promoted  to  the  role  of  General 
Manager – Operations.
23
Director’s Report 
 
REMUNERATION REPORT (AUDITED) (continued) 
 
Mr McKee held the following unlisted securities at the date of this report:
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016  |  24
•
500,000  performance  rights  (expiry  30  June  2020).  50%  of  these  rights  vest  upon  the grant  of  the  Mining 
Lease for The Range Project and the balance of 50% vest upon achieving an annualised production rate of 
5Mtpa  of  product  coal  at  The  Range  Project.  At  the  date  of  this  report  none  of  these  rights  have  vested 
(2015: Nil).
Remuneration details  
 
The following table details the components of remuneration for each key management personnel of the Company, in 
respect of the financial years ending 30 June 2015 and 30 June 2016.
Termination
Share-based payments
Total
%
* Patrick O’Connor was appointed on 1 October 2014 
** Doug McAlpine resigned on 4 August 2014 (Chief Financial Officer) 
*** Andrew Roach was appointed on 4 August 2014 (Chief Financial Officer)
2016
Directors 
Neville Sneddon  
Nicholas Jorss       
Patrick O’Connor 
Stephen Bizzell    
Viv Forbes 
Chris McAuliffe 
Total  
Senior Management 
Michael McKee 
Andrew Roach 
Total
2015
Directors 
Neville Sneddon  
Nicholas Jorss       
Patrick O’Connor* 
Stephen Bizzell    
Viv Forbes 
Chris McAuliffe 
Total  
Senior Management 
Doug McAlpine** 
Michael McKee 
Andrew Roach*** 
Total
Short-term benefits
Post-
Employmen
t
Salary &
Fees
Cash 
Bonus
Other short-
term benefits
Superannuation
$
55,000 
380,000 
40,000 
40,000 
40,000 
40,000 
595,000
353,200 
245,416 
598,616
$
- 
289,467 
- 
- 
- 
- 
289,467 
 
209,596 
145,840 
355,436
Short-term benefits
$
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
-
$
- 
19,616 
- 
- 
- 
- 
19,616 
 
19,616 
19,616 
39,232
Post-
Employmen
t
Salary &
Fees
Cash 
Bonus
Other short-
term benefits
Superannuation
$
55,000 
367,577 
30,000 
40,000 
40,000 
40,000 
572,577
83,582 
334,408 
192,000 
609,990
$
$
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
-
$
- 
18,783 
- 
- 
- 
- 
18,783 
 
4,696 
18,783 
18,240 
41,719
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
-
Benefits
$
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
 
-
Equity-
settled 
(options)
Equity-
settled 
(shares)
$
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
3,960 
3,759 
7,719
$
- 
14,402 
- 
- 
- 
- 
14,402 
 
14,402 
14,402 
28,804
$
55,000 
703,485 
40,000 
40,000 
40,000 
40,000 
918,485 
 
600,774 
429,033 
1,029,807
Benefits
$
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
 
-
Equity-
settled 
(options)
Equity-
settled 
(shares)
$
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
63,517 
20,790 
84,307
$
- 
14,363 
- 
- 
- 
- 
14,363 
 
- 
14,363 
14,363 
28,726
$
55,000 
400,723 
30,000 
40,000 
40,000 
40,000 
605,723 
 
88,278 
431,071 
245,393 
764,742
Termination
Share-based payments
Total
%
Remuneration
as
share-based 
payments
%
Performance-
related
remuneration
Remuneration
as
share-based 
payments
0% 
2% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
 
 
3% 
4%
0% 
41% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
 
 
35% 
34%
%
Performance-
related
remuneration
0% 
4% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
 
 
0% 
18% 
14%
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
 
 
0% 
0% 
0%
24
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016  |  25
Director’s Report 
 
REMUNERATION REPORT (AUDITED) (continued) 
 
Remuneration details (continued) 
 
Cash bonuses, performance-related bonuses and share-based payments 
 
For the financial year ending 30 June 2016 the following cash performance bonuses were paid or accrued at year end.
Nicholas Jorss 
Michael McKee 
Andrew Roach
Target STI 
% of base salary 
75% 
60% 
60%
Stage 1 Incentive * 
$ 
95,000 
70,640 
49,083
Stage 2 Incentive ** 
$ 
194,467 
138,956 
96,756
Total STI incentive 
$  
289,467 
209,569 
145,840
% of Stage 2 
Incentive achieved 
102% 
98% 
99%
* one third of target STI, paid in December 2015 upon completion of the Isaac Plains acquisition 
** Stage 2 incentive accrued and payable in September 2016 
 
The Stage 1 Incentive performance test was successful completion of the Isaac Plains transaction. This was achieved in 
November 2015.  The Stage 2 Incentive performance test  had multiple parameters  which were specific to each key 
management personnel. These hurdles were targeted around key operational milestones to recommence mining at 
Isaac  Plains  in  a  relatively  short  timeframe.  Targets  such  as  capital  overhaul  budgets,  first  coal  date  and  operating 
costs were set by the Board at the start of the financial year and reviewed throughout. 
 
There  were  no  share-based  payments  made  to  key  management  personnel  and  other  executives  during  the  year 
ended 30 June 2016 other than accounting charges for issuances made in prior periods.  
 
Equity instruments 
 
Shareholdings 
 
Details of ordinary shares held directly, indirectly or beneficially by key management personnel and their related parties are as 
follows:
Directors 
Neville Sneddon 
Nicholas Jorss *      
Patrick O’Connor 
Stephen Bizzell 
Viv Forbes 
Chris McAuliffe 
Senior Management 
Michael McKee 
Andrew Roach
Balance 
1 July 2015 
 
300,000 
32,263,375 
500,000 
7,372,514 
2,613,270 
- 
 
422,540 
101,464
Granted as 
Remuneration
On Exercise of 
Options or Rights
Net Change 
Other
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
-
200,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
213,000 
-
Balance 
30 June 2016
500,000 
32,263,375 
500,000 
7,372,514 
2,613,270 
- 
 
635,540 
101,464
* 31,700,270 shares are held by St Lucia Resources International Pty Ltd of which Nicholas Jorss is a Director, and has an interest in trusts which own 
>20%. 
 
There were no shares held nominally at 30 June 2016.
25
Director’s Report 
 
REMUNERATION REPORT (AUDITED) (continued) 
 
Options holdings
Granted as 
Remuneration
Exercise of 
Options
Balance 
1 July 2015
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016  |  26
Net Change
Balance
Other
30 June 2016
Total vested at 
30 June 2016
Total vested 
and exercisable
at
30 June 2016
Total vested
and not
exercisable 
at 30 June
2016
Directors 
Neville Sneddon 
Nicholas Jorss       
Stephen Bizzell 
Patrick O’Connor 
Viv Forbes 
Chris McAuliffe 
Senior Management 
Michael McKee* 
Andrew Roach
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
2,730,000 
693,000
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
(2,000,000) 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
730,000 
693,000
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
730,000 
693,000
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
730,000 
693,000
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
-
* The movement of “net change other” represents expiry of unlisted options that were not exercised during the year. 
 
Performance Rights
Net Change
Exercise of
Balance
Balance 
1 July 2015
Granted as 
Remuneration
Rights
Other
30 June 2016
Total vested at 
30 June 2016
Total vested 
and exercisable
at
30 June 2016
Total vested
and not
exercisable at 
30 June 2016
Directors 
Neville Sneddon 
Nicholas Jorss  
Patrick O’Connor 
Stephen Bizzell 
Viv Forbes 
Chris McAuliffe 
Senior Management 
Michael McKee 
Andrew Roach
- 
500,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
500,000 
450,000
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
-
- 
500,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
500,000 
450,000
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
-
Transactions with Directors and Director-related entities 
There were no transactions with Directors or Director-related entities during the year ending 30 June 2016 (2015: None). 
 
Loans to Key Management Personnel 
 
There were no loans to Key Management Personnel during the year (2015: none). 
 
 
End of Remuneration Report (Audited)
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
-
26
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016  |  27
Director’s Report 
 
INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE OF DIRECTORS, OFFICERS AND AUDITOR 
 
Each  of  the  Directors  and  the  Secretaries  of  Stanmore  Coal  Limited  have  entered  into  a  Deed  with  Stanmore  Coal 
Limited  whereby  Stanmore  Coal  Limited  has  provided  certain  contractual  rights  of  access  to  books  and  records  of 
Stanmore Coal Limited to those Directors and Secretary. 
 
Stanmore Coal Limited has insured all of the Directors of the Consolidated Entity. The contract of insurance prohibits 
the disclosure of the nature of the liabilities covered and amount of the premium paid. The Corporations Act does not 
require disclosure of the information in these circumstances. 
 
Stanmore Coal Limited has not indemnified or insured its auditor. 
 
OPTIONS & PERFORMANCE RIGHTS 
 
At the date of this report there were 2,766,000 unissued ordinary shares under options, 2,150,000 unissued ordinary 
shares under performance rights as follows:
 

2,766,000 unlisted options exercisable at $0.22 on or before 4 September 2017  
2,150,000 unlisted performance rights which vest upon achieving development and production milestones at 
The Range Project. There is no consideration payable upon vesting.
No option holder and performance right holder has any right under the options to participate in any other share issue 
of Stanmore Coal Limited or any other entity. 
 
During the year ended 30 June 2016 there were nil fully paid ordinary shares in Stanmore Coal Limited issued. 
 
CHANGES TO CAPITAL STRUCTURE 
 
At the date of this report, the Consolidated Entity had 222,497,435 ordinary shares, 2,766,000 unlisted options, and 
2,150,000 performance rights on issue. 
 
EVENTS AFTER REPORTING DATE 
 
There have been no events since 30 June 2016 that impact upon the financial report as at 30 June 2016 and future 
periods.
27
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016  |  28
Director’s Report 
 
DIVIDENDS PAID OR RECOMMENDED 
 
There were no dividends paid or recommended during the financial year. 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES 
 
The Consolidated Entity is subject to environmental regulation in relation to its exploration activities.  There are no 
material matters that have arisen in relation to environmental issues up to the date of this report.  
 
PROCEEDINGS ON BEHALF OF THE CONSOLIDATED ENTITY 
 
No person has applied for leave of Court to bring proceedings on behalf of the Consolidated Entity or intervene in any 
proceedings  to  which  the  Consolidated  Entity  is  a  party  for  the  purposes  of  taking  responsibility  on  behalf  of  the 
Consolidated Entity for all or any part of those proceedings.  
 
The Consolidated Entity was not a party to any such proceedings during the year. 
 
NON-AUDIT SERVICES 
 
The following non-audit services were provided by the entity’s auditor BDO Audit Pty Ltd. The Directors are satisfied 
that the provision of non-audit services is compatible with the general standard of independence for auditors imposed 
by the Corporations Act 2001.  The nature and scope of each type of non-audit service provided means that auditor 
independence was not compromised. 
 
BDO Audit Pty Ltd received the following amounts for the provision of non-audit services:
AUDITOR’S INDEPENDENCE DECLARATION 
 
The Auditor’s Independence Declaration forms part of the Directors’ Report and can be found on page 29. 
 
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 
 
In  recognising  the  need  for  the  highest  standards  of  corporate  behaviour  and  accountability,  the  Directors  of 
Stanmore Coal Limited support and have adhered to the principles of corporate governance.  Stanmore Coal Limited’s 
Corporate Governance Statement can be found on page 34. 
 
This report is signed in accordance with a resolution of the Directors.
Tax services
$58,811
Nicholas Jorss 
Managing Director 
 
Brisbane 
Date: 31 August 2016
28
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016  |  29
Tel: +61 7 3237 5999 
Fax: +61 7 3221 9227 
www.bdo.com.au
Level 10, 12 Creek St  
Brisbane QLD 4000 
GPO Box 457 Brisbane QLD 4001 
Australia
Independence Declaration
DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE BY T J KENDALL TO THE DIRECTORS OF STANMORE COAL LIMITED
As lead auditor of Stanmore Coal Limited for the year ended 30 June 2016, I declare that, to the best of 
my knowledge and belief, there have been:
1.  No contraventions of the auditor independence requirements of the Corporations Act 2001 in relation
to the audit; and
2.  No contraventions of any applicable code of professional conduct in relation to the audit.
This declaration is in respect of Stanmore Coal Limited and the entities it controlled during the year.
T J Kendall 
Director
BDO Audit Pty Ltd
Brisbane, 31 August 2016
BDO Audit Pty Ltd ABN 33 134 022 870 is a member of a national association of independent entities which are all members of BDO Australia Ltd ABN 77 050 110 
275, an Australian company limited by guarantee. BDO Audit Pty Ltd and BDO Australia Ltd are members of BDO International Ltd, a UK company limited by 
guarantee, and form part of the international BDO network of independent member firms. Liability limited by a scheme approved under Professional Standards 
Legislation, other than for the acts or omissions of financial services licensees.
29
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016  |  30
Independence Declaration 
 
 
Shareholder Information 
 
Additional information required by the Australian Securities Exchange Ltd and not shown elsewhere in this report is as 
follows.  The information is current as at 31 July 2016. 
 
(a)  Distribution of equity securities 
The number of holders, by size of holding, in each class of security is:
Ordinary shares
Unlisted options 
($0.22 @ 04/09/16)
Unlisted Performance
Rights)
1 – 1,000 
1,001 – 5,000 
5,001 – 10,000 
10,001 – 
100,000 
100,001 and 
over 
Total
Number 
of holders 
138 
278 
179
Number of
shares
42,917 
864,445 
1,402,249
Number 
of holders 
- 
- 
-
614
22,155,724
151 
1,360
198,032,100 
222,497,435
-
7 
7
Number of 
options
- 
- 
-
-
2,766,000 
2,766,000
Number 
of holders 
- 
- 
-
-
5 
5
Number of 
options
- 
- 
-
-
2,150,000 
2,150,000
30
Shareholder Information
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016  |  31
The number of shareholders holding less than a marketable parcel (1,852 ordinary shares) is 192 (116,790 ordinary 
shares). 
 
(b)  Twenty largest holders 
The names of the twenty largest holders as at 31 July 2016, in each class of quoted security are: 
Ordinary shares: 
 
 
1  GREATGROUP INVESTMENTS LTD  
2  3RD WAVE INVESTORS LTD  
3  ST LUCIA RESOURCES  
4  ONE MANAGED INVT FUNDS LTD  
5  ROOKHARP INVESTMENTS PTY LIMITED  
6  MR SLOBODAN KOVIJANIC & MRS NADEZDA KOVIJANIC  
7  WHITTINGHAM SECURITIES PTY LIMITED  
8  JH NOMINEES AUSTRALIA PTY LTD  
9  COMMON SENSE PTY LTD  
10 MRS ELIZABETH ANNE FOGARTY & MISS CAITLYN ELIZABETH FOGARTY  
11 KABILA INVESTMENTS PTY LTD  
12 GREATGROUP INVESTMENTS LIMITED  
13 CAYTHORPE PTY LTD  
14 CHENGDU DI'AO INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT PTY LTD  
15 INVIA CUSTODIAN PTY LIMITED  
16 TAIHEIYO KOUHATSU INCORPORATED  
17 ALBIANO HOLDINGS PTY LTD  
18 BCP ALPHA INVESTMENTS LIMITED  
19 WISHART FAMILY SUPER PTY LTD  
20 BIZZELL CAPITAL PARTNERS PTY LTD
Number of shares  % of total shares 
24.00 
15.78 
14.25 
4.01 
2.58 
1.47 
1.35 
1.26 
1.17 
0.90 
0.81 
0.69 
0.58 
0.55 
0.54 
0.54 
0.50 
0.46 
0.45 
0.44 
72.33 
       100.00
53,393,407  
35,099,150  
31,700,270  
8,915,000  
5,737,270  
3,270,973  
3,000,000  
2,806,313  
2,613,270  
2,000,000  
1,793,502  
1,545,388  
1,300,000  
1,233,000  
1,205,000  
1,200,000  
1,104,232  
1,034,000  
1,010,000  
972,341  
160,933,116  
222,497,435
Total of twenty largest holders 
Total ordinary shares
31
Shareholder Information
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016  |  32
Substantial shareholders 
 
Substantial shareholders as shown in substantial shareholder notices received by Stanmore  Coal Limited at 31  July 
2016 are:
Name of Shareholder: 
Greatgroup Investments Limited 
3rd Wave Investors Limited 
St Lucia Resources International Pty Ltd 
VW & AC Pty Ltd* 
Olross Investments Pty Ltd* 
Raplon Pty Ltd*
Ordinary Shares: 
54,938,795 
34,999,150 
31,700,270 
31,700,270 
31,700,270 
31,700,270
* Relevant interest under s.608(3)(a) Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) by having voting power of above 20% in St Lucia Resources International Pty Ltd,
which holds 31,700,270 shares in Stanmore Coal Limited.
(c)  Voting rights 
 
All ordinary shares carry one vote per share without restriction. 
 
Options and performance rights do not carry voting rights. 
 
(d)  Restricted securities 
 
There are no restricted securities on issue at 31 July 2016.
32
Interest in tenements
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016  |  33
Interests in Tenements  
 
Stanmore Coal Limited held the following interests in tenements as at 31 July 2016. All tenements are located in the 
State of Queensland, Australia.
Tenement Name
Tenement No.
% Interest
Isaac Plains 
The Range 
New Cambria
Belview 
Tennyson
Belview North 
Clifford West 
Clifford East
Tennyson South
Lilyvale
Belview East 
The Range 
New Cambria 
Mackenzie
Lilyvale
New Cambria 
Isaac Plains
Isaac Plains East 
Isaac Plains East
The Range
The Range (Transport)
EPC 755 
EPC 1112 
EPC 1113 
EPC 1114 
EPC 1168 
EPC 1186 
EPC 1274 
EPC 1276 
EPC 1580 
EPC 1687 
EPC 1798 
EPC 2030 
EPC 2039 
EPC 2081 
EPC 2157 
EPC 2371 
ML 70342 
MDL 135*
MDL 137* (part)
MLA 55001 
MLA 55009
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
60** 
60** 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
95 
85 
100 
100 
100 
100
Application 
Application
The Range (Transport)
MLA 55010
Application
Date Granted 
10/04/2002 
23/03/2007 
23/03/2007 
28/02/2008 
24/10/2007 
12/03/2008 
10/09/2008 
10/09/2008 
3/07/2009 
28/07/2011 
19/02/2010 
12/10/2010 
12/10/2010 
15/10/2010 
21/05/2013 
28/07/2011 
1/01/2006 
1/07/1993 
1/07/1993
- 
-
-
* Acquired as part of Wotonga Acquisition - subject to regulatory approval 
** Joint venture partner has an option to acquire up to a 40% economic interest in the project
Date Exp 
9/04/2018 
22/03/2017 
22/03/2017 
27/02/2018 
23/10/2020 
11/03/2018 
9/09/2018 
9/09/2018 
2/07/2019 
27/07/2021 
18/02/2020 
11/10/2020 
11/10/2020 
14/10/2020 
20/05/2018 
27/07/2021 
31/12/2025 
30/06/2018 
30/06/2018
- 
-
-
33
Corporate Governance Statement
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016 |  34
(ASX)  Corporate  Governance  Council’s
Corporate Governance Statement 
 
The  Board  of  Directors  of  Stanmore  Coal  Limited  is  responsible  for  the  corporate  governance  of  the  Consolidated 
Entity. The Board guides and monitors the business and affairs of Stanmore Coal Limited on behalf of the shareholders 
by whom they are elected and to whom they are accountable.  
 
Stanmore  Coal Limited’s Corporate Governance Statement is  structured  with reference to the Australian Securities 
Exchange 
(the  Council)  “Corporate  Governance  Principles  and 
Recommendations, 3rd Edition”.  A copy of the Company’s Corporate Governance Charter can be downloaded from 
the Company’s website www.stanmorecoal.com.au. 
 
Structure of the Board and Director Independence 
 
The skills, experience and expertise relevant to the position of Director held by each Director in office at the date of 
the Annual Report is included in the Director’s  Report.  The Corporate  Governance Council defines an independent 
Director as a non-executive Director who is not a member of management and who is free of any business or other 
relationship that could materially interfere with – or could reasonably be perceived to materially interfere with – the 
independent exercise of their judgement. 
 
In  the  context  of  Director  independence,  “materiality”  is  considered  from  both  the  Company  and  the  individual 
Director  perspective.    The  determination  of  materiality  requires  consideration  of  both  quantitative  and  qualitative 
elements.  An item is presumed to be quantitatively immaterial if it is equal or less than 5% of the appropriate base 
amount.  It is presumed to be material (unless there is qualitative evidence to the contrary) if it is equal to or greater 
than  5%  of  the  appropriate  base  amount.    Qualitative  factors  considered  included  whether  a  relationship  is 
strategically  important,  the  competitive  landscape,  the  nature  of  the  relationship  and  the  contractual  or  other 
arrangements governing it and other factors which point to the actual ability of the Director in question to shape the 
direction of the Company’s loyalty.  Factors that may impact on a Director’s independence are considered each time 
the Board meets. 
 
Stanmore Coal Limited considers industry experience and specific expertise, as well as general corporate experience, 
to be important attributes of its Board members. The Directors noted above have been appointed to the Board of 
Stanmore  Coal  Limited  due  to  their  considerable  industry  and  corporate  experience.  The  Company  conducts 
comprehensive background checks prior to the appointment of any new Director.  Formal letters of appointment are 
in place for all Directors. 
 
There  are  procedures  in  place,  agreed  by  the  Board,  to  enable  Directors,  in  furtherance  of  their  duties,  to  seek 
independent  professional  advice  at  the  Consolidated  Entity’s  expense.    Based  on  the  size  and  complexity  of  the 
Company,  the  Company  Secretary  has  close  working  relationships  with  the  Board  of  Directors  and  the  Senior 
Management Group.  In respect of matters relating to the proper functioning of the Board and Corporate Governance, 
the Company Secretary has direct access to the Chairman. 
 
Mr Nicholas Jorss is the Managing Director. The Consolidated Entity does not consider Mr Jorss to be an independent 
Director as defined in the ASX Guidelines on the basis that he is a Director of St Lucia Resources International Pty Ltd, 
a substantial shareholder (greater than 5%) in the Consolidated Entity. 
 
Mr  Chris  McAuliffe  is  a  non-executive  Director.  The  Consolidated  Entity  does  not  consider  Mr  McAuliffe  to  be  an 
independent Director as defined in the ASX Guidelines on the basis that he is the Managing Director of Sprint Capital, 
the investment management group responsible for Greatgroup Investments Limited, who is a substantial shareholder 
(greater than 5%) in the Consolidated Entity. 
 
Based  on  the  above,  for  the  purposes  of  the  ASX  Corporate  Governance  Principles  and  Recommendations,  Messrs 
Jorss and McAuliffe are not considered independent Directors. 
 
The term in office held by each Director in office at the date of this report is as follows:
34
Corporate Governance Statement
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016 |  35
Name 
Neville Sneddon 
Nicholas Jorss 
Stephen Bizzell 
Viv Forbes 
Chris McAuliffe 
Patrick O’Connor
Term in office 
6 year 11 months 
8 years 3 months 
6 year 11 months 
6 year 11 months 
4 year 2 months 
1 year 9 months
“Why not” explanation
ASX Principles and Recommendations 
 
The  Board  is  of  the  view  that  with  the  exception  of  the  departures  from  the  ASX  Corporate  Governance  Council 
Principles and Recommendations (3rd edition) as set out in the table below, it otherwise complies with all of the ASX 
Guidelines. 
 
 
ASX Principles  
and recommendations 
Principle 7 –Recognise and Manage Risk 
Recommendation 7.3 – A listed entity 
should disclose if it has an internal audit 
function, how the function is structured 
and what role it performs
The Company has not established an internal audit function as it does 
not  believe  it  is  of  the  size  or  complexity  to  justify  this  function.  The 
Company is audited annually and reviewed each half year by its auditors 
who provide an independent report to the Board on the  systems and 
processes in place. This external audit process provides the Board with 
sufficient  comfort  that  the  Company  has  appropriate 
internal 
procedures in place.
35
Corporate Governance Statement
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016 |  36
Principle 1 
 
The Board has not established formal evaluation criteria for the review of itself or its committees and has not 
undertaken a specific performance evaluation. The Board uses a personal evaluation review to review the 
performance of Directors. Individual Directors are asked to communicate to the Chairman on a confidential basis to 
comment on their own performance, and the performance of the board and its committee. Key executives are 
reviewed periodically against the business objectives and their own contractual obligations, including their personal 
KPIs. 
 
Appropriate background checks are conducted on proposed new directors and material information about a director 
being re-elected is provided to security holders. 
 
Principle 2 
 
The Board is comprised of six Directors from a range of backgrounds with significant experience, skills and attributes. 
The following table demonstrates the skills and experience of the Directors across a number of areas that are relevant 
to the Company’s business. 
 
Technical and Operations 
Coal mining experience in 
Australia 
Project delivery 
Coal marketing 
Contractor management 
 
Corporate Governance 
Public Listed Company 
experience 
Governance and Compliance 
Leadership 
 
The Board is of the view that its current Directors hold an appropriate mix of skills, experience and diversity to enable 
the Board to discharge its responsibilities and deliver on the corporate objectives. 
 
Principle 3 
 
The Company has a published corporate code of conduct to guide executives, management and employees in carrying 
out their duties and responsibilities. The code of conduct covers such matters as:
Sustainability & Stakeholder 
Management 
Community relations 
Human resources 
Remuneration 
Government affairs 
 
Health & Safety 
Working knowledge of systems 
and best practice 
Management of contractor 
system
Business, Risk & Finance 
Audit 
Legal 
Accounting 
Tax 
Risk Management 
Mergers & Acquisition 
Finance
• 
• 
• 
• 
•
act in the best interests of the Company; 
act honestly and with high standards of personal integrity; 
comply with the laws and regulations that apply to the Company and its operations; 
not knowingly participate in any illegal or unethical activity; 
not enter into any arrangement or participate in any activity that would conflict with the Company’s best 
interests or that would be likely to negatively affect the Company’s reputation; 
not take advantage of the property or information of the entity or its customers for personal gain or to 
cause detriment to the entity or its customers; and 
not take advantage of their position or the opportunities arising from their position with the Company 
for personal gain.
36
•
•
Corporate Governance Statement
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016 |  37
Principle 4 
 
The Company has established an Audit and Risk Management Committee as follows:
• 
• 
•
Stephen Bizzell (Chairman) 
Chris McAuliffe 
Patrick O’Connor
The activities and policies of the Committee is stated in Section B of the Charter: 
(www.stanmorecoal.com.au/corporate) 
 
For additional details of Directors’ attendance at Audit and Risk Management Committee meetings and to review the 
qualifications of the members of the Audit and Risk Management Committee, please refer to the Directors’ Report. 
 
The Board has received written assurances from the Managing Director and Chief Financial Officer that to the best of 
their knowledge and belief, the declaration provided by them in accordance with section 295A of the Corporations Act 
is founded on a sound system of risk management and internal control and that the system is operating effectively in 
all material respects in relation to financial reporting risks.  
 
The Audit and Risk Management Charter has been made publicly available on the Company’s website. 
 
Principle 5 
 
Detailed compliance procedures for ASX Listing Rule disclosure requirements have been adopted by the Consolidated 
Entity. Stanmore Coal Limited’s Obligation of Disclosure Policy can be found within Stanmore Coal Limited’s Corporate 
Governance Charter on the Stanmore Coal Limited website (www.stanmorecoal.com.au/corporate). 
 
Principle 6 
 
The Company promotes effective communication with shareholders and encourage effective participation at general 
meetings by providing information to shareholders:
• 
• 
• 
•
•
Through the release of information to the market via the ASX; 
Through the distribution of the Annual Report and notices of annual general meeting; 
Through shareholder meetings and investor relation presentations;  
By offering security holders the option to receive ASX announcements and other notices from the
Company electronically; and
By posting relevant information on Stanmore’s website: www.stanmorecoal.com.au
The Company’s website has a dedicated investor relations section for the purpose of publishing all important company 
information and relevant announcements made to the market. 
 
Principle 7 
 
The  Company’s  Risk  Management  Policy  is  detailed  in  Section  B  of  the  Corporate  Governance  Charter  located  at 
(www.stanmorecoal.com.au/corporate).  Management  has  evaluated  the  various  risk  and  disclosed  in  the  Directors 
Report. 
 
In respect of the Company’s financial statements and systems of accounting control, the Company’s external auditor 
attends the Company’s Annual General Meeting to address questions from shareholders. The Audit & Risk Committee 
(see Principal 4) evaluates and addresses risks within the business as outlined in the Corporate Governance Charter 
(www.stanmorecoal.com.au/corporate).  A  review  of  the  risk  management  framework  was  undertaken  by  the 
Committee during the year.
37
Corporate Governance Statement
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016 |  38
Principle 8 
 
The Company has established a Remuneration & Nominations Committee as follows:
• 
• 
• 
• 
•
Neville Sneddon (Chairman) 
Chris McAuliffe 
Patrick O’Connor 
Stephen Bizzell 
Viv Forbes
The Remuneration & Nominations Committee’s objectives and compliance is detailed in Section C of the Corporate 
Governance Charter. Refer to (www.stanmorecoal.com.au/corporate). 
 
All matters of remuneration and executive appointments were also considered by the full board.  At this stage it is 
reasonable that the Board be accountable for setting their own remuneration and that of senior executives. 
 
The remuneration of the Board’s non-executive and executive directors is set out in the relevant section of the Annual 
Report. Details of the nature and amount of each element of the remuneration of each director of the company and 
the key management personnel of the company are disclosed in the relevant section of the Annual Report. There is no 
retirement benefit scheme for directors other than payment of statutory superannuation. 
 
The Company has adopted a Trading Policy that includes a prohibition on hedging, aimed at ensuring participants do 
not enter in to arrangements which would have the effect of limited their exposure to risk relating to an element of 
their remuneration.
38
Financial Statements
Consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income
Consolidated statement of financial position 
Consolidated statement of changes in equity 
Consolidated statement of cash flows
Notes to the 
financial statements
About this report
Key numbers
Capital
Risk
Group structure
Accumulated 
losses
21
Financial risk 
management
22
Subsidiaries
23
Unrecognised
items 
Commit-
ments
1.
2.
3.
4
6
7
8
9
10(a)
10(b)
11
12 
13
14
15
Revenue and 
other income
Cost of sales & 
other expenses
16.
18
Earnings per 
share
Income tax 
expense
19
Issued capital
Cash and cash 
equivalents 
Cash flow 
information 
Inventory
Trade and other 
receivables  
Property, plant 
and equipment
Exploration and 
evaluation 
expenditure  
Capitalised 
development 
costs  
Intangible 
assets 
Other assets 
Trade and other 
payables 
Onerous 
contract 
provisions 
Rehabilitation 
provisions
20
Option 
Reserve
24
25
Contingent 
liabilities 
and 
contingent 
assets 
Events 
after 
reporting 
date
39
Page           40
Page           41 
Page           42 
Page           43
Page           44
Other
Key 
management 
personnel 
Auditors’ 
remuneration
Business 
Combinations
Parent entity 
information  
Operating 
segment  
Share based 
payments  
Related party 
transactions  
Other 
accounting 
policies
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
Financial statements
for  the  year  ended  30  June  2016 -  Stanmore Coal   Limited  and  its  controlled   entities 
 
Contents
Signed reports
Directors’ declaration
Independent auditor’s report
Page          83
Page          84
39
Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and other Comprehensive Income
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Statements 2016 |  40
Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and other Comprehensive 
Income 
For the year ended 30 June 2016
2016 
$’000
Note
2015 
$ ‘000
Revenue
Cost of sales 
Gross Profit 
Other income 
Pre-production mining expenses 
Other expenses 
Profit before income tax and net finance 
expenses 
Finance income 
Financial expenses
Loss before income tax expense 
Income tax benefit 
Net loss for the year 
 
Other comprehensive income 
 
Total comprehensive loss for the year 
 
Loss for the year is attributable to: 
Owners of Stanmore Coal Limited
Total comprehensive income / (loss) for the 
year is attributable to: 
Owners of Stanmore Coal Limited 
 
Earnings/(loss) per share attributable to the 
owners of Stanmore Coal Limited:
Basic loss per share (cents per share) 
Diluted loss per share (cents per share)
1
2 
 
1 
2 
2
2 
 
3
18 
18
12,700
(24,600) 
(11,900) 
23,459 
(6,650) 
(21,873)
(16,964)
355 
(3,137)
(19,746) 
- 
(19,746) 
 
- 
 
(19,746) 
 
 
(19,746)
(19,746)
(8.9) 
(8.9)
-
- 
- 
298 
- 
(12,999)
(12,701)
561 
(8)
(12,148) 
- 
(12,148) 
 
- 
 
(12,148) 
 
 
(12,148)
(12,148)
(5.8) 
(5.8)
The above Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and other Comprehensive Income should be read in conjunction with the 
accompanying notes.
40
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Statements 2016 |  41
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
As at 30 June 2016
Note
Current Assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Restricted Cash 
Trade and other receivables 
Inventories 
Other current assets 
Total Current Assets
Non-Current Assets 
Trade and other receivables 
Property, plant and equipment 
Exploration and evaluation assets 
Capitalised development costs 
Intangible assets 
Other non-current assets 
Total Non-Current Assets
TOTAL ASSETS
Current Liabilities 
Trade and other payables 
Onerous contracts provision 
Rehabilitation provision 
Total Current Liabilities 
Non-Current Liabilities 
Onerous contracts provision 
Rehabilitation provision 
Total Non-Current Liabilities
TOTAL LIABILITIES
NET ASSETS
EQUITY 
Issued capital 
Option Reserve 
Accumulated Losses
TOTAL EQUITY ATTRIBUTABLE TO OWNERS OF 
STANMORE COAL LIMITED
4 
5 
8 
7 
12
8 
9 
10a 
10b 
11 
12
13 
14 
15 
 
 
14 
15
19 
20 
16
2016 
$ ‘000
12,080 
76 
22,285 
5,079 
2,845 
42,365
738 
33,445 
23,584 
7,175 
4,786 
181 
69,909
112,274
22,552 
5,153 
1,687 
29,392 
 
21,576 
22,221 
43,797
73,189
39,085
97,368 
4,377 
(62,660)
2015 
$ ‘000
15,199 
83 
186 
- 
11 
15,479
- 
1,995 
21,565 
20,108 
- 
156 
43,824
59,303
545 
- 
- 
545 
 
- 
- 
545
545
58,758
97,368 
4,304 
(42,914)
39,085
58,758
The above Consolidated Statement of Financial Position should be read in conjunction with the accompanying notes.
41
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Statements 2016  |  42
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 
For the year ended 30 June 2016
Issued 
Capital 
$ ‘000
Convertible 
Note Reserve
$ ‘000
Accumulated
Losses 
$ ‘000
Option 
Reserve 
$ ‘000
Total
$ ‘000
- 
- 
-
88,359
9,027
9,027
(9,027)
-
(30,766)
(12,148) 
- 
(12,148)
At 1 July 2014 
Total comprehensive income for the 
financial year 
Profit/(loss) for the year 
Other comprehensive income 
 
 
Transactions with owners in their capacity 
as owners 
Conversion of convertible notes into share 
capital 
Costs associated conversion of convertible 
notes 
Share based payments 
 
At 30 June 2015 
 
Total comprehensive income for the 
financial year 
Profit/(loss) for the year 
Other comprehensive income 
 
 
Transactions with owners in their capacity 
as owners 
Share based payments 
 
At 30 June 2016 
 
The above Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity should be read in conjunction with the accompanying notes.
- 
- 
 
(42,914) 
 
 
(19,746) 
- 
(19,746) 
 
 
- 
 
(62,660)
(18) 
- 
 
97,368 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
 
97,368
- 
206 
 
4,304 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
73 
 
4,377
- 
- 
-
-
- 
 
- 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
 
-
4,098
- 
- 
-
-
70,718
(12,148) 
- 
(12,148)
-
(18) 
206 
 
58,758 
 
 
(19,746) 
- 
(19,746) 
 
 
73 
 
39,085
42
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Statements 2016  |  43
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 
For the year ended 30 June 2016
Note
Cash Flows from Operating Activities 
Receipts from customers (inclusive of GST) 
Payments to suppliers and employees 
(inclusive of GST) 
Payments for onerous contracts 
Interest received 
Interest and other finance costs paid 
Net cash (outflow)/inflow from operating 
activities
Cash Flows from Investing Activities 
Payments for property, plant and equipment 
Net (payments) / receipts for exploration, 
evaluation and development assets 
Receipts relating to vendor payments 
Security deposit (payments) / refunds 
Net cash (outflow)/inflow from investing 
activities
Cash Flows from Financing Activities 
Proceeds from issue of shares 
Conversion of convertible notes expenses 
Net proceeds from/(repayment of) 
borrowings 
 
Net cash (outflow)/inflow from financing 
activities
6
2016 
$ ‘000
10,993
(31,027)
(7,920) 
                 257 
          (5,876)
(33,573)
(8,278) 
(4,658)
43,416 
(26)
30,454
- 
- 
-
-
Net increase/(decrease) in cash held 
Net cash at beginning of year 
Net cash at end of year 
 
The above Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows should be read in conjunction with the accompanying notes
(3,119) 
15,199 
12,080
4
2015 
$ ‘000
705 
(4,899)
- 
738 
(1)
(3,457)
(17) 
483
- 
378
844
- 
(18) 
-
(18)
(2,631) 
17,830 
15,199
43
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: 
About this report 
 
 
The financial statements of Stanmore Coal Limited for the year ended 30 June 2016 covers the Consolidated Entity consisting of 
Stanmore Coal Limited and its subsidiaries (“the Consolidated Entity”) as required by the Corporations Act 2001.  
 
The financial statements are presented in the Australian currency.  
 
Stanmore Coal Limited is a company limited by shares, incorporated and domiciled in Australia, whose shares are publicly traded on 
the Australian Securities Exchange. 
 
The consolidated general purpose financial report of the Consolidated Entity for the year ended 30 June 2016 was authorised for 
issue in accordance with a resolution of the directors on 31 August 2016. The Directors have the power to amend and reissue the 
financial report. 
 
The financial report is a general purpose financial report which: 
-
has been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Corporations Act 2001, Australian Accounting Standards and 
other  authoritative  pronouncements  of  the  Australian  Accounting  Standards  Board  (AASB)  and  International  Financial 
Reporting Standards (IFRS) as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board; 
is presented in Australian dollars with all values rounded to the nearest thousand dollars ($‘000) unless otherwise stated, in 
accordance with ASIC Corporations (Rounding in Financial / Directors Report) Instrument 2016/191; 
presents reclassified comparative information where required for consistency with the current year’s presentation; 
adopts  all  new  and  amended  Accounting  Standards  and  Interpretations  issued  by  the  AASB  that  are  relevant  to  the 
operations of the Consolidated Entity and effective for reporting periods beginning on or after 1 July 2015. Refer to note 33 
for further details; and 
does not early adopt any Australian Accounting Standards and Interpretations that have been issued or amended but are not 
yet effective, except for those described in note 33. Refer to note 33 for details on others not early-adopted.
-
- 
-
-
Property Plant and equipment 
Exploration and evaluation expenditure 
Capitalised development costs 
Onerous contracts provision 
Rehabilitation provision 
Business combination 
Share-based payments
The financial statements have been prepared on a historical cost basis, except for derivatives, available-for-sale financial assets and 
held-for-trading investments that have been measured at fair value. The entity is a for-profit entity for the purposes of Australian 
Accounting Standards. 
 
Key judgements and estimates 
 
In  the  process  of  applying  the  Consolidated  Entity’s  accounting  policies,  management  has  made  a  number  of  judgements  and 
applied estimates of future events. Judgements and estimates which are material to the financial report are found in the following 
notes: 
 
Note 9 
Note 10(a) 
Note 10(b) 
Note 14 
Note 15 
Note 28 
Note 31 
 
Going concern 
 
The  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  on  a  going  concern  basis  which  contemplates  the  continuity  of  normal  business 
activities and the realisation of assets and discharge of liabilities in the ordinary course of business.  The ability of the Company to 
continue to adopt the going concern assumption will depend upon a number of factors including the success of the Isaac Plains 
mine operations, or the successful exploration and subsequent exploitation of the Company’s tenements. Should these avenues be 
delayed or fail to materialise, the Consolidated Entity expects to have the ability to successfully raise additional funding through 
debt, equity or farmout / selldown to allow the Consolidated Entity to continue as a going concern and meet its debts as and when 
they fall due. 
 
Basis of Consolidation 
 
Subsidiaries are all those entities (including special purpose entities) over which the Company has control. The Consolidated Entity 
controls an entity when the Consolidated Entity is exposed, or has the rights, to variable returns from its involvement with the 
entity  and  has  the  ability  to  affect  those  returns  through  its  power  to  direct  the  activities  of  the  entity.  Subsidiaries  are  fully 
consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the consolidated entity. They are de-consolidated from the date that 
control ceases.
Page          54 
  Page          56 
  Page          57 
  Page          60 
  Page          61 
  Page          73 
  Page          78
44
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: 
About this report 
 
All intercompany balances and transactions, including unrealised profits arising from intragroup transactions have been eliminated. 
Unrealised  losses  are  also  eliminated  unless  the  transaction  provides  evidence  of  the  impairment  of  the  asset  transferred.  The 
financial statements of subsidiaries are prepared for the same reporting period as the parent, using consistent accounting policies. 
 
Non-controlling interests in the results and consolidated equity of subsidiaries are shown separately in the consolidated statement 
of profit or loss and other comprehensive income and statement of financial position respectively. Total comprehensive income is 
attributable to owners of Stanmore Coal Limited and non-controlling interests even if this results in the non-controlling interests 
having a debit balance. 
 
Other accounting policies 
 
Significant and other accounting policies that summarise the measurement basis used and are relevant to an understanding of the 
financial statements are provided throughout the notes to the financial statements. 
 
Foreign Currency Translation 
 
Transactions in foreign currencies are initially recorded in the functional currency by applying the exchange rate ruling at the date 
of the transaction. Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the rate of exchange ruling 
at the reporting date. Foreign exchange differences arising on translation are recognised in profit or loss. Non-monetary assets and 
liabilities that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rate as at the date of 
the initial transaction. 
 
The notes to the financial statements 
 
The  notes  include  information  which  is  required  to  understand  the  financial  statements  and  is  material  and  relevant  to  the 
operations, financial position and performance of the Consolidated Entity. Information is considered relevant and material if for 
example: 
- 
- 
-
the amount in question is significant because of its size or nature; 
it is important for understanding the results of the Consolidated Entity; 
it  helps  to  explain  the  impact  of  significant  changes  in  the  Consolidated  Entity’s  business  for  example,  acquisitions  and 
impairment write-downs; or 
it is related to an aspect of the Consolidated Entity’s operations that is important to its future performance.
45
The notes are organised into the following sections: 
 
-
Key  numbers:  provides  a  breakdown  of  individual  line  items  in  the  financial  statements  that  the  directors  consider  most 
relevant and summarises the accounting policies, judgments and estimates relevant to understanding these line items; 
Capital: provides information about the capital management practices of the Consolidated Entity and shareholder returns for 
the year; 
Risk:  discusses  the  Consolidated  Entity’s  exposure  to  various  financial  risks,  explains  how  these  affect  the  Consolidated 
Entity’s financial position and performance and what the Consolidated Entity does to manage these risks; 
Consolidated Entity structure: explains aspects of the Consolidated Entity structure and how changes (if any) have affected 
the financial position and performance of the Consolidated Entity; 
Unrecognised  items:  provides  information  about  items  that  are  not  recognised  in  the  financial  statements  but  could 
potentially have a significant impact on the Consolidated Entity’s financial position and performance; and 
Other:  provides  information  on  items  which  require  disclosure  to  comply  with  Australian  Accounting  Standards  and  other 
regulatory pronouncements.
-
-
-
-
-
-
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Key Numbers
Note
NOTE 1  REVENUE AND OTHER INCOME
2016 
$ ‘000
2015 
$ ‘000
- 
- 
 
 
- 
-
- 
298 
298
11,376 
2,465 
23,459
12,700 
12,700 
 
 
565 
9,053
Revenue 
Revenue from contracts with customers 
Total revenue  
 
Other income 
Gain on bargain purchase (refer note 28) 
Rehabilitation provision write-back (refer 
Note 15) 
Onerous contract write-back (refer Note 14) 
Other 
Total other income 
 
Recognition and measurement 
 
Revenue is measured at the fair value of consideration received or receivable. Amounts disclosed as revenue are net of returns, 
trade  allowances  and  duties  and  taxes  paid.  The  following  specific  recognition  criteria  must  also  be  met  before  revenue  is 
recognised: 
 
Contracts with Customers - Coal sales 
 
Revenue from the sale of coal is recognised in the profit or loss when the significant risks and rewards of ownership have been 
transferred to the buyer. Transfer of risk and rewards are considered to have passed to the buyer under the terms of the individual 
contracts. Typically the risk transfer occurs as the coal passes the ship rail when loading at the port. In the case of coal sold from 
Isaac Plains, all coal is exported through the Dalrymple Bay Coal Terminal and all coal sold during the financial year ending 30 June 
2016 was on a contracted ‘free on board’ basis.  
 
As is customary with free on board contracts, parameters such as coal quality and mass are tested using independent experts and 
weightometers as the vessel is being loaded. The bill of lading is only issued upon verification and confirmation from several parties 
involved with the logistic and handling process. Once confirmed, the measured parameters form the basis for calculation of final 
price on the commercial invoice. All customer contracts specify a known price and tolerance range for quality parameters prior to 
the Consolidated Entity committing to the supply of coal to the customer.  
 
Payment terms for coal customers range from letter of credit basis to up to 20 days from issuance of the commercial invoice. There 
were no breaches of payment terms noted during the financial year and contracts recognised as fulfilled and therefore receivable 
at 30 June 2016 have subsequently been receipted in July 2016 without issue. 
 
Gain on bargain purchase 
 
The gain on bargain purchase relates to the acquisition of the Isaac Plains Coal Mine in November 2015. The gain represents the 
difference between the fair value of consideration paid or payable and the fair value of the assets and liabilities acquired. Refer to 
Note 28 Business Combination for information on the purchase price allocation. 
 
Rehabilitation provision write-back 
 
The write-back of the rehabilitation provisions relates to a reduction in liability due to the transition from care and maintenance to 
operational status following completion of the acquisition of Isaac Plains and the maiden JORC reserve announcement for Isaac 
Plains East. Refer to Note 15 for further information. 
 
Onerous contract write-back 
 
The write-back of onerous contract provisions relates to the difference between initial recognition of contracts acquired, 
determined by the purchase price allocation, and the assessed business plan of the Company to utilise those contracts as at 30 June 
2016 following the maiden JORC reserve announcement for Isaac Plains East. Refer to Note 14 for further information.
46
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Key Numbers
Note
NOTE 2  COST OF SALES & OTHER EXPENSES
2016 
$ ‘000
2015 
$ ‘000
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
 
- 
 
 
4,369 
8,630
14,159 
1,548 
1,624 
602 
1,503 
5,164 
24,600 
 
 
1,632 
5,018 
6,650 
 
 
7,990 
-
PRODUCTION  COSTS 
Mining costs 
Processing Costs 
Transport & logistics 
State Royalties 
Production overheads 
Other costs 
Total production costs 
 
PRE-PRODUCTION MINING COSTS 
Site establishment 
Other costs 
Total pre-production costs 
 
OTHER EXPENSES 
Other expenses 
Provision for impairment – Exploration 
Asset (refer note 10(a)) 
Provision for impairment – Development 
Asset (refer note 10(b)) 
Total other expenses 
 
FINANCIAL EXPENSES 
Interest paid – external parties 
Borrowing costs 
Total financial expenses 
 
 
 
Recognition and measurement 
 
Production costs 
 
Production  costs  are  costs  incurred  directly  or  indirectly  relating  to  the  mining  and  preparation  of  coal  for  sale  to  third  party 
customers. Costs have been recognised on an accruals basis at the time the sale is recognised, in line with movements through 
inventory and survey information from site. Refer to Inventory in Note 7. 
 
Pre-production mining costs 
 
Pre-production  costs  relate  to  those  incurred  during  transition  from  care  &  maintenance  to  operations  at  the  Isaac  Plains  Coal 
Mine. The costs  represent all-in costs such as take-or-pay contractual commitments prior to first commercial production. Items 
have been recognised when incurred.
12,999 
 
 
1 
7 
8
21,873 
 
 
2,085 
1,052 
3,137
13,883
-
47
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Key Numbers 
 
Note 2: COST OF SALES & OTHER EXPENSES (continued) 
 
Other expenses 
 
Other expenses include the following specific items:
Note
2016 
$ ‘000
2015 
$ ‘000
9 
28 
31 
31
1,292 
2,538 
70 
3 
2,939 
138 
153
32 
- 
11 
195 
1,767 
124 
172
Depreciation 
Plant & equipment 
Acquisition costs on business combination 
Share-based payments (shares) 
Share-based payments (options) 
Employee benefits expense 
Superannuation expense 
Minimum lease payments made under 
operating lease 
 
 
 
Recognition and measurement 
 
Wages and Salaries, Annual Leave and Sick Leave 
 
Liabilities for wages and salaries, including non-monetary benefits, annual leave and accumulating sick leave expected to be settled 
within 12 months of the end of the reporting period are recognised in respect of employees' services rendered up to the end of the 
reporting period and are measured at amounts expected to be paid when the liabilities are settled. Liabilities for non-accumulating 
sick  leave  are  recognised  when  leave  is  taken  and  measured  at  the  actual  rates  paid  or  payable.    In  determining  the  liability, 
consideration is given to employee wage increases and the probability that the employee may satisfy vesting requirements. 
 
Operating leases 
 
The determination of whether an arrangement is or contains a lease is based on the substance of the arrangement and requires an 
assessment of whether the fulfilment of the arrangement is dependent on the use of a specific asset or assets and the arrangement 
conveys a right to use the asset. 
 
A distinction is made between finance leases, which effectively transfer from the lessor to the lessee substantially all the risks and 
benefits incidental to ownership of leased assets, and operating leases, under which the lessor effectively retains substantially all 
such risks and benefits. 
 
Finance leases are capitalised. A lease asset and liability are established at the fair value of the leases assets, or if lower, the present 
value of minimum lease payments. Lease payments are allocated between the principal component of the lease liability and the 
finance costs, so as to achieve a constant rate of interest on the remaining balance of the liability 
 
Lease assets acquired under a finance lease are depreciated over the asset’s useful life or over the shorter of the asset’s useful life 
and the lease term if there is no reasonable certainty that the consolidated entity will obtain ownership at the end of the lease 
term. 
 
Operating lease payments, net of any incentives received from the lessor, are charged to profit or loss on a straight-line basis over 
the term of the lease.
48
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Key Numbers
NOTE 3
INCOME TAX EXPENSE
Reconciliation 
Current income tax expense 
Deferred income tax expense 
Deferred income tax through equity 
Income tax expense/(benefit) 
 
The prima facie income tax on the loss is reconciled to the income tax expense as follows:
Prima facie tax benefit (30%) on loss before 
income tax 
 
Add tax effect of:
-  Permanent differences 
-  Deferred tax asset not recognised
Income tax expense/(benefit)
Recognised deferred tax assets and liabilities
Deferred tax assets 
Unused tax losses 
Deductible temporary differences 
 
Deferred tax liabilities 
Assessable temporary differences 
Deferred tax
Unrecognised deferred tax assets
Gross unused tax losses
2016 
$ ‘000
2015 
$ ‘000
- 
- 
- 
-
(5,924) 
 
 
2,622 
3,302 
-
8,485 
12,992 
21,477 
 
(21,477) 
-
44,495
- 
- 
- 
-
(3,646) 
 
 
(835) 
4,482 
-
11,722 
3,373 
15,095 
 
(15,095) 
-
35,583
Deferred tax assets not taken up at 30% 
(2015: 30%) 
 
In order to recoup carried forward losses in future periods, either the Continuity of Ownership Test (COT) or Same Business Test 
(SBT) must be passed. There are approximately $6.300 million SBT losses and $66.778 million in COT losses carried forward at 30 
June 2016. 
 
Deferred tax assets which have not been recognised as an asset, will only be obtained if:
13,349
10,675
(i)
the Consolidated Entity derives future assessable income of a nature and of an amount sufficient to enable the losses to 
be realised;
(ii)  the Consolidated Entity continues to comply with the conditions for deductibility imposed by the law; and  
(iii)  no changes in tax legislation adversely affect the Consolidated Entity in realising the losses.
Recognition and measurement 
 
The income tax expense for the period is the tax payable on the current period's taxable income based on the national income tax 
rate for each jurisdiction adjusted by changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities attributable to temporary differences between 
the tax base of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the financial statements, and to unused tax losses.
49
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Key Numbers 
 
Note 3: INCOME TAX (continued) 
 
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognised for all temporary differences, between carrying amounts of assets and liabilities 
for financial reporting purposes and their respective tax bases, at the tax rates expected to apply when the assets are recovered or 
liabilities settled, based on those tax rates which are enacted or substantively enacted for each jurisdiction. Exceptions are made 
for certain temporary differences arising on initial recognition of an asset or a liability if they arose in a transaction, other than a 
business combination, that at the time of the transaction did not affect either accounting profit or taxable profit. 
 
Deferred tax assets are only recognised for deductible temporary differences and  unused tax losses if it is probable that future 
taxable amounts will be available to utilise those temporary differences and losses. 
 
Deferred  tax  assets  and  liabilities  are  not  recognised  for  temporary  differences  between  the  carrying  amount  and  tax  bases  of 
investments in subsidiaries, associates and interests in joint ventures where the parent entity is able to control the timing of the 
reversal of the temporary differences and it is probable that the differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future. 
 
Current  and  deferred  tax  balances  relating  to  amounts  recognised  directly  in  other  comprehensive  income  and  equity  are  also 
recognised directly in other comprehensive income and equity, respectively. 
 
Amounts received under the Research & Development Tax Incentive Scheme are treated as an income tax benefit as it is effectively 
the  monetisation  of  future  tax  benefits.  These  amounts  are  recognised  in  the  period  in  which  they  are  received  as  there  is  no 
reliable method to measure or quantify the potential incentive at the end of the financial period to which the claim relates. 
 
Tax consolidation 
Stanmore Coal Limited and its wholly-owned subsidiaries have implemented the tax consolidation legislation for the whole of the 
financial year.  Stanmore Coal Limited is the head entity in the tax consolidated group. These entities are taxed as a single entity. 
The stand-alone taxpayer/separate taxpayer within a group approach has been used to allocate current income tax expense and 
deferred  tax  expense  to  wholly-owned  subsidiaries  that  form  part  of  the  tax  consolidated  group.  Stanmore  Coal  Limited  has 
assumed all the current tax liabilities and the deferred tax assets arising from unused tax losses for the tax consolidated group via 
intercompany  receivables  and  payables  because  a  tax  funding  arrangement  has  been  in  place  for  the  whole  financial  year.  The 
amounts receivable/payable under tax funding arrangements is due upon notification by the head entity, which is issued soon after 
the end of each financial year. Interim funding notices may also be issued by the head entity to its wholly-owned subsidiaries in 
order for the head entity to be able to pay tax instalments. These amounts are recognised as current intercompany receivables or 
payables.
NOTE 4  CASH & CASH EQUIVALENTS
2016 
$ ‘000
2015 
$ ‘000
15,199
12,080
Cash at bank and in hand 
Cash at bank bear floating and fixed interest rates between 1% and 2.25% (2015: 1% and 3.75%).  
 
Reconciliation of Cash 
The above figures are reconciled to the 
cash at the end of the financial year as 
shown in the consolidated statement of 
cash flows as follows: 
Balances as above  
Balances per consolidated statement of 
cash flows 
 
Cash and cash equivalents held at 30 June 2016, includes term deposits of $nil (2015: $13.400 million). Average maturity of 
term deposits was nil days (2015: 21 days)
12,080 
12,080
15,199 
15,199
50
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Key Numbers 
 
Note 4: CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS (continued) 
 
Recognition and measurement 
 
For  the  purposes  of  the  Consolidated Statement  of  Cash  Flows,  cash  and  cash  equivalents  includes  cash  on  hand  and  at  bank, 
deposits held at call with financial institutions, other short term, highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months 
or less, that are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and which are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value and 
bank overdrafts.
NOTE 5 RESTRICTED CASH
2016 
$ ‘000
2015 
$ ‘000
Restricted cash 
Restricted cash held at 30 June 2016 is an amount held on term deposit to cash-back a bank guarantee.  
 
Recognition and measurement 
 
Restricted  cash  includes  term  deposits  which  securitise  a  bank  guarantee  or  other  facility  provided  by  an  external  third  party 
lender. These amounts are not able to be converted to readily accessible cash without the consent of an external third party.
76
83
2016 
$ ‘000
2015 
$ ‘000
NOTE 6   CASH FLOW INFORMATION
(a) Reconciliation of profit/(loss) after income tax to net cash flow from operating activities 
Loss for the year 
Depreciation 
Amortisation 
Gain on bargain purchase 
Rehabilitation provision write-back 
Onerous contract write-back 
Contingent consideration write-back 
Impairment of exploration and 
evaluation expenditure 
Impairment of development assets 
Share-based payments expense 
Change in operating assets and liabilities:
- (Increase)/Decrease in trade and 
other receivables 
- (Increase)/Decrease in coal 
inventory 
- (Increase)/Decrease in other assets 
- Increase/(Decrease) in trade and 
other payables  
- Increase/(Decrease) in provisions 
for onerous contracts 
- Increase/(Decrease) in 
rehabilitation provisions
Net cash flow from operating activities
(19,746) 
1,292 
14 
(565) 
(9,053) 
(11,376) 
(400) 
-
13,883 
73 
 
(8,783)
(5,079)
(3,398) 
18,075
(8,371)
(139)
(33,573)
(12,148) 
32 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
8,630
- 
206 
 
77
-
5 
(259)
-
-
(3,457)
51
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Key Numbers 
 
 
Note 6: CASH FLOW INFORMATION (continued) 
 
(b) Non-cash  investing and financing activities 
 
With the exception of the business combination described in note 28, there were no non-cash investing or financing activities 
during the current year. (2015: nil activities).
NOTE 7 INVENTORY
Current 
Coal stocks at lower of cost or net 
realisable value 
Inventory 
Coal stocks include run of mine and product coal.
2016 
$ ‘000
5,079
5,079
2015 
$ ‘000
-
-
Recognition and measurement 
 
 
Inventories are measured at the lower of cost and net realisable value. Net realisable value is the estimate selling price in the 
ordinary course of business, less the estimate costs of completion and selling expenses. 
 
The cost of coal inventories is determined using a direct costing basis. Costs include blasting, overburden removal, coal mining, 
processing, labour, transport and other costs which are directly related to mining activities at site. 
 
Inventories are classified as follows:
The Consolidated Entity does not capitalise the value of overburden removed to allow access to coal seams.
-
-
run of mine material extracted through the mining process and awaiting processing at the coal handling and preparation 
plant 
product coal which has been processed into final saleable form. Product coal may be held at the site or at port shared 
stockpile facilities awaiting delivery to customers
52
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Key Numbers
NOTE 8 TRADE & OTHER RECEIVABLES
2016 
$ ‘000
2015 
$ ‘000
Current 
GST receivable 
Trade receivables 
Vendor receivable 
Sundry receivables 
 
 
Non-Current 
Vendor receivable 
 
 
No receivables balances are past due or impaired at the end of the reporting period.  Sundry receivables reflect interest 
receivable in relation to $nil of term deposits held as at 30 June 2016 (2015: $13.400 million) with various financial 
institutions.
757 
11,633 
9,895 
- 
22,285
738 
738
152 
- 
- 
34 
186
- 
-
Recognition and measurement 
 
 
Trade  receivables  are  recognised  at  original  invoice  amounts  less  an  allowance  for  uncollectible  amounts  and  have  repayment 
terms between 30 and 90 days. Collectability of trade receivables is assessed on an ongoing basis. Debts which are known to be 
uncollectible  are  written  off.  An  allowance  is  made  for  doubtful  debts  where  there  is  objective  evidence  that  the  Consolidated 
Entity  will  not  be  able  to  collect  all  amounts  due  according  to  the  original  terms.    Objective  evidence  of  impairment  includes 
financial  difficulties  of  the  debtor,  default  payments  or  debts  more  than  180  days  overdue.  On  confirmation  that  the  trade 
receivable will not be collectible the gross carrying value of the asset is written off against the associated provision. 
 
From time to time, the Consolidated Entity elects to renegotiate the terms of trade receivables due from customers with which it 
has previously had a good trading history. Such renegotiations will lead to changes in the timing of payments rather than changes 
to the amounts owed and are not, in the view of the Directors, sufficient to require the derecognition of the original instrument. 
 
GST 
 
Revenues, expenses and assets are recognised net of GST except where GST incurred on a purchase of goods and services is not 
recoverable from the taxation authority, in which case the GST is recognised as part of the cost of acquisition of the asset or as part 
of the expense item. 
 
Receivables and payables are stated with the amount of GST included. The net amount of GST recoverable from, or payable to, the 
taxation authority is included as part of receivables or payables in the consolidated statement of financial position. 
 
Cash flows are included in the consolidated statement of cash flows on a gross basis and the GST component of cash flows arising 
from investing and financing activities, which is recoverable from, or payable to, the taxation authority, are classified as operating 
cash flows. 
Commitments and contingencies are disclosed net of the amount of GST recoverable from, or payable to, the taxation authority.
53
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Key Numbers
2016 
$ ‘000
2015 
$ ‘000
NOTE 9  PROPERTY, PLANT & EQUIPMENT
Land deposit 
At cost
Plant and equipment
At cost 
Accumulated depreciation
Buildings and improvements
At cost 
Accumulated depreciation
Computer equipment
At cost 
Accumulated depreciation
Furniture and office equipment
At cost 
Accumulated depreciation
Capital work in progress
At cost 
Accumulated depreciation
Total property plant and equipment
1,946
30,035 
(1,115) 
28,920
1,398 
(133) 
1,265
111 
(94) 
17
162 
(162) 
-
1,297 
-
1,297
33,445
Movements in carrying amounts
1,946
17 
(12) 
5
- 
- 
-
105 
(92) 
13
139 
(108) 
31
- 
-
-
1,995
Capital 
work in 
progress 
$’000
-
-
Total
$ ‘000 
1,995
23,765
1,297
8,978
- 
1,297
(1,293) 
33,445
54
Furniture 
and office 
equipment
Land 
Deposit
Plant and 
equipment
Buildings and 
improvements
Computer 
equipment
$ ‘000 
1,946
-
-
- 
1,946
$ ‘000
$ ‘000
$ ‘000
$ ‘000
5
22,367
7,651
(1,103) 
28,920
-
1,398
-
(133) 
1,265
13
-
6
(2) 
17
31
-
23
(54) 
-
2016
Balance at the beginning of the 
year 
Additions – through business 
combination (Note 28) 
Additions – through ordinary 
course 
Depreciation expense 
Carrying amount at the end of 
the year
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Key Numbers 
 
NOTE 9  PROPERTY, PLANT & EQUIPMENT (continued)
Total
$ ‘000 
2,010 
17 
(32) 
1,995
$ ‘000 
1,946 
- 
- 
1,946
2015
Land 
Deposit
Plant and 
equipment
Buildings and 
improvements
Computer 
equipment
$ ‘000
$ ‘000
$ ‘000
Furniture 
and office 
equipment
$ ‘000
8 
3 
(6) 
5
47 
- 
(16) 
31
9 
14 
(10) 
13
Balance at the beginning of the year 
Additions 
Depreciation expense 
Carrying amount at the end of the 
year 
 
Recognition and measurement 
 
Property, plant and equipment are measured on the cost basis less depreciation and impairment losses. 
 
The cost of fixed assets constructed within the Consolidated Entity includes the cost of materials, direct labour, borrowing costs 
and an appropriate portion of fixed and variable costs. 
 
Subsequent costs are included in the asset’s carrying amount or recognised as a separate asset, as appropriate, only when it is 
probable that future economic benefits associated with the item will flow to the Consolidated Entity and the cost of the item can 
be measured reliably.  All other repairs and maintenance are charged to profit or loss during the financial period in which they are 
incurred. 
 
Depreciation 
The  depreciable  amount  of  all  non-mining  property  fixed  assets  is  depreciated  over  their  useful  life  to  the  Consolidated  Entity 
commencing from the time the asset is held ready for use. Mining property fixed assets are depreciated on a units of production 
basis over the life of the economically recoverably reserves. The estimate is based on 14.2Mt of run-of-mine open cut coal within 
the mine plan for Isaac Plains and Isaac Plains East. This is supported by an open cut JORC Recoverable Reserve of 15.3Mt across 
the Isaac Plains Complex. 
 
The depreciation rates used for each class of assets are:
Class of Fixed Asset 
Plant and Equipment 
Computer Equipment 
Furniture and Office Equipment 
Buildings & Improvements
Depreciation Rate 
10 – 25% Straight Line / Units of Production 
33.3% Straight Line 
5 - 10% Straight Line 
5 - 10% Straight Line
The assets’ residual values and useful lives are reviewed, and adjusted if appropriate, at the end of each reporting period. 
 
Gains and losses on disposal are determined by comparing proceeds with the carrying amount.  The gains and losses are included in 
profit or loss. 
 
Impairment 
 
At  the  end  of  each  reporting  period  the  Consolidated  Entity  assesses  whether  there  is  any  indication  that  property,  plant  & 
equipment l assets are impaired. Where impairment indicators exist, recoverable amount is determined and impairment losses are 
recognised in profit or loss where the asset's carrying value exceeds its recoverable amount. Recoverable amount is the higher of 
an asset's fair value less costs to sell and value in use. For the purpose of assessing value in use, the estimated future cash flows are 
discounted to their present value using a pre-tax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money 
and the risks specific to the asset. 
 
Where it is not possible to estimate recoverable amount for an individual asset, the Consolidated Entity estimates the recoverable 
amount of the cash-generating unit to which the asset belongs. 
 
Key judgements – property, plant & equipment 
 
The  Consolidated  Entity  performs  regular  reviews  on  property,  plant  and  equipment  to  determine  the  appropriateness  of 
classification  and  methodology  to  apply  depreciation.  The  methodology  and  rate  of  depreciation  is  assessed  with  reference  to 
residual values and useful lives .
55
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Key Numbers
2016 
$ ‘000
2015 
$ ‘000
NOTE 10  (a) EXPLORATION AND EVALUATION ASSETS
Non-Current 
Exploration and evaluation expenditure capitalised 
- exploration and evaluation phases
23,584
21,565
Recoverability of the carrying amount of exploration and evaluation assets is dependent on the successful development and 
commercial exploitation of coal, or alternatively, sale of the respective areas of interest.
Movements in carrying amounts
Balance at the beginning of the year 
Additions 
Written-off 
 
Provision for impairment 
Carrying amount at the end of the year 
 
Movements in provision for impairment 
amounts 
Balance at the beginning of the year 
Provisions (raised) / released 
Provision for impairment at the end of 
the year
30,195 
2,019 
(2,430) 
29,784 
(6,200) 
23,584
(8,630) 
2,430 
(6,200)
29,713 
482 
- 
30,195 
(8,630) 
21,565
- 
(8,630) 
(8,630)
Commitments for exploration and evaluation expenditure are disclosed in Note 23. 
 
Recognition and measurement 
 
Exploration and evaluation expenditure incurred is accumulated in respect of each identifiable area of interest.  Such expenditures 
comprise  net  direct  costs  and  an  appropriate  portion  of  related  overhead  expenditure  but  do  not  include  overheads  or 
administration expenditure not having a specific nexus with a particular area of interest.  These costs are only carried forward to 
the extent that they are expected to be recouped through the successful development of the area or where activities in the area 
have  not  yet  reached  a  stage  which  permits  reasonable  assessment  of  the  existence  of  economically  recoverable  reserves  and 
active or significant operations in relation to the area are continuing. 
 
A regular review has been undertaken on each area of interest to determine the appropriateness of continuing to carry forward 
costs in relation to that area of interest.  Accumulated costs in relation to an abandoned area are written off in full against profit in 
the year in which the  decision to abandon the area is made. Where an  uncertainty exists for further exploration of the area, a 
provision is raised for the costs of exploration. 
 
When  production  commences,  the  accumulated  costs  for  the  relevant  area  of  interest  are  amortised  over  the  life  of  the  area 
according to the rate of depletion of the economically recoverable reserves. 
 
Costs of site restoration are provided over the life of the facility from when exploration commences and are included in the costs of 
that stage.  Site restoration costs include the dismantling and removal of mining plant, equipment and building structure, waste 
removal,  and  rehabilitation  of  the  site  in  accordance  with  clauses  of  mining  permits.    Such  costs  have  been  determined  using 
estimates of future costs, current legal requirements and technology on an undiscounted basis. 
 
Any changes in the estimates for the costs are accounted on a prospective basis.  In determining the costs of site restoration, there 
is  uncertainty  regarding  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  restoration  due  to  community  expectations  and  future  legislation.  
Accordingly the costs have been determined on the basis that restoration will be completed within one year of abandoning the site.
56
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Key Numbers 
 
NOTE 10  (a) EXPLORATION AND EVALUATION ASSETS (continued)
Key judgements – exploration & evaluation assets 
 
The Consolidated Entity performs regular reviews on each area of interest to determine the appropriateness of continuing to 
carry forward costs in relation to that area of interest.  While there are certain areas of interest from which no reserves have 
been extracted, the Directors are of the continued belief that such expenditure should not be written off since feasibility studies 
in such areas  have not yet concluded.  Such capitalised expenditure is carried at the  end of the reporting period at $23.584 
million (2015: $21.565 million).
2016 
$ ‘000
2015 
$ ‘000
7,175
NOTE 10  (b) CAPITALISED DEVELOPMENT COSTS 
Non-Current 
 
20,108 
Capitalised development costs 
Recoverability of the carrying amount of development assets is dependent on the successful completion of development 
activities, or alternatively, sale of the respective areas of interest. 
 
Movements in carrying amounts 
Balance at the beginning of the year 
Other additions 
 
Provision for impairment 
Carrying amount at the end of the year 
 
Movements in provision for impairment 
amounts 
Balance at the beginning of the year 
Provisions raised 
Provision for impairment at the end of 
the year
20,108 
950 
21,058 
(13,883) 
7,175
20,022 
86 
20,108 
- 
20,108
- 
(13,883) 
(13,883)
- 
- 
-
Recognition and measurement 
 
Development  expenditures  on  an  individual  project  are  recognised  as  an  intangible  asset  when  the  Consolidated  Entity  can 
demonstrate: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Following  initial  recognition  of  the  development  expenditures  as  an  asset,  the  asset  is  carried  at  cost  less  any  accumulated 
amortisation and accumulated impairment losses. Amortisation of the asset begins when development is complete and the asset is 
available for use.  During the period of development, the asset is tested for impairment annually.
the technical feasibility of completing the intangible asset so that it will be available for use or sale; 
its intention to complete and its ability to use or sell the asset; 
how the asset will generate future economic benefits; 
the availability of resources to complete the asset; and 
the ability to measure reliability the expenditure during development.
Key judgements – fair value of development costs 
 
Development costs are capitalised in accordance with the accounting policy above.  Initial capitalisation of costs is based 
on  management’s  judgement  that  technological  and  economic  feasibility  is  confirmed,  usually  when  a  PFS  has  been 
completed.  In determining the amounts to be capitalised, management makes assumptions regarding the expected future 
cash  generating  potential  of  the  Project,  discount  rates  to  be  applied  and  the  expected  period  of  which  cashflows  are 
expected to be received.  As at 30 June 2016, the carrying amount of capitalised developments costs was $7,175k (2015: 
$20,108k). This amount relates wholly to The Range Project located in the Surat Basin. A provision for impairment totalling 
$13,883k has been raised in the current period to reflect the uncertain commercialisation potential of The Range given the 
current coal market greenfield project environment and infrastructure constraints. The directors have raised a provision to 
reduce the carrying value to a level that is supportable by current transactional activity in the sector over the last year. In 
making this assessment the directors have had regard to the comparable features of observed transactions and aligned the 
remaining carried value to the lower end of the implied transaction range ($0.025 per Resource tonne).
57
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Key Numbers
NOTE 11  INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Infrastructure intangible asset 
At cost 
Accumulated amortisation
Movements in carrying amounts 
2016
Balance at the beginning of the year 
Additions – through business combination (Note 28) 
Additions – through ordinary course 
Amortisation expense 
Carrying amount at the end of the year
2015 
$ ‘000
2016 
$ ‘000
4,800 
(14) 
4,786
Infrastructure intangible
$ ‘000
- 
- 
-
- 
4,800 
- 
(14) 
4,786
Impairment of Assets 
 
At  the  end  of  each  reporting  period  the  Consolidated  Entity  assesses  whether  there  is  any  indication  that  individual  assets  are 
impaired. Where impairment indicators exist, recoverable amount is determined and impairment losses are recognised in profit or 
loss where the asset's carrying value exceeds its recoverable amount. Recoverable amount is the higher of an asset's fair value less 
costs to sell and value in use. For the purpose of assessing value in use, the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their 
present  value  using  a  pre-tax  discount  rate  that  reflects  current  market  assessments  of  the  time  value  of  money  and  the  risks 
specific to the asset. 
 
Where it is not possible to estimate recoverable amount for an individual asset, the Consolidated Entity estimates the recoverable 
amount of the cash-generating unit to which the asset belongs.  
 
Intangible Assets 
 
The infrastructure intangible asset relates to future rebates on the cost of coal railings based on an agreement with the below rail 
infrastructure owner. The asset was recognised upon acquisition of the Isaac Plains Coal Mine (refer Note 28). Receipts of coal 
railing rebates are recognised in profit or loss. The estimated useful life of the asset is aligned with the term of the contractual 
agreement and is amortised on a straight-line basis over the life in accordance with the anticipated profile of benefits received.
58
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Key Numbers
NOTE 12  OTHER ASSETS
Current 
Prepayments
Non-Current 
Security deposits
NOTE 13  TRADE & OTHER PAYABLES
Current 
Trade and other payables 
Sundry payables and accrued expenses 
Employee benefits
2016 
$ ‘000
2,845 
2,845
181 
181
2015 
$ ‘000
11 
11
156 
156
2016 
$ ‘000
8,377 
13,444 
731 
22,552
2015 
$ ‘000
341 
117 
87 
545
Recognition and measurement 
 
Trade and other payables represent liabilities for goods and services provided to the Consolidated Entity prior to the year end and 
which are unpaid. These amounts are unsecured and have 7 – 60 day payment terms. They are recognised initially at fair value and 
subsequently  measured  at  amortised  cost  using  the  effective  interest  method.  No  assets  of  the  Consolidated  Entity  have  been 
pledged as security for the trade and other payables. 
 
After initial recognition, loans and borrowings are subsequently recognised at amortised cost.
59
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Key Numbers
NOTE 14  Onerous Contracts Provision
Current 
Current onerous contract provision 
 
Non-Current 
Non-current onerous contract provision 
 
Total onerous contracts provision 
 
Reconciliation of movements 
Opening balance 
Additions – business combination 
recognition (refer note 28) 
Depletions through settlement 
Depletion through re-measurement 
Closing balance
2016 
$ ‘000
5,153 
 
 
21,576 
 
26,729 
 
 
- 
49,800
(11,695) 
(11,376) 
26,729
2015 
$ ‘000
- 
 
 
 
 
- 
 
 
- 
-
- 
 
-
Recognition and measurement 
 
The provision for onerous contracts relates to the transaction to acquire the Isaac Plains Coal Mine which completed in November 
2015. The Company acquired various long term contracts necessary for mining activities at Isaac Plains including rail haulage, port 
allocations,  water  supply,  electricity  supply  and  accommodation.  Based  on  the initial  Isaac  Plains  mine  plan,  a  portion  of  these 
contracts were estimated to be underutilised and the fixed charges incurred above the deemed requirement was recognised as an 
onerous  contract  liability.  The  fair  value  of  onerous  contracts  at  acquisition  was  estimated  by  calculating  the  present  value  of 
expected  future  cash  outflows  for  the  onerous  portion  of  each contract,  discounted  at  a  rate  reflecting  the  risk  profile  of  each 
contract. Excluding the assessed onerous portion of the contracts already recognised in the balance sheet, the minimum payments 
required under the identified contracts is approximately $110 million (undiscounted). These payments are expected to be met as 
part of normal operational expenditure at Isaac Plains and Isaac Plains East in the coming years. 
 
In the period from acquisition through to 30 June 2016, a number of onerous contracts have been settled through the ordinary 
course of business. The onerous position at 30 June 2016 has been re-measured for all contracts having regard to the latest internal 
Isaac Plains mine plan. In addition, Coal Reserves within Isaac Plains East have been factored into the measurement for the first 
time given the anticipated transition of open cut mining activities to Isaac Plains East at the completion of the current 3 year open 
cut within Isaac Plains. The JORC compliant Reserves report was released on the ASX 6 April 2016, noting sufficient Reserves for 
approximately 7 years of mining at an annual ROM production rate of 1.5Mtpa. The inclusion of Isaac Plains East production has 
reduced the assessed onerous portion of these contracts with the movement recognised in the profit or loss. 
 
Key estimates – onerous contracts 
 
The Consolidated Entity assesses onerous contracts at each reporting date by evaluating conditions specific to each contract and 
the then-current business plan.  Where a contract provides capacity above that required to meet the business plan or for a longer 
period than the current extent of the business plan, the contract is deemed onerous and the onerous portion of the contract is 
recognised  as  a  liability  using  an  estimate  of  future  onerous  cashflows  discounted  to  a  net  present  value.  The  release  of  the 
maiden JORC reserve for Isaac Plains East in April 2016, and the subsequent extension to the mine life and planned production of 
the Isaac Plains Complex has reduced the onerous portion of a number of contracts. Any remeasurement of the assessed level of 
onerous contracts is taken through profit or loss in the period in which the assessment is made. During the year a total of $7,920k 
of onerous contracts were settled through payment and $3,775k is recognised in trade and other payables, with $11,376k taken 
through profit or loss due to the re-assessment in onerous contract liability for the inclusion of Isaac Plains East in the mine plan.
60
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Key Numbers
2016 
$ ‘000
NOTE 15  Rehabilitation Provision
Current 
Current rehabilitation provision 
 
Non-Current 
Non-current rehabilitation provision 
 
–Total rehabilitation liability 
 
Reconciliation of movements  
Opening balance 
Additions – business combination 
Less re-measurement 
Closing balance
1,687 
 
 
22,221 
 
23,908 
 
 
- 
33,100 
(9,192) 
23,908
2015 
$ ‘000
- 
 
 
 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
- 
 
-
Recognition and measurement 
 
The provision for rehabilitation closure costs relates to areas disturbed during operation of the mine up to reporting date and not 
yet  rehabilitated.  Provision  has  been  made  to  rehabilitate  all  areas  of  disturbance  including  surface  infrastructure,  contouring, 
topsoiling and revegetation, using internal and external expert assessment of each aspect to calculate an anticipated cash outflow 
discounted to a net present value. At each reporting date the rehabilitation liability is re-measured in line with the then-current 
level of disturbances, cost estimates and other key inputs. The amount of provision relating to rehabilitation of areas caused by 
mining disturbance is recognised in profit or loss as incurred. 
 
 
Key estimates – rehabilitation provision 
 
The Consolidated Entity assesses rehabilitation liabilities at each reporting date as there are numerous factors that may affect the 
ultimate  liability  payable.  This  includes,  but  is  not  limited  to,  the  extent  and  nature  of  rehabilitation  activity  to  be  undertaken, 
changes in technology and techniques, changes in discount rates and regulatory impacts. There may be differences between the 
future actual expenditure and the assessment made at the balance date. The provisions at balance date represent management’s 
best estimate of the present value of rehabilitation cost to completely rehabilitate the site. 
 
During FY16 the rehabilitation liability relating to the Isaac Plains Coal Mine was recognised upon completion of the acquisition in 
November 2015. The rehabilitation obligation at the time of acquisition related to the mine in a care & maintenance phase. Since 
completing the acquisition, the Consolidated Entity submitted a plan of operations with the relevant State government department 
which was accepted in January 2016. This revised operating plan changes the assessed value of rehabilitation liability based on the 
key inputs into the operational timeline and contemporary cost estimates. The release of the maiden JORC reserve for Isaac Plains 
East in April 2016, and the subsequent extension to the mine life of the Isaac Plains Complex, has extended the operational timeline 
for the majority of the rehabilitation activities. The reduction in the rehabilitation provision of $9,192k (2015: $nil) is recognised in 
profit or loss in the financial year ending 30 June 2016.
61
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Risk (continued)
2016 
$ ‘000
2015 
$ ‘000
NOTE 16 ACCUMULATED LOSSES
Accumulated losses attributable to 
members of Stanmore Coal Limited at 
beginning of the financial year 
Losses after income tax 
Accumulated losses attributable to 
members of Stanmore Coal Limited at 
the end of the financial year
NOTE 17 DIVIDENDS & FRANKING CREDITS
There were no dividends paid or recommended during the financial year. 
There are no franking credits available to the shareholders of Stanmore Coal Limited.
NOTE 18 EARNINGS PER SHARE 
Earnings 
Loss attributable to owners of Stanmore Coal Limited used to 
calculate basic and diluted earnings per share
Weighted average number of ordinary shares used as the 
denominator in calculating basic earnings per share 
Adjustments for calculation of diluted earnings per share:
-
Options *
(42,914)
(19,746)
(62,660)
(30,766)
(12,148)
(42,914)
2016 
$ ‘000
(19,746)
2016
Number
‘000
222,497
-
2015 
$ ‘000
(12,148)
2015
Number
‘000
210,640
-
210,640
222,497
options are considered anti-dilutive as the Consolidated Entity is loss making.  Options could potentially dilute earnings per share in the 
future.  Refer to note 31 for details of options granted as at 30 June 2016.
Weighted average number of ordinary shares and potential 
ordinary shares used as the denominator in calculating diluted 
earnings per share 
 
*  
 
 
Recognition and measurement 
 
Basic earnings per share 
Basic  earnings  per  share  is  calculated  by  dividing  the  profit  attributable  to  owners  of  Stanmore  Coal  Limited  by  the  weighted 
average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the financial year, adjusted for bonus elements in ordinary shares issued 
during the year.  
 
Diluted earnings per share 
Earnings used to calculate diluted earnings per share are calculated by adjusting the amount used in determining basic earnings per 
share  by  the  after-tax  effect  of dividends  and  interest  associated  with  dilutive  potential  ordinary  shares.  The  weighted  average 
number of shares used is adjusted for the weighted average number of shares assumed to have been issued for no consideration in 
relation to dilutive potential ordinary shares.
62
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Risk (continued)
2016 
$ ‘000
NOTE 19  ISSUED CAPITAL
222,497,435 fully paid ordinary 
shares (2015: 222,497,435) 
Share issue costs
2016
Number
2015
Number
2015 
$ ‘000
101,246
(3,878) 
97,368
101,246
(3,878) 
97,368
2016 
$ ‘000
2015 
$ ‘000
97,368 
- 
- 
97,368
88,359 
9,027 
(18) 
97,368
209,124,058 
13,373,377 
- 
222,497,435
222,497,435 
- 
- 
222,497,435
(a) Ordinary shares 
At the beginning of the year 
-  4 May 2015 (1) 
Share issue costs 
At reporting date 
 
 
(1) On 4 May 2015, 13,373,377 Convertible Notes held by Greatgroup Investments Limited was converted into ordinary shares of 
the Company at a ratio of 1:1 
 
Ordinary shares participate in dividends and the proceeds on winding up of the Consolidated Entity in proportion to the number of 
shares held. At shareholders meetings each ordinary share is entitled to one vote when a poll is called, otherwise each shareholder 
has one vote on a show of hands. 
Ordinary shares have no par value and Stanmore Coal Limited does not have a limited amount of authorised capital. 
  
 
 (b) Options, Performance Rights and Convertible notes
For information relating to the Stanmore Coal Limited employee option plan, including details of options issued, exercised and 
lapsed during the financial year and the options outstanding at year-end refer to the Remuneration Report which is contained 
within the Directors’ Report.
For  information  relating  to  the  Stanmore  Coal  Limited  performance  rights,  including  details  of  rights  issued,  exercised  and 
lapsed during the financial year and the performance rights outstanding at year-end refer to the Remuneration Report which is 
contained within the Directors’ Report. 
During the year ended 30 June 2016, 2,000k options held by employees of the company expired due to expiration of the options 
in accordance with the terms.  
 
All options on issue at 30 June 2016 were as follows:
Number of 
options 
2,766,000 
2,766,000
Exercise price
$0.22
Expiry date
4 September 2017
63
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Risk (continued) 
 
NOTE 19  ISSUED CAPITAL (continued) 
(c)  Capital Management
The capital of the Consolidated Entity is managed in order to provide capital growth to shareholders and ensure the Consolidated 
Entity can fund its operations and continue as a going concern. 
The Consolidated Entity’s capital comprises equity as shown in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.   There are no 
externally imposed capital requirements. 
Management manages the Consolidated Entity’s capital by assessing the Consolidated Entity’s financial risks and adjusting its 
capital structure in response to changes in these risks and the market.  These responses include the management of share issues 
and debt. 
There have been no changes in the strategy adopted by management to control the capital of the Consolidated Entity since the 
prior year other than the need to limit dilution arising from our issuances of capital at low share prices. 
 
(d) Recognition and measurement 
 
Ordinary shares are classified as equity. Costs directly attributable to the issue of new shares or options are shown as a deduction 
from the equity proceeds, net of any income tax benefit.
NOTE 20 OPTION RESERVE
2016 
$ ‘000
2015 
$ ‘000
286
3,582
436 
4,304
64
Option Reserve – capital raising 
Option Reserve – Director, executive 
and employee options 
Option Reserve – other options 
 
 
The option reserve records the value of options issued as part of capital raisings, as well as expenses relating to Director, 
executive and employee share options.
436 
4,377
3,655
286
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Risk (continued)
NOTE 21  FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
(a) General objectives, policies and processes
In common with all other businesses, the Consolidated Entity is exposed to risks that arise from its use of financial instruments.  
This note describes the Consolidated Entity’s objectives, policies and processes for managing those risks and the methods used 
to measure them.  Further quantitative information in respect of these risks is presented throughout these financial statements.
There  have  been  no  substantive  changes  in  the  Consolidated  Entity’s  exposure  to  financial  instrument  risks,  its  objectives, 
policies and processes for managing those risks or the methods used to measure them from previous periods unless otherwise 
stated in this note.
The  Consolidated  Entity’s  financial  instruments  consist  mainly  of  deposits  with  banks,  trade  and  other  receivables,  security 
deposits and trade and other payables.
The Board has overall responsibility for the determination of the Consolidated Entity’s risk management objectives and policies 
and, whilst retaining ultimate responsibility for them, it has delegated the authority for designing and operating processes that 
ensure  the  effective  implementation  of  the  objectives  and  policies  to  the  Consolidated  Entity’s  finance  function.    The 
Consolidated Entity’s risk management policies and objectives are therefore designed to minimise the potential impacts of these 
risks on the results of the Consolidated Entity where such impacts may be material.
The  overall  objective  of  the  Board  is  to  set  polices  that  seek  to  reduce  risk  as  far  as  possible  without  unduly  affecting  the 
Consolidated Entity’s competitiveness and flexibility.  Further details regarding these policies are set out below: 
 
(b) Credit Risk
Credit  risk  is  the  risk  that  the  other  party  to  a  financial  instrument  will  fail  to  discharge  their  obligation  resulting  in  the 
Consolidated  Entity  incurring  a  financial  loss.  This  usually  occurs  when  debtors  fail  to  settle  their  obligations  owing  to  the 
Consolidated Entity.  The Consolidated Entity’s objective is to minimise the risk of loss from credit risk exposure.
The Consolidated Entity’s maximum exposure to credit risk at the end of the reporting period, without taking into account the 
value of any collateral or other security, in the event other parties fail to perform their obligations under financial instruments in 
relation to each class of recognised financial asset at reporting date, is as follows:
Note
Cash and cash equivalents 
Restricted cash 
Receivables 
Security deposits and debt service 
reserve
2016 
$ ‘000
12,080 
76 
23,023
181
35,360
2015 
$ ‘000
15,199 
83 
186
156
15,624
Credit risk is reviewed regularly by the Board and the audit committee.    
The Consolidated Entity does not have any material credit risk exposure to any single debtor or group of debtors under financial 
instruments entered into by the Consolidated Entity except for $12.956m recognised within receivables at reporting date due 
from a vendor of the Isaac Plains Coal Mine. All payments due from the vendor during the financial year have been made within 
payment terms and the Consolidated Entity is not aware of any information that would indicate the ability to pay the balance of 
the debt is impaired. No receivables balances were past due or impaired at year end.  The credit quality of receivables that are 
neither  past  due  nor  impaired  is  good.  Bank  deposits  are  held  with  National  Australia  Bank  Limited  and  Westpac  Banking 
Corporation.
65
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Risk (continued) 
 
NOTE 21  FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT (continued) 
 (c) Liquidity Risk
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Consolidated Entity may encounter difficulties raising funds to meet financial obligations as they 
fall  due.    The  object  of  managing  liquidity  risk  is  to  ensure,  as  far  as  possible,  that  the  Consolidated  Entity  will  always  have 
sufficient  liquidity  to  meets  its  liabilities  when  they  fall  due,  under  both  normal  and  stressed  conditions.    Liquidity  risk  is 
reviewed regularly by the Board and the Audit & Risk Management Committee. 
The Consolidated Entity manages liquidity risk by monitoring forecast cash flows and liquidity ratios such as working capital.  The 
Consolidated Entity’s working capital, being current assets less current liabilities has decreased from $14.934 million in 2015 to 
$12.793 million in 2016.  As outlined Note 1, the ability for the Company to deliver on its strategic and operational objectives is 
dependent upon the mining operations of the Isaac Plains Coal Mine and supporting funding avenues such as debt, equity or 
farm-out, or the successful exploration and subsequent exploitation of the Consolidated Entity’s tenements.
Carrying 
Amount 
$ ‘000
Contractual 
Cash flows
<6 months
$ ‘000
$ ‘000
6 – 12 
months 
$ ‘000
1 – 3 years
>3 years
$ ‘000
$ ‘000
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
-
1 – 3 years
$ ‘000
- 
- 
-
>3 years
$ ‘000
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
-
8,377 
14,175 
22,552
<6 months
$ ‘000
341 
204 
545
6 – 12 
months 
$ ‘000
MATURITY ANALYSIS – CONSOLIDATED – 2016 
Financial Liabilities 
- 
Trade payables 
-  Other payables
8,377 
14,175 
22,552
Contractual 
Cash flows
$ ‘000
8,377 
14,175 
22,552
Carrying 
Amount 
$ ‘000
341 
204 
545
341 
204 
545
MATURITY ANALYSIS – CONSOLIDATED – 2015 
Financial Liabilities 
- 
Trade payables 
-  Other payables 
 
 
Further information regarding commitments is included in Note 23.
66
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Risk (continued) 
 
NOTE 21 FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT (continued)
(d) Market Risk
Market risk arises from the use of interest bearing, tradable and foreign currency financial instruments.  It is the risk that the fair 
value or future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate because of changes in interest rates (interest rate risk), foreign 
exchange rates (currency risk) or other market factors (other price risk).  The consolidated entity does not have any material 
exposure to market risk other than as set out below.
Interest rate risk
Interest rate risk arises principally from cash and cash equivalents.  The objective of interest rate risk management is to manage 
and control interest rate risk exposures within acceptable parameters while optimising the return.
Interest rate risk is managed with a mixture of fixed and floating rate investments.  For further details on interest rate risk refer 
to the tables below:
Financial assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Restricted cash 
Receivables 
Security deposits 
Total financial assets 
Financial liabilities 
Trade payables 
Other payables 
Total financial liabilities
Floating interest
rate  Fixed interest rate
Non-interest 
bearing
2016 
$ ‘000 
 
12,080 
- 
- 
- 
12,080 
 
- 
- 
-
2016 
$‘000 
 
- 
76 
- 
- 
76 
 
- 
- 
-
2016 
$‘000 
 
- 
- 
23,023 
181 
23,204 
 
8,377 
14,175 
22,552
Total carrying amount as 
per the consolidated 
statement of financial 
position 
2016 
$‘000 
 
12,080 
76 
23,023 
181 
35,360 
 
8,377 
14,175 
22,552
Weighted average 
effective interest rate
2016 
% 
 
1.88 
3.11 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
-
Weighted average 
effective interest rate
Floating interest
rate  Fixed interest rate
Non-interest 
bearing
Financial assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Restricted cash 
Receivables 
Security deposits 
Total financial assets 
Financial liabilities 
Trade payables 
Other payables 
Total financial liabilities 
 
 
The  Consolidated  Entity  has  performed  a  sensitivity  analysis  relating  to  its  exposure  to  interest  rate  risk.    This  sensitivity 
demonstrates the effect on the current year results and equity which could result from a change in these risks.
2015 
$ ‘000 
 
1,849 
- 
- 
- 
1,849 
 
- 
- 
-
2015 
$ ‘000 
 
13,350 
83 
- 
- 
13,433 
 
- 
- 
-
2015 
$ ‘000 
 
- 
- 
186 
156 
342 
 
341 
204 
545
2015 
% 
 
2.86 
3.11 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
-
Total carrying amount as 
per the consolidated 
statement of financial 
position 
2015 
$ ‘000 
 
15,199 
83 
186 
156 
15,624 
 
341 
204 
545
67
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Risk (continued) 
 
NOTE 21 FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT (continued)
(d) Market Risk (continued)
Interest rate risk (continued) 
 
At 30 June 2016 the effect on profit and equity as a result of changes in the interest rate would be as follows:
Increase in interest rate by 1%
Decrease in interest rate by 1%
Carrying 
Amount
$ ‘000
Other
comprehensive
Profit
$ ‘000
income 
$ ‘000
2016 
121 
Cash and cash equivalents 
- 
Tax charge of 30% 
121 
After tax increase/ (decrease) 
The above analysis assumes all other variables remain constant.
12,080
2015
18 
Cash and cash equivalents 
- 
Tax charge of 30% 
18 
After tax increase/ (decrease) 
The above analysis assumes all other variables remain constant.
1,849
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
-
Profit
$ ‘000
(121)
-
(121)
(18) 
- 
(18)
Other
comprehensive
income
$ 
 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
-
Fair Values 
 
The fair value of financial assets and financial liabilities must be estimated for recognition and measurement or for disclosure 
purposes.  
Stanmore Coal Limited has adopted the amendment to AASB 7 Financial Instruments: Disclosures which requires disclosure of 
fair value measurements by level of the following fair value measurement hierarchy: 
(a) quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (level 1); 
(b) inputs other than quoted prices included within level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly (as prices) 
or indirectly (derived from prices) (level 2); and 
(c) inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data (unobservable inputs) (level 3).  
 
There were no financial assets or financial liabilities measured and recognised at fair value at 30 June 2016 and 2015 (nil). The 
carrying value of a significant portion of all financial assets and financial liabilities approximate their fair values to their short 
term nature.
68
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: 
Group Structure 
 
NOTE 22  SUBSIDIARIES
The consolidated financial statements incorporate the assets, liabilities and results of the following subsidiaries in accordance 
with the accounting policy described below.
Name of entity
Principle 
Activities
Country of 
Incorporation
Class of 
Shares
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary 
Ordinary
Ordinary 
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Percentage Owned
(%)*
2015 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100%
100% 
100%
-
-
2016 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100%
100% 
100%
100%
100%
Mackenzie Coal Pty Ltd 
Comet Coal & Coke Pty Ltd 
Belview Coal Pty Ltd 
Belview Expansion Pty Ltd 
Brown River Project Pty Ltd 
Emerald Coal Pty Ltd 
New Cambria Pty Ltd 
Kerlong Coking Coal Pty Ltd  
Stanmore Surat Coal Pty Ltd  
Theresa Creek Coal Pty Ltd 
Stanmore Wotonga Pty Ltd
Stanmore IP Pty Ltd 
Stanmore Bowen Coal Pty Ltd
Australia 
Australia 
Australia 
Australia 
Australia 
Australia 
Australia 
Australia 
Australia 
Australia 
Australia
Australia 
Australia
Coal exploration 
Coal exploration 
Coal exploration 
Coal exploration 
Coal exploration 
Coal exploration 
Coal exploration 
Coal exploration 
Coal exploration 
Coal exploration 
Coal exploration 
& mining 
Coal mining 
Coal exploration 
& mining 
Coal exploration 
& mining 
Coal exploration 
& mining
Australia
Isaac Plains Coal Management 
Pty Ltd** 
Isaac Plains Sales & Marketing 
Pty Ltd** 
* the proportion of ownership interest is equal to the proportion of voting power held. 
**these entities were acquired in 2016 (refer to Note 28)
Australia
69
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: 
Unrecognised items
NOTE 23 COMMITMENTS
(a) Future Exploration
2016 
$ ‘000
2015 
$ ‘000
5,186 
2,607 
- 
7,793
The Consolidated Entity has certain obligations to expend minimum amounts on exploration in tenement areas.  These 
obligations may be varied from time to time and are expected to be fulfilled in the normal course of operations of the 
Consolidated Entity.
The commitments to be undertaken are as follows: 
Payable 
- not later than 12 months 
- between 12 months and 5 years 
- greater than 5 years
1,885 
2,430 
- 
4,315
To keep tenements in good standing, work programs should meet certain minimum expenditure requirements. If the minimum 
expenditure  requirements  are  not  met,  the  Consolidated  Entity  has  the  option  to  negotiate  new  terms  or  relinquish  the 
tenements.  The  Consolidated  Entity  also  has  the  ability  to  meet  expenditure  requirements  by  joint  venture  or  farm-in 
agreements. 
 
(b) Operating leases
The commitments to be undertaken are as follows: 
Payable 
- not later than 12 months 
- between 12 months and 5 years 
- greater than 5 years
143 
114 
- 
257
143 
228 
- 
371
The Consolidated Entity has an operating lease commitment in relation to the lease of commercial office premises. The lease 
commenced on 1 December 2013 for a term of 4 years. The Consolidated Entity has provided a bank guarantee of $68,000 as a 
security bond on the premises.
(c) Capital commitments
The commitments to be undertaken are as follows: 
Payable 
- not later than 12 months 
- between 12 months and 5 years 
- greater than 5 years
3,100 
- 
- 
3,100
- 
3,100 
- 
3,100
Land Acquisitions 
On 7 April 2011 the Consolidated Entity announced that it had completed an agreement for the right to purchase a key property 
at The Range thermal coal Project in the Surat Basin.  This agreement gives the Company access to undertake evaluation and 
development work as the Project moves to coal production. The terms of the acquisition are confidential but are within normal 
market expectations and involve a series of staged payments over a number of years.  
A completion payment of $3,100,000 in cash is due the earlier of 30 days after the Mining Lease is granted by the Department of 
Mines and Energy or November 2016. An extension to the payment date from November 2014 to November 2016 was granted 
through an agreement with the  landholder. The Company is in  discussions with  the landholder  to extend the payment  date 
beyond November 2016.
70
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Unrecognised items 
(continued) 
 
NOTE 24 CONTINGENT LIABILITIES AND CONTINGENT ASSETS
Contingent Asset – WICET Loan 
In the 2014 financial year the Company impaired the full balance of the loan provided to third party infrastructure providers. 
The loan related to the WEXP1 project in Gladstone and the Company’s participation in the Capacity Commitment Deed (CCD) 
which provided certain future access rights in return for a funding commitment from the Company. The Company provided $8 
million in loans which were used to fund studies and complete initial dredging activities in respect of a future expansion to the 
port site. The CCD expired on 31 August 2014. The Company retains only those rights which relate to recoupment of loaned 
amounts as a result of a future port expansion, which may or may not occur. Based on a range of factors, a new expansion 
proponent who achieves financial close prior to 31 December 2020 will be required to reimburse the Company for a portion of 
the loaned amount which, in the opinion of an expert, provides a benefit to the proponents of that expansion. Until the timing 
of that future financing event is known, it is difficult to reliably estimate what portion of the Company’s $8 million loan would 
be repaid.  
 
Contingent Liability - Isaac Plains contingent consideration 
 
The contingent consideration relates to a royalty stream payable to the vendors of Isaac Plains in the event that benchmark 
Hard Coking Coal prices are above an Australian Dollar equivalent of 160 (adjusted for CPI) and coal is produced and sold from 
either  Isaac  Plains  or  Isaac  Plains  East.  Each  royalty  is  capped  at  predetermined  amounts  for  each  vendor,  reflecting  the 
compensation  payments  received  from  each  vendor,  but  some  of  the  vendor  payments  are  dependent  on  uncertain  future 
contract expenditure. Therefore, until these payments are known, the actual amount of the cap is unknown and can only be 
estimated.  The  estimated  maximum  contingent  consideration,  assuming  price  thresholds  are  reached,  is  approximately  $52 
million (2015 dollars). Once the price threshold and production requirements are met, the royalty is payable at $2 per product 
tonne (2015 dollars) to each of the two vendors of Isaac Plains. The fair value of the contingent consideration at the date of 
acquisition was $0.400 million and had been estimated by calculating the present value of expected future cash flows from the 
Isaac Plains coal mine using a range of coal price revenue scenarios. As at 30 June 2016 the fair value was assessed as $nil. 
 
Contingent Liability - Isaac Plains East acquisition 
 
On 4 September 2015 the Company completed the acquisition of MDL 135 and (part) MDL 137 for an initial cash payment of $2 
million. The transaction terms include two contingent consideration items, namely:
- 
-
A further $2.000 million payable upon grant of a Mining Lease; and 
A royalty capped at $3.000 million payable at $1 per tonne of production for coal that is mined within the new Mining 
Lease.
As these items are dependent on future activities of the Company and government approvals these payments have not been 
recognised as provisions in the financial statements of the Consolidated Entity. 
 
Contingent Liability - Debt finance facility 
 
In November 2015 the Company signed a debt facility with Taurus which provides US$30.000 million credit support for certain 
bank guarantees issued to third parties related to the Isaac Plains Coal Mine, such as rehabilitation bonds and to support major 
infrastructure  and  transport  contracts.  A  contingent  US$12.000  million  facility  has  also  been  provided  for  general  project 
working  capital  purposes.  Given  the  structure  of  the  arrangement  with  Taurus,  the  facility  is  backed-to-back  with  a  major 
financial institution which provides credit support on the Company’s behalf. This arrangement, amongst other things, avoids 
foreign currency translation risk as the guarantees issued to third parties are denominated in Australian dollars. The letters of 
credit arrangement is off-balance sheet except in circumstances where the Company is in default under the facility agreement 
or the underlying infrastructure contract. If a default were to occur then the debt would convert into a US dollar loan from 
Taurus which would result in balance sheet recognition. At the date of these financial statements there is no default occurring 
or subsisting. 
 
The Directors are not aware of any other significant contingent liabilities or contingent assets at the date of this report.
NOTE 25 EVENTS AFTER REPORTING DATE 
 
There have been no events since 30 June 2016 that impact upon the financial report as at 30 June 2016.
71
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Others (continued) 
 
 
NOTE 26  KEY MANAGEMENT PERSONNEL 
 
(a)  Total key management personnel compensation 
 
 
 
Short-term employee benefits 
Post-employment benefits 
Termination benefits 
Share-based payments
1,838,519 
58,848 
- 
50,925 
1,948,292
2016
$
2015
$
1,182,567 
60,502 
- 
127,396 
1,370,465
Further  information  regarding  the  identity  of  key  management  personnel  and  their  compensation  can  be  found  in  the  Audited 
Remuneration Report contained in the Directors' report on pages 18 to 26 of this annual report.
2016 
$
160,631
58,811
219,442
2015 
$
46,000
12,920
58,920
72
NOTE 27 AUDITORS’ REMUNERATION 
Audit services 
Amounts paid/payable to BDO Audit  Pty Ltd for 
audit or review of the financial statements for the 
entity or any entity in the Consolidated Entity 
 
Taxation services 
Amounts paid/payable to related entities of BDO 
Audit Pty Ltd for non-audit taxation services 
performed for the entity or any entity in the 
Consolidated Entity:
-
Preparation of income tax return
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Others (continued) 
 
NOTE 28 BUSINESS COMBINATION 
 
On 27 November 2015, Stanmore IP Coal Pty Ltd (subsidiary of Stanmore Coal Limited) completed the acquisition of 100% of the 
issued share capital of Isaac Plains Coal Management Pty Ltd and the assets and liabilities of the Isaac Plains Coal Joint Venture, a 
coal mine in Queensland’s Bowen Basin. This acquisition provides Stanmore with an established coking coal mine capable of re-
instatement of mining activity.  
 
Key judgements – Business Combination 
 
The acquisition has been deemed an acquisition of a business, rather than an acquisition of assets, having regard to the inputs and 
processes  acquired  which  are  necessary  to  the  recommencement  of  mining  activities.  Several  inputs  and  processes  were  not 
acquired, however they been determined to be readily replaceable in the current market as evidenced by the Company’s ability to 
recommence activities within several months of transaction completion. On this basis the rules of AASB 3 Business Combinations 
have been applied to the acquisition.  
 
Details of the final purchase price allocation of all the assets and liabilities acquired are as follows:
PURCHASE CONSIDERATION 
Cash paid 
Contingent consideration (a) 
Total purchase consideration 
 
ACQUISITION RELATED COSTS – included in other expenses in the 
consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES ACQUIRED
Vendor Compensation Payments Receivable (b) 
Property, plant & equipment 
Intangibles – Rail loop benefit (c) 
Provision – Onerous Contracts (d) 
Provision – Rehabilitation (e) 
Bargain gain on acquisition (f) 
Net Assets acquired
$ ‘000s 
- 
400 
400
2,538
Fair Value $ 
‘000s 
55,300 
23,765 
4,800 
(49,800) 
(33,100) 
(565) 
400
Contingent Consideration
(a) 
 
The contingent consideration relates to a royalty stream payable to the vendors of Isaac Plains in the event that benchmark Hard 
Coking Coal prices are above an Australian Dollar equivalent of 160 (adjusted for CPI) and coal is produced and sold from either 
Isaac Plains or Isaac Plains East. Each royalty is capped at predetermined amounts for each vendor, reflecting the compensation 
payments received from each vendor, but some of the vendor payments are dependent on uncertain future contract expenditure. 
Therefore, until these payments are known, the actual amount of the cap is unknown and can only be estimated. The estimated 
maximum contingent consideration, assuming price thresholds are reached, is approximately $52.000 million (2015 dollars). Once 
the price threshold and production requirements are met, the royalty is payable at $2 per product tonne (2015 dollars) to each of 
the two vendors of Isaac Plains. The fair value of the contingent consideration of $0.400 million has been estimated by calculating 
the present value of expected future cash flows from the Isaac Plains coal mine using a range of coal price revenue scenarios. At 
balance date 30 June 2016, the contingent consideration value has been assessed as $nil. This is due to re-assessment of long term 
coal price expectations and foreign currency, which reduced the net present value calculation to $nil. The discount rate attributable 
to this is 13.75%. 
 
(b) 
 
The  vendors  of  Isaac  Plains  agreed  to  pay  a  series  of  compensation  payments,  the  majority  up  front  with  the  balance  paid  in 
instalments, to cover certain underutilised contracts and general working capital requirements. The gross amount of compensation 
payments is unknown as a portion is linked to an estimate of payments that may or may not occur. The fair value of the receivable 
is  estimated  to  be  $55.000  million  and  determined  by  calculating  the  present  value  of  expected  future  cash  inflows  from  the 
vendors. As at 30 June 2016 the remaining vendor compensation receivable is $10.633 million.
Receivables
73
Rail Loop Benefit
Onerous Contracts
Other notes
Provision for rehabilitation
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Others (continued) 
 
NOTE 28 BUSINESS COMBINATION (continued) 
 
(c) 
 
The rail loop benefit arises from a contractual relationship with the below rail infrastructure provider where rebates will be paid to 
the Company in the future based on utilisation of the rail loop asset. The benefit is assessed as an intangible asset given the nature 
of this contractual relationship. Refer Note 11 for further information. 
 
(d) 
 
The  Company  acquired  various  long  term  contracts  necessary  for  mining  activities  at  Isaac  Plains  including  rail  haulage,  port 
allocations, water supply, electricity supply and accommodation. Based on the current Isaac Plains mine plan, a portion of these 
contracts will be underutilised and the fixed charges incurred above the deemed requirement has been recognised as an onerous 
contract liability. The fair value of onerous contracts has been estimated by calculating the present value of expected future cash 
outflows for the onerous portion of each contract, discounted at a rate reflecting the risk profile of each contract.  
 
(e) 
 
The Company assumed the liability for future rehabilitation of mining activities at the Isaac Plains coal mine. The fair value of the 
rehabilitation  liability  has  been  determined  by  calculating  the  present  value  of  expected  future  cash  outflows  to  undertake  the 
rehabilitation of the Isaac Plains coal mine, using an appropriate discount rate in accordance with standard market practice. 
 
(f) 
 
The Company’s acquisition of Isaac Plains for nominal consideration was an arm’s length transaction between non-related third 
parties. Given current market conditions it is reasonable that within the overall transaction there is not a material residual value 
remaining to allocate to goodwill. In this acquisition the calculated result is negative goodwill, or a bargain gain on acquisition of 
$565 thousand. This gain has been reflected within Other Income in profit or loss. The net bargain gain on acquisition is immaterial 
when compared to the total assets acquired of $83.865 million. In this context the outcome does not appear unreasonable. 
 
(g) 
 
The Company has assessed each of the assets and liabilities noted above at reporting date and determined whether any adjustment 
to the recognised value is appropriate. Since the acquisition, changes in events and conditions required several adjustments to be 
made during the financial year that have had an impact on the consolidated entity’s profit or loss. Refer to Note 15 Rehabilitation 
Provision and Note 14 Onerous Contract for information on these adjustments. 
 
The Company has assessed the impact of tax effect accounting from the acquisition. At the half year ending 31 December 2015 the 
Company assessed a small net deferred tax asset but given the net tax loss position the Company has elected not to recognise this 
asset. This has been reflected as a decrease to the bargain gain on acquisition noted above and included in profit or loss. 
 
Revenue  from  the  Isaac  Plains  mine  included  in  the  consolidated  entity’s  revenue  since  the  date  of  acquisition  amounted  to 
$12.700 million. The loss for the Isaac Plains mine included in the consolidated entity’s loss since the date of acquisition amounted 
to $6.132 million. 
 
Had the results of the Isaac Plains mine been consolidated from 1 July 2015 there would have been no change in revenue as the 
mine was in care and maintenance. The consolidated loss would have been $34.865 million due to the continued payments for take 
or pay agreements.
Bargain gain on acquisition
74
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Others (continued)
NOTE 29  PARENT ENTITY INFORMATION 
The Corporations Act 2001 requirement to prepare parent entity financial statements where consolidated financial statements are 
prepared has been removed and replaced by the new regulation 2M.3.01 which requires the following limited disclosure in regards 
to the parent entity (Stanmore Coal Limited).  The consolidated financial statements incorporate the assets, liabilities and results of 
the parent entity in accordance with the Group accounting policy. The financial information for the parent entity, Stanmore Coal 
Limited, has been prepared on the same basis as the consolidated financial statements, except as follows: 
 
Investments in subsidiaries 
Investments in subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures are accounted for at cost.
Parent Entity
Current assets 
Non-current assets
Total assets
Current liabilities 
Non-current liabilities
Total liabilities
Net assets
Issued capital 
Convertible Note Reserve 
Reserves  
Accumulated losses
Total shareholder’s equity
2016 
$ ‘000 
11,116 
38,707
49,823
1,286 
-
1,286
48,537
97,352 
- 
4,377 
(53,192)
48,537
2015 
$ ‘000 
46,372 
15,981
62,353
547 
-
547
61,806
97,352 
- 
4,304 
(39,850)
61,806
Profit / (loss) for the year 
 
 
Total comprehensive income for the year 
 
 
Guarantees 
 
Under the terms of the Secured Financing Facility entered with Taurus Mining Finance Fund LLP in November 2015, Stanmore Coal 
Limited has provided certain guarantees in relation to the arrangements between Taurus and the borrowing entity (Stanmore IP 
Coal Pty Ltd. These guarantees relate primarily to payment performance and maintaining the tenure of the Isaac Plains Coal Mine 
in good standing. (2015: $nil). 
 
Contingent liabilities 
The parent entity has no contingent liabilities.
(13,342) 
 
(13,342)
(12,209) 
 
(12,209)
Capital Commitments 
The parent entity has no capital commitments.
75
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Others (continued)
NOTE 30  OPERATING SEGMENTS
The Consolidated Entity has identified its operating segments based on the internal reports that are reviewed and used by the 
Board  of  Directors  (chief  operating  decision  makers,  “CODM”)  in  assessing  performance  and  determining  the  allocation  of 
resources.  The  Consolidated  Entity  is  managed  primarily  on  a  producing  asset  versus  non-producing  asset  basis.  Operating 
segments are determined on the basis of financial information reported to the Board which is at the Consolidated Entity level. 
All segments are located within Australia.
Accordingly, management currently identifies the Consolidated Entity as having two reportable segments, the first being the 
operation of the Isaac Plains Coal Mine (including the Isaac Plains East project) and the second being all other exploration and 
development coal assets. This represents a change from prior years when the Company had only one operating segment as all 
assets were non-producing in nature.   
 
Accounting policies adopted 
Unless otherwise stated, all amounts reported to the Board of Directors, being the CODM with respect to operating segments, 
are  determined  in  accordance  with  accounting  policies  that  are  consistent  with  those  adopted  in  the  annual  financial 
statements of the Consolidated Entity. 
 
Inter-segment transactions 
An  internally  determined  transfer  price  is  set  for  all  intersegment  sales  and  services  provided.  All  such  transactions  are 
eliminated on consolidation into the Consolidated Entity’s financial statements. 
 
Segment assets 
Where  an  asset  is  used  across  multiple  segments  the  asset  is  allocated  to  the  segment  that  receives  the  majority  of  the 
economic  value  from  the  assets.  In  most  instances,  segment  assets  are  clearly  identifiable  on  the  basis  of  their  nature  and 
physical location. 
 
Segment liabilities 
Liabilities are allocated to segments where there is a direct nexus between the incurred of the liability and the operations of the 
segment. Borrowings and tax liabilities are generally considered  to relate to the Consolidated Entity as a whole and are not 
allocated. Segment liabilities include trade and other payables and certain direct borrowings. 
 
Unallocated items 
The  following  items  of  revenue,  expenses,  assets  and  liabilities  are  not  allocated  to  operating  segments  as  they  are  not 
considered core to the operation of any segment:
•
Corporate head office costs and salaries of non-site based staff.
Segment performance
30 June 2016
Revenue 
External sales 
Intersegment sales 
Interest revenue 
Total segment revenue 
 
Reconciliation of segment revenue to 
Consolidated Entity revenue 
Other revenue 
Intersegment elimination 
Total group revenue
Isaac Plains 
Coal Mine 
$ ‘000s 
 
12,700 
- 
- 
12,700
All Other 
Segments 
$ ‘000s 
 
- 
- 
- 
-
Total 
$ ‘000s 
 
12,700 
- 
- 
12,700
- 
- 
12,700
76
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Others (continued) 
 
NOTE 30  OPERATING SEGMENTS (continued)
30 June 2016
Segment net loss from continuing operations 
before tax 
 
Reconciliation of segment result to Consolidated 
Entity net loss before tax 
Amounts not included in segment result but 
reviewed by the Board: 
Impairment of exploration & development assets 
Unallocated 
Net loss before tax from continuing operations
30 June 2016
Segment assets 
 
Reconciliation of segment assets to Consolidated 
Entity assets: 
Intersegment eliminations 
Unallocated assets 
Total Consolidated Entity assets
30 June 2016
Segment liabilities 
 
Reconciliation of segment liabilities to 
Consolidated Entity assets: 
Intersegment eliminations 
Unallocated liabilities 
Total Consolidated Entity liabilities
Isaac Plains 
Coal Mine 
$ ‘000s 
(6,132)
All Other 
Segments 
$ ‘000s 
(1)
Isaac Plains 
Coal Mine 
$ ‘000s 
71,824
All Other 
Segments 
$ ‘000s 
31,235
Isaac Plains 
Coal Mine 
$ ‘000s 
77,955
All Other 
Segments 
$ ‘000s 
46,812
Total 
$ ‘000s 
(6,133)
(13,883) 
270 
(19,746)
Total 
$ ‘000s 
103,059
(3,162) 
12,377 
 112,274
Total 
$ ‘000s 
124,767
(52,864) 
1,286 
73,189
Major customers 
The Consolidated Entity has a number of customers to whom it sells export grade coal. The Consolidated Entity supplies one 
such external customer who accounts for 25% of external  revenue. The next most significant customer accounts for 20% of 
external revenue. 
 
Recognition and measurement 
 
 
The  Consolidated  Entity  applies  AASB  8  Operating  Segments  which  requires  a  management  approach  under  which  segment 
information is presented on the same basis as that used for internal reporting purposes.  Operating segments are reported in a 
manner that is consistent with the internal reporting to the chief operating decision maker (CODM), which has been identified by 
the Consolidated Entity as the Managing Director and other members of the Board of Directors.
77
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Others (continued) 
 
 
NOTE 31  SHARE-BASED PAYMENTS 
The following share based payment arrangements existed at 30 June 2016. 
(a) Share-based payments to Directors, executives and employees 
 
During the year ended 30 June 2016, no options were granted to key management personnel as share-based payments.
2016
2015
No. of options  Weighted average 
exercise price
No. of options
Weighted average 
exercise price
$
$
1.02 
- 
- 
- 
2.12 
0.22 
0.22
8,841,000 
- 
(1,800,000) 
- 
(2,275,000) 
4,766,000 
2,000,000
4,766,000 
- 
- 
- 
(2,000,000) 
2,766,000 
2,766,000
Outstanding at beginning of year 
Granted 
Forfeited 
Exercised 
Expired 
Outstanding at year-end 
Exercisable at year-end 
 
 
 
The options exercisable at 30 June 2016 had a weighted average exercise price of $0.22 (2015: $2.13) and weighted average 
remaining contractual life of 1.2 years (2015: 0.5 years).  The exercise price was $0.22 in respect of all options outstanding at 30 
June 2016 (2015: $1.75 to $2.50).  
 
In the year ending 30 June 2016, no options were exercised (2015: nil)  
 
Pursuant to the Consolidated Entity’s Incentive Option Scheme, if an employee ceases to be employed by the Consolidated 
Entity then options will expire three months from the date employment ceases.
1.42 
- 
2.13 
- 
1.90 
1.02 
2.13
78
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Others (continued) 
 
NOTE 31  SHARE-BASED PAYMENTS (continued) 
 
The weighted average fair value of the options granted during the year ended 30 June 2014 was $0.07. This price was calculated 
by using a Black-Scholes options pricing model applying the following inputs: 
 
 
Weighted average exercise price 
Weighted average life of the option 
Weighted average share price 
Weighted average expected share price volatility 
Weighted average risk free interest rate 
 
Historical volatility has been the basis for determining expected share price volatility. 
 
The expected life of the options has been taken to be the full period of time from grant date to expiry date.  The options pricing 
model assumes that options will be exercised on or immediately before the expiry date.   
 
The settlement method for the  above options is on a 1:1 basis.  During the year ended 30 June 2016, no options were exercised 
(2015: nil) resulting in nil issue of additional shares in lieu of options. 
 
During the year ended 30 June 2016, no performance rights were granted to key management personnel as share-based payments. 
 
The amount included in profit or loss is as follows:
2014 
$0.22 
4.00 years 
$0.18 
58.36% 
3.81%
2016 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
2015 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
Employee benefits expense 
Administration and consulting expense
2016 
$ ‘000 
73 
- 
73
These amounts have been recognised in equity in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as follows:
2016 
$ ‘000 
- 
(73) 
(73)
Share capital 
Option reserve
2015 
$ ‘000 
195 
11 
206
2015 
$ ‘000 
- 
(206) 
(206)
79
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Others (continued) 
 
NOTE 31  SHARE-BASED PAYMENTS (continued) 
 
Recognition and measurement 
 
The Consolidated Entity provides benefits to employees and consultants in the form of share-based payment transactions, whereby 
they render services in exchange for shares or options over shares (equity-settled transactions).  
 
The  fair  value  of  share  or  options  granted  to  employees  and  consultants  are  recognised  as  an  expense  with  a  corresponding 
increase  in  equity.  The  fair  value  is  measured  at  grant  date  and  recognised  over  the  period  during  which  the  employees  or 
consultants become unconditionally entitled to the instruments. For options, fair value is determined by an independent valuer 
using a Black-Scholes option pricing model. In determining fair value, no account is taken of any performance conditions other than 
those related to the share price of Stanmore Coal Limited (market conditions). The cumulative expense recognised between grant 
date  and  vesting  date  is  adjusted  to  reflect  the  Directors’  best  estimate  of  the  number  of  instruments  that  will  ultimately  vest 
because  of  internal  conditions  of  the  instruments,  such  as  the  employees  having  to  remain  with  the  Consolidated  Entity  until 
vesting date, or such that employees are required to meet internal sales targets. No expense is recognised for instruments that do 
not ultimately vest because internal conditions were not met. An expense is still recognised for instruments that do not ultimately 
vest because a market condition was not met. 
 
Where the terms of options are modified, the expense continues to be recognised from grant date to vesting date as if the terms 
had never been changed. In addition, at the date of the modification, a further expense is recognised for any increase in fair value 
of the transaction as a result of the change. 
 
Where  options  are  cancelled,  they  are  treated  as  if  vesting  occurred  on  cancellation  and  any  unrecognised  expenses  are  taken 
immediately to profit or loss. However, if new options are substituted for the cancelled options and designated as a replacement 
on grant date, the combined impact of the cancellation and replacement options are treated as if they were a modification. 
 
Key estimates – share-based payments 
 
The  Consolidated  Entity  uses  estimates  to  determine  the  fair  value  of  equity  instruments  issued  to  Directors,  executives  and 
employees. The estimates include volatility, risk free rates and consideration of satisfaction of performance criteria for recipients 
of  equity  instruments.  During  the  period  no  additional  equity  instruments  were  issued  and  the  accounting  impact  of  prior 
issuances and determinations remains unchanged. 
 
 
NOTE 32 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Transactions between related parties are on normal commercial terms and conditions no more favourable than those available 
to other parties unless otherwise stated.
(a) Parent entity
The parent entity and ultimate controlling entity is Stanmore Coal Limited, which is incorporated in Australia.
(b) Subsidiaries
Interests in subsidiaries are disclosed in Note 22.
(c) Key management personnel
Disclosures  relating  to  key  management  personnel  are  set  out  in  Note  26  and  the  Remuneration  Report  contained  in  the 
Directors’ Report.
(d) Other related party transactions
There were no transactions with other related parties during the year (2015: nil).
80
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Others (continued) 
 
 
NOTE 33  OTHER ACCOUNTING POLICIES  
 
(a)  Business Combinations 
 
The acquisition method of accounting is used to account for all business combinations. Consideration is measured at the fair 
value of the assets transferred, liabilities incurred and equity interests issued by the Consolidated Entity on acquisition date. 
Consideration  also  includes  the  acquisition  date  fair  values  of  any  contingent  consideration  arrangements,  any  pre-existing 
equity interests in the acquiree and share-based payment awards of the acquiree that are required to be replaced in a business 
combination. The acquisition date is the date on which the Consolidated Entity obtains control of the acquiree. Where equity 
instruments are issued as part of the consideration, the value of the equity instruments is their published market price at the 
acquisition date unless, in rare circumstances it can be demonstrated that the published price at acquisition date is not fair 
value and that other evidence and valuation methods provide a more reliable measure of fair value.  
 
Identifiable  assets  acquired  and  liabilities  and  contingent  liabilities  assumed  in  business  combinations  are,  with  limited 
exceptions,  initially  measured  at  their  fair  values  at  acquisition  date.  Goodwill  represents  the  excess  of  the  consideration 
transferred  and  the  amount  of  the  non-controlling  interest  in  the  acquiree  over  fair  value  of  the  identifiable  net  assets 
acquired.  If  the  consideration  and  non-controlling  interest  of  the  acquiree  is  less  than  the  fair  value  of  the  net  identifiable 
assets acquired, the difference is recognised in profit or loss as a bargain purchase price, but only after a reassessment of the 
identification and measurement of the net assets acquired. 
 
For each business combination, the Consolidated Entity measures non-controlling interests at either fair value or at the non-
controlling interest's proportionate share of the acquiree's identifiable net assets. 
 
Acquisition-related  costs  are  expensed  when  incurred.  Transaction  costs  arising  on  the  issue  of  equity  instruments  are 
recognised directly in equity. 
 
Where  the  Consolidated  Entity  obtains  control  of  a  subsidiary  that  was  previously  accounted  for  as  an  equity  accounted 
investment in associate or jointly controlled entity, the Consolidated Entity remeasures its previously held equity interest in the 
acquiree at its acquisition date fair value and the resulting gain or loss is recognised in profit or loss. Where the Consolidated 
Entity obtains control of a subsidiary that was previously accounted for as an available-for-sale investment, any balance on the 
available-for-sale reserve related to that investment is recognised in profit or loss as if the Consolidated Entity had disposed 
directly of the previously held interest.  
 
Where settlement of any part of the cash consideration is deferred, the amounts payable in future are discounted to present 
value at the date of exchange using the entity's incremental borrowing rate as the discount rate. 
 
Contingent consideration is classified as equity or financial liabilities. Amounts classified as financial liabilities are subsequently 
remeasured to fair value at the end of each reporting period, with changes in fair value recognised in profit or loss. 
 
Assets and liabilities from business combinations involving entities or businesses under common control are accounted for at 
the carrying amounts recognised in the Consolidated Entity's controlling shareholder's consolidated financial statements.
(b)  Derivative Financial Liabilities
Obligations  to  settle  fees  payable  to  financiers  as  either  cash  or  shares  are  reflected  as  derivative  financial  liabilities  with 
changes in fair value recognised directly through profit and loss.
(c)  Provisions
Provisions for legal claims, service warranties and make good obligations are recognised when the Consolidated Entity has a 
present legal or constructive obligation as a result of a past event, it is probable that that an outflow of economic resources will 
be required to settle the obligation and the amount can be reliably estimated.
(d)  New and amended standards and interpretations not yet adopted
New Accounting Standards and Interpretations not yet mandatory or early adopted Australian Accounting Standards and 
Interpretations that have recently been issued or amended but are not yet mandatory, have not been early adopted by the 
consolidated entity for the annual reporting period ended 30 June 2016 (with the exception of AASB 15 Revenue from 
Contracts with Customers which has been early adopted). The consolidated entity's assessment of the impact of these new or 
amended Australian Accounting Standards and Interpretations, most relevant to the consolidated entity, are set out below.
81
Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2016: Others (continued) 
 
NOTE 33  OTHER ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued) 
 
AASB 9 Financial Instruments 
 
This standard is applicable to annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018. The standard replaces all previous 
versions of AASB 9 and completes the project to replace IAS 39 'Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement'. AASB 9 
introduces new classification and measurement models for financial assets. A financial asset shall be measured at amortised 
cost, if it is held within a business model whose objective is to hold assets in order to collect contractual cash flows, which arise 
on specified dates and solely principal and interest. All other financial instrument assets are to be classified and measured at 
fair value through profit or loss unless the entity makes an irrevocable election on initial recognition to present gains and losses 
on  equity  instruments  (that  are  not  held-for-trading)  in  other  comprehensive  income  ('OCI').  For  financial  liabilities,  the 
standard requires the portion of the change in fair value that relates to the entity's own credit  risk to be presented in OCI 
(unless it would create an accounting mismatch). New simpler hedge accounting requirements are intended to more closely 
align the accounting treatment with the risk management activities of the entity. New impairment requirements will use an 
'expected credit loss' ('ECL') model to recognise an allowance. Impairment will be measured under a 12-month ECL method 
unless the credit risk on a financial instrument has increased significantly since initial recognition in which case the lifetime ECL 
method is adopted. The standard introduces additional new disclosures. The consolidated entity will adopt this standard from 
1 July 2018 but the impact of its adoption is yet to be assessed by the consolidated entity. 
 
AASB 16 Leases 
 
This standard is applicable to annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019. When effective, the Standard will 
replace current accounting requirements applicable to leases in AASB 117. AASB 16 introduces a single lessee accounting 
model that eliminates the requirement for leases to be classified as operating or finance leases. The main changed introduced 
by the new standard include: recognition of a right-to-use asset and liability for all leases; depreciation of right-to-use assets in 
line with AASB 116 in profit or loss and unwinding of the liability in principal and interest components; and additional 
disclosure requirements. The Consolidated Entity will adopt this standard from 1 January 2019 but the impact of its adoption is 
yet to be assessed by the Consolidated Entity.
(e)  New, revised or amending Accounting Standards and Interpretations adopted
The consolidated entity has adopted all of the new, revised or amending Accounting Standards and Interpretations issued by the 
Australian Accounting Standards Board ('AASB') that are mandatory for the current reporting period. 
  
The adoption of these Australian Accounting Standards and Interpretations did not have any significant impact on the financial 
performance or position of the consolidated entity. 
  
The following Accounting Standard has been adopted early by the consolidated entity: 
  
AASB 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers 
 
The standard provides a single standard for revenue recognition. The core principle of the standard is that an entity recognises 
revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which 
the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The standard requires: contracts (either written, verbal 
or implied) to be identified, together with the separate performance obligations within the contract; determine the transaction 
price, adjusted for the time value of money excluding credit risk; allocation of the transaction price to the separate performance 
obligations on a basis of relative stand-alone selling price of each distinct good or service, or estimation approach if no distinct 
observable prices exist; and recognition of revenue when each performance obligation is satisfied.  
 
The Consolidated Entity has adopted this standard from 1 July 2015 with no impact on  prior periods given  the Consolidated 
Entity has transitioned to a producing miner in the year ending 30 June 2016.
82
Declaration by Directors
STANMORE COAL LIMITED Financial Report 2016  |  83
Declaration by Directors 
 
The Directors of the Consolidated Entity declare that:
1.  The  consolidated  financial  statements,  comprising  the  consolidated  statement  of  profit  or  loss  and  other 
comprehensive income, consolidated statement of financial position, consolidated statement of cash flows, 
consolidated  statement  of  changes  in  equity,  and  accompanying  notes,  are  in  accordance  with  the 
Corporations Act 2001 and: 
 
(a)
comply with Australian Accounting Standards and the Corporations Regulations 2001; and
(b)
give a true and fair view of the Consolidated Entity’s financial position as at 30 June 2016 and of its 
performance for the year ended on that date.
3.
2.  The  Consolidated  Entity  has  included  in  the  notes  to  the  financial  statements  an  explicit  and  unreserved
statement of compliance with International Financial Reporting Standards. 
 
In the Directors’ opinion, there are reasonable grounds to believe that the Consolidated Entity will be able to 
pay its debts as and when they become due and payable.
4.  The  remuneration  disclosures  included  in  pages  18  to  26  of  the  Directors’  report  (as  part  of  audited 
Remuneration Report) for the year ended 30 June 2016, comply with section 300A of the Corporations Act 
2001.
5.  The  Directors  have  been  given  the  declarations  by  the  chief  executive  officer  and  chief  financial  officer
required by section 295A of the Corporations Act 2001.
This declaration is signed in accordance with a resolution of the Directors.
Nicholas Jorss 
Managing Director  
 
Brisbane 
Date: 31 August 2016
83
Tel: +61 7 3237 5999 
Fax: +61 7 3221 9227 
www.bdo.com.au
Level 10, 12 Creek St  
Brisbane QLD 4000 
GPO Box 457 Brisbane QLD 4001 
Australia
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT
To the members of Stanmore Coal Limited
Report on the Financial Report
We  have  audited  the  accompanying  financial  report  of  Stanmore  Coal  Limited,  which  comprises  the 
consolidated statement of financial position as at 30 June 2016, the consolidated statement of profit or 
loss  and  other  comprehensive  income,  the  consolidated  statement  of  changes  in  equity  and  the 
consolidated statement of cash flows for the year then ended, notes comprising a summary of significant 
accounting policies and other explanatory information, and the directors’ declaration of the consolidated 
entity comprising the company and the entities it controlled at the year’s end or from time to time during 
the financial year.
Directors’ Responsibility for the Financial Report
The directors of the company are responsible for the preparation of the financial report that gives a true 
and fair view in accordance with Australian Accounting Standards and the Corporations Act 2001 and for 
such  internal  control  as  the  directors  determine  is  necessary  to  enable  the  preparation  of  the  financial 
report that gives a true and fair view and is free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or 
error. In the notes to the financial statements on page 44, the directors also state, in accordance with 
Accounting Standard AASB 101 Presentation of Financial Statements, that the financial statements comply 
with International Financial Reporting Standards.
Auditor’s Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the financial report based on our audit. We conducted our 
audit  in  accordance  with  Australian  Auditing  Standards.  Those  standards  require  that  we  comply  with 
relevant  ethical  requirements  relating  to  audit  engagements  and  plan  and  perform  the  audit  to  obtain 
reasonable assurance about whether the financial report is free from material misstatement.
An  audit  involves  performing  procedures  to  obtain  audit  evidence  about  the  amounts  and  disclosures  in 
the  financial  report.  The  procedures  selected  depend  on  the  auditor’s  judgement,  including  the 
assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the financial report, whether due to fraud or error. In 
making  those  risk  assessments,  the  auditor  considers  internal  control  relevant  to  the  company’s 
preparation of the financial report that gives a true and fair view in order to design audit procedures that 
are  appropriate  in  the  circumstances,  but  not  for  the  purpose  of  expressing  an  opinion  on  the 
effectiveness of the company’s internal control. An audit also includes evaluating the appropriateness of 
accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates made by the directors, as well as 
evaluating the overall presentation of the financial report.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for 
our audit opinion.
BDO Audit Pty Ltd ABN 33 134 022 870 is a member of a national association of independent entities which are all members of BDO Australia Ltd ABN 77 050 110 
275, an Australian company limited by guarantee. BDO Audit Pty Ltd and BDO Australia Ltd are members of BDO International Ltd, a UK company limited by 
guarantee, and form part of the international BDO network of independent member firms. Liability limited by a scheme approved under Professional Standards 
Legislation, other than for the acts or omissions of financial services licensees.
84
Independence
In conducting our audit, we have complied with the independence requirements of the Corporations Act 
2001. We confirm that the independence  declaration required  by the Corporations Act 2001, which  has 
been given to the directors of Stanmore Coal Limited, would be in the same terms if given to the directors 
as at the time of this auditor’s report.
Opinion
In our opinion:
(a)  the  financial  report  of  Stanmore  Coal  Limited  is  in  accordance  with  the  Corporations  Act  2001,
including:
(i)  giving a true and fair view of the consolidated entity’s financial position as at 30 June 2016 and
of its performance for the year ended on that date; and
(ii)  complying with Australian Accounting Standards and the Corporations Regulations 2001; and
(b)  the  financial  report  also  complies  with  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  as  disclosed  in
the notes to the financial statements on page 44.
Report on the Remuneration Report
We have audited the Remuneration Report included in pages 18 to 26 of the directors’ report for the year 
ended 30 June 2016. The directors of the company are responsible for the preparation and presentation of 
the Remuneration Report in accordance with section 300A of the Corporations Act 2001. Our responsibility 
is to express an opinion on the Remuneration Report, based on our audit conducted in accordance with 
Australian Auditing Standards.
Opinion
In  our  opinion,  the  Remuneration  Report  of  Stanmore  Coal  Limited  for  the  year  ended  30  June  2016 
complies with section 300A of the Corporations Act 2001.
BDO Audit Pty Ltd
T J Kendall 
Director
Brisbane, 31 August 2016
BDO Audit Pty Ltd ABN 33 134 022 870 is a member of a national association of independent entities which are all members of BDO Australia Ltd ABN 77 050 110 
275, an Australian company limited by guarantee. BDO Audit Pty Ltd and BDO Australia Ltd are members of BDO International Ltd, a UK company limited by 
guarantee, and form part of the international BDO network of independent member firms. Liability limited by a scheme approved under Professional Standards 
Legislation, other than for the acts or omissions of financial services licensees.
85