
6-K 1 v447817_6k.htm FORM 6-K
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 6-K
REPORT OF FOREIGN PRIVATE ISSUER
PURSUANT TO RULE 13a-16 OR 15d-16 UNDER
THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the month of August, 2016
Commission File Number 001-34175
ECOPETROL S.A.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
N.A.
(Translation of registrant’s name into English)
COLOMBIA
(Jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
Carrera 13 No. 36 – 24
BOGOTA D.C. – COLOMBIA
(Address of principal executive offices)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant files or will file annual reports under cover of Form
20-F or Form 40-F.
Form 20-F x      Form 40-F ¨
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper as permitted by
Regulation S-T Rule 101(b)(1)
Yes ¨      No x
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper as permitted by
Regulation S-T Rule 101(b)(7)
Yes ¨      No x
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant by furnishing the information contained in this form
is also thereby furnishing the information to the Commission pursuant to Rule 12g3-2(b) under
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Yes ¨      No x
If “Yes” is marked, indicate below the file number assigned to the registrant in connection with
Rule 12g3-2(b): 82- N/A
Ecopetrol´s Extraordinary Shareholders' Meeting
Due to the vacancies in the Board of Directors, the Chief Executive Officer of Ecopetrol S.A.
(BVC: ECOPETROL; NYSE: EC) hereby calls on Shareholders to attend the extraordinary
shareholders’ meeting to be held on Wednesday, September 14th, 2016, starting at 7:30 a.m. at
Ecopetrol´s auditorium located in Cra. 13 No. 36 – 24, Bogotá, Colombia.
The agenda of the meeting will be:
Safety guidelines
Quorum verification
1.
2.
3. Opening by the Chief Executive Officer of Ecopetrol S.A.
4.
Approval of the agenda
5. Appointment of the President for the meeting
6.Appointment of the Commission in charge of scrutinizing elections and polling
7.
Appointment of the Commission in charge of reviewing and approving the minutes of the
meeting
8.
Election of the Board of Directors
The résumés of the current directors and new candidates nominated to fill the vacant positions
are available on Ecopetrol´s Web site.
Shareholders that are not able to attend the Shareholders´ Meeting may be represented through
a proxy, granted in writing, pursuant to the requirements provided for under Colombian Corporate
Law. In order to facilitate the fulfillment of these requirements, shareholders are allowed to
download from the website, various proxy models that have been designed for each relevant
case.
Except for the cases of legal representation, officers and employees of Ecopetrol S.A. shall not
be entitled to represent shares other than their own, while in exercise of their posts, nor shall they
be allowed to substitute the powers of attorney conferred upon them.
In all events, shareholders´ representation shall be subject to the rules set forth under Colombian
Corporate Law and Securities Regulations, concerning illegal, unauthorized and unsafe
practices by the issuers of securities.
JUAN CARLOS ECHEVERRY GARZON
Chief Executive Officer
RECOMMENDATIONS:
•
Have your identity document at hand, and if you are representing other shares, the respective
proxy.
To avoid congestions and ensure proper participation of shareholders, the doors of the
auditorium and the registration spots will be opened from 6:30 a.m. onwards.
Entry of accompanying persons will be allowed only for physically handicapped Shareholders,
eldery adults and under aged individuals.
• No kits (presents) or food will be provided to the attendees.
•
•
Bogota, August 26, 2016
-----------------------------------------
Ecopetrol is the largest company in Colombia and is an integrated oil & gas company; it is
among the top 50 oil companies in the world and among the four top ones in Latin America.
Besides Colombia - where it generates over 60% of the national production - it has exploration
and production activities in Brazil, Peru & the US (Gulf of Mexico). Ecopetrol owns the largest
refinery in Colombia and most of the pipeline and multi-product pipeline network in the country,
and is significantly increasing its participation in bio-fuels.
This release contains statements that may be considered forward looking statements within the
meaning of Section 27A of the U.S. Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the U.S. Securities
Exchange Act of 1934. All forward-looking statements, whether made in this release or in future
filings or press releases or orally, address matters that involve risks and uncertainties, including
in respect of the Company’s prospects for growth and its ongoing access to capital to fund the
Company’s business plan, among others. Consequently, changes in the following factors, among
others, could cause actual results to differ materially from those included in the forward-looking
statements: market prices of oil & gas, our exploration and production activities, market
conditions, applicable regulations, the exchange rate, the Company’s competitiveness and the
performance of Colombia’s economy and industry, to mention a few. We do not intend, and do
not assume any obligation to update these forward-looking statements.
For further information, please contact:
Head of Corporate Finance and Investor Relations (E)
Lina María Contreras
Phone: (+571) 234 5190
E-mail: investors@ecopetrol.com.co
Media Relations (Colombia)
Jorge Mauricio Tellez
Phone: + 571-234-4329
E-mail: mauricio.tellez@ecopetrol.com.co
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
Ecopetrol S.A.
  
 By:   /s/ María Fernanda Suárez
Name:   María Fernanda Suárez 
Title:
Chief Financial Officer
Date: August 26, 2016