
CDN Jade Mine Resources Inc.
(Formerly Acqua Export Acquisition Corp.)
307 – 4940 No. 3 Road 
Richmond, BC V6X 3A5
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION & ANALYSIS
Accompanying the May 31, 2016 Unaudited Interim Financial Statements
1
This Management’s Discussion & Analysis (“MD&A”), prepared as of August 2, 2016, is intended to be 
read  in  conjunction  with  the  Company’s  unaudited  interim    financial  statements  for  the  three  months 
ended  May  31,  2016,  and  related  notes  thereto,  which  have  been  reported  in  Canadian  dollars,  and 
prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (“IFRS”).
This  discussion  relates  to  the  operations  of  CDN  Jade  Mine  Resources  Inc.  (formerly  Acqua  Export 
Acquisition Corp.) (“CJM,” “we,” “our,” or the "Company"), during the period ended May 31, 2016 and 
up to the date of this MD&A, being August 2, 2016.  This MD&A should be read in conjunction with the 
Company’s unaudited interim financial statements for the three months ended May 31, 2016 (the “Interim 
Financial Statements”).
Additional  information,  including  press  releases,  has  been  filed  electronically  through  the  System  for 
Electronic Document Analysis and Retrieval (“SEDAR”) and is available under the Company’s profile at 
www.sedar.com.
FORWARD LOOKING INFORMATION
This  MD&A  contains  certain  forward-looking  statements  and  information  relating  to  the  Company  that 
are  based  on  the  beliefs  of  management  as  well  as  assumptions  made  by  and  information  currently 
available  to  the  Company.    When  used  in  this  document,  the  words  “anticipate”,  “believe”,  “estimate”, 
“expect” and similar expressions, as they relate to the Company or management, are intended to identify 
forward-looking statements.  This MD&A contains forward-looking statements relating to, among other 
things,  regulatory  compliance,  the  sufficiency  of  current  working  capital,  the  estimated  cost  and 
availability  of  funding  for  the  continued  exploration  and  development  of  exploration  properties.    Such 
statements reflect the current views of management with respect to future events and are subject to certain 
risks,  uncertainties  and  assumptions.    Many  factors  could  cause  the  actual  results,  performance  or 
achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements that may be 
expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements.
All forward-looking statements in this MD&A, other than statements of historical fact, are based on the 
opinions and estimates of management as of the date such statements are made and are necessarily based 
on estimates and assumptions that are inherently subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and 
other factors that may cause actual results, level of activity, performance or achievements to be materially 
different  from  those  expressed  or  implied  by  such  forward-looking  statements.  Although  CJM  believes 
the expectations expressed in such forward-looking statements are based on reasonable assumptions, such 
statements should not be in any way construed as guarantees of future performance and actual results or 
developments  may  differ materially  from  those in the  forward-looking  statements.  Accordingly,  readers 
should  not  place  undue  reliance  on  forward-looking  statement  or  information.  Factors  that  could  cause 
actual results to differ materially from those in forward-looking statements include without limitation: our 
ability to implement our strategic business plan; market prices for jade; lower than expected grades and 
quantities of resources; mining rates and recovery rates; significant capital requirements; fluctuations in 
the  rates  of  exchange  of  the  currencies  of  Canada  and  China  and  any  other  country  where  we  sell  our 
jade;  taxation;  controls,  regulations  and  political  or  economic  developments  in  the  countries  in  which 
CJM  does  or  may  carry  on  business;  the  speculative  nature  of  mineral  exploration  and  development, 
competition; loss of key employees; rising costs of labour, supplies, fuel and equipment; actual results of
2
current exploration or reclamation activities; accidents; labour disputes; defective title to mineral claims 
or  property  or  contests  over  claims  to  mineral  properties;  unexpected  delays  and  costs  inherent  to 
consulting  and  accommodating  rights  of  First  Nations  and  other  Aboriginal  groups;  risks,  uncertainties 
and  unanticipated  delays  associated  with  obtaining  and  maintaining  necessary  licenses,  permits  and 
authorizations and complying with permitting requirements, in particular those associated with the Ogden 
Mountain mining property. In addition, there are risks and hazards associated with the business of mineral 
exploration,  development  and  mining,  including  environmental events and  hazards, industrial  accidents, 
unusual or unexpected formations, pressures, extreme weather events and the risk of inadequate insurance 
or inability to obtain insurance to cover these risks as well as “Risk Factors” included in this MD&A and 
in CJM’s disclosure documents filed on and available at www.sedar.com.
Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance, and actual results and future events 
could materially differ from those anticipated in such statements. All of the forward- looking statements 
contained in this information package are qualified by these cautionary statements. CJM does not intend, 
and does not assume any obligation, to update these forward-looking statements, except as required under 
applicable  securities  legislation.    For  more  information  on  the  CJM,  readers  should  refer  to 
www.sedar.com for the CJM’s filings with the Canadian securities regulatory authorities.
ABOUT THE COMPANY
The Company is engaged in the mining of nephrite jade.
The  Company  was  incorporated  under  the  Business  Corporations  Act  (British  Columbia)  on  April  29, 
2014  under  the  name  Acqua  Export  Acquisition  Corp  (“Acqua”)  as  a  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of 
0941092  B.C.  Ltd.  (“092BC”)  for  the  purpose  of  completing  a  statutory  plan  of  arrangement  (the 
“Arrangement”) with 092BC followed by a subsequent amalgamation with CDN Water Corp (“CWC”), a 
private British Columbia Corporation engaged in the business of exporting Canadian water to Asia.   On 
June 3, 2015 Acqua Export Acquisition Corp. and CDN Water Corp. were amalgamated as one company 
and  adopted  the  name  CDN  Jade  Mine  Resources  Inc  (the  “Amalgamation”).    Upon  completion  of  the 
Amalgamation,  the  Company  had  intended  to  enter  into  the  water  distribution  business,  however  it  has 
determined  not  to  continue  with  the  water  distribution  business  and  as  such  has  reflected  this  in  its 
Audited Financial Statements.  Further details regarding the Arrangement and the Amalgamation can be 
found in the Notes to the Financial Statements accompanying this MD&A.
OVERALL PERFORMANCE / DISCUSSION OF OPERATIONS
MINING LEASE
Effective  July  1,  2015,  CJM  entered  into  a  mining  lease  with  Green  Mountain  Jade  Inc.  (“Green 
Mountain” or “GMJ”), a private British Columbia nephrite jade mining company with operating mines in 
the province of British Columbia; Green Mountain is owned by Shao Long Li, a director of the Company 
(the “Mining Lease”).  As such the Mining Lease is considered a related party transaction.
Under the terms of the Mining Lease, CJM has taken over the operations of the Ogden Mountain Mine, a 
nephrite jade mine located approximately 250 kilometers north of Fort St James in the Omineca Mining 
Division in Northern British Columbia.  Nephrite jade has been mined from Ogden Mountain for over 30
3
years, with a total production to date estimated at over 5,000 tonnes.  The mine is accessible by a network 
of paved and gravel forest roads and exploration trails from Fort St James.  Access to the camp and mine 
site  are  removed  at  the  end  of  each  mining  season  to  prevent  vandalism  and  theft.    The  Company  is 
responsible for performing all required reclamation work at Ogden Mountain.
The Company has commissioned BJ Price Geological Consultants Inc. to prepare a technical report under 
NI43-101 to further delineate the jade mining potential at Ogden Mountain.  Completion of this report is 
expected shortly.
The Mining Lease grants the Company the exclusive mineral and placer rights at Ogden Mountain Mine 
to the year 2020 with an option to renew the Mining Lease for a further five years, as well as the Right of 
First Refusal for the sale of the property.  Furthermore, the Mining Lease grants CJM the selling rights for 
all  jade  produced  from  the  property,  with  the  net  revenue  of  each  year’s  production  split  between  the 
parties.
Between July 2015 and the end of the mining season in October 2015, the Company worked closely with 
Green  Mountain  to  transition  the  mining  operations  from  Green  Mountain’s  management  to  the 
Company’s stewardship ( the “Transition Period”).  The nephrite jade mining season is short and intense, 
generally lasting only a few months each year. The Company has taken over full operations of the mine 
effective with the 2016 mining season, which is began on _xxx, 2016.  Pursuant to the Mining Lease, the 
Company was required to make certain payments to Green Mountain during the Transition Period, all of 
which have been paid: $100,000 payable in each of July, August and September 2015, plus the purchase 
of  the  Ogden  Mountain  Mine’s  mining  equipment  for  a  price  of  $399,000,  payable  as  5,700,000  CJM 
Shares at a value of $0.07 per share due on October 2, 2015
Net Revenue Return 
In  addition  to  the  payments  described  above,  during  the  term  of  the  Mining  Lease,  the  Company  must 
also  pay  Green  Mountain  a  net  revenue  return  (the  “Net  Revenue  Return”  or  “NRR”)  from  the  gross 
proceeds of the sale of minerals mined from Ogden Mountain.  In the first two years of the Mining Lease, 
the  Net  Revenue  Return  is  set  at  25%;  it  then  decreases  to  20%  for  the  remainder  of  the  term  of  the 
Mining Lease. The NRR will be calculated based on the net proceeds received by the Company from the 
sale  of  such  mined  minerals  after  deducting  the  cost  of  typical  sales  factors  which  include  but  are  not 
necessarily limited to agent commissions, taxes, and shipping discounts.  The Net Revenue Return will be 
payable within thirty days following the end of the calendar quarter in which the NRR is realized.  See 
Annual Jade Sale for details on the 2015 mining season’s NRR payments.
Green  Mountain  is  also  entitled  to  the  right  of  first  refusal  for  any  service  contracts  for  the  loading, 
shipping,  hauling,  trucking,  screening,  and  crushing  of  any  minerals  extracted  at  Ogden  Mountain  over 
the entire term of the Mining Lease.
ANNUAL JADE SALE
Green  Mountain  holds  a  public  jade  sale  in  Vancouver,  BC  in  the  fall  of  each  year,  where  jade  mined 
from  its  four  mines  is  sold  (the  “Annual  Jade  Sale”).    Nephrite  jade  mined  from  Ogden  Mountain  will 
continue to be offered to the public at this annual jade sale.  It is traditional for BC suppliers of nephrite 
jade to host the Annual Jade Sale in October.  The majority of the customer base for BC Jade are buyers
4
from China, Taiwan and Hong Kong.  This annual tradition allows this regular customer base priority in 
choosing and purchasing jade from  each year’s new inventory.  Nephrite jade is sold in  US dollars on a 
price  per  kilogram  basis.    In  the  past  five  years,  the  price  of  rough  jade  per  kilogram  has  risen 
consistently,  contrary  to  other  conventional  commodities  in  recent  years.    On  average,  at  Green 
Mountain’s Annual Jade Sale, approximately 200,000 – 400,000 kilograms are sold.  While the majority 
of  our  regular  customers  take  advantage  of  the  Annual  Jade  Sale  to  purchase  jade  for  their  next  year’s 
needs, jade would usually be available for sale year round and  buyers continue to inquire and purchase 
nephrite jade throughout the year.  Pursuant to the Mining Lease, the Company and Green Mountain have 
the first option to each purchase up to 10,000 kg of that year’s Ogden Mountain jade production at fair 
market price before it is offered to the public each year. Neither company exercised this option in 2015.
The most recent Annual Jade Sale took place in the fall of 2015.  Green Mountain conducted the sale in 
its usual course of business and the Company achieved $178,718 in gross revenue from the sale of only 
6,513  kilograms  of  jade,  this  reflects  an  average  selling  price  of  $27.44  per  kilogram,  and  the  NRR  of 
25%  of  those  gross  revenues  is  payable  to  Green  Mountain,  for  a  net  revenue  of  $134,039  from  the 
Annual  Jade  Sale.    Further  discussions  of  our  financial  results  for  the  period  are  discussed  later  in  this 
MD&A.
DOMAIN NAME (www.jade.com)
As  announced  in  the  news  releases  dated  February  24  and  May  31,  2016,  the  Company  acquired  the 
domain name www.Jade.com from a third party vendor (the “Domain Name”).  The Company originally 
announced that the purchase price of the Domain Name was USD$1,250,000.  The Company was able to 
renegotiate  a  lower  purchase  price  subsequent  to  that  announcement  and  the  final  purchase  price  was 
USD$857,500  (CAD$1,180,435)    The  additional  funds  raised  from  the  February  24  private  placement 
have been allocated to working capital to be used for general operating expenses.
PRIVATE PLACEMENT FINANCINGS
During the  three months  ended  May 31, 2016, the Company conducted private placement financings to 
fund its ongoing operations.
On  February  24,  2016,  the  Company  announced  a  non-brokered  private  placement  to  raise  up  to 
$1,800,000  by  issuing  up  to  25,714,286  common  shares  at  a  price  of  $0.07  per  Share.    This  financing 
closed  on  April  1,  2016  and  raised  a  total  of  $1,683,000  through  the  issuance  of  24,042,858  common 
shares  in  the  equity  of  the  Company.    The  majority  of  the  proceeds  from  such  private  placement  were 
earmarked for the acquisition of the domain name www.Jade.com as described above.
On July 8, 2016 the Company announced an additional private placement to raise up to $200,000 through 
the  issuance  of  up  to  1,000,000  common  shares  at  a  price  of  $0.20  per  common  share.    This  private 
placement has not yet closed.
5
SUMMARY OF QUARTERLY FINANCIAL RESULTS
A summary of financial results for the most recently completed quarters as follows:
For the three-months ended:
May 31,
2016
February 29,
November 30,
August 31,
2016
2015
2015
Revenue
-
-
$ 178,718
-
Net income (loss)
$ (85,726)
$ (470,654)
$ 54,478
$ (123,459)
Income (loss) per 
common share
Revenue
Net income (loss)
Income (loss) per 
common share
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.01)
-
May 31,
2015
For the three-months ended:
February 28,
November 30,
August 31,
2015
2014
2014
-
-
-
$ (36)
(0.00)
$ (20,118)
$ (2,846)
$ (28,008)
0.00
$ (0.00)
$ (0.00)
For  the  three  months  ended  May  31,  2016,  the  Company  had  a  net  loss  and  comprehensive  loss  of 
$85,726 compared to a net loss and comprehensive loss of $36 for the same period ended May 31, 2015. 
The increase in loss and comprehensive loss was mainly attributable to increased consultant and legal fees 
due  to  growing  obligations  as  a  reporting  issuer.    Another  factor  to  the  increased  loss  experienced  this 
quarter  is  the  cost  of  legal  expenses  with  regards  to  brokering  and  administering  of  the  Domain  Name 
purchase.
The Company had a deficit of $679,936 at May 31, 2016, a $625,052 increase as compared to May 31, 
2015’s deficit of $54,884.  The increase in deficit was attributable to amalgamation expenses and writing 
off the water distribution rights and deferred listing costs throughout the year combined with a first year 
operation of the Mining Lease.
The Company’s consulting fees increased from $ nil in the three months ended May 31, 2015 to $14,307 
in the three months ended May 31, 2016 due to engagements with consultants to assist with the ongoing 
increased obligations of being a reporting issuer; this increase in consulting fees is on trend with a general 
increase  in  monthly  consulting  fees  as  the  Company  progresses  through  the  process  of  going  public  in 
Canada.
6
Professional fees increased from $ nil in the three months ended May 31, 2015 to $45,311 in the quarter 
ended May 31, 2016.   This is  attributable to the increased legal expenses and services required for the 
brokering and administering of the Domain Name purchase.
Since the Company has now moved into a revenue generating mode and will fully run this year’s mining 
operation, management is optimistic that it can increase revenues and decrease deficits going forward.
OPERATIONS UPDATE
In  transitioning  to  the  second  year  of  the  mining  lease,  on  June  4th,  2016,  the  Company  has  mobilized 
personnel  to  continue  mining  at  the  Ogden Mountain jade  mine  which is  approximately  250  kilometers 
North of Fort St. James in the Omineca mining division  of Northern British Columbia as a continuance 
from last year’s operations.
Management expects approximately 50,000 to 100,000 kilograms of nephrite jade production to meet the 
current market demand and will generate revenues to cover current general operation expenses as well as 
decreasing the current deficit.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of May 31, 2016, the Company had total cash of $72.  There were no sales revenue generated during 
this quarter as the majority of sales occur at the Annual Jade Sale.  For the three months ended May 31, 
2016, the Company received $111,323 cash flow from operations.
The Company’s continued operations are dependent upon its ability to raise additional capital by private 
placements,  the  continuous  support  from  its  creditors,  and  ultimately,  the  attainment  of  profitable 
operations and positive cash flows.  As the Company has incurred losses since inception and is dependent 
on  external  financing  to  sustain  operations,  these  uncertainties  raise  significant  doubt  about  the 
Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.  Recognizing that there are insufficient cash reserves to 
implement its business plan and continue operations for the ensuing twelve months, and that the nature of 
its  revenues  are  seasonal,  and  only  attained  at  the  end  of  the  mining  season  following  the  Annual  Jade 
Sale, the Company will need to generate additional working capital through sales throughout the year.
Management intends to pursue equity financing to meet its working capital requirements and announced a 
private  placement  financing  on  July  8,  2016.  Funds  raised  via  private  placement  financings  provide 
working capital to meet the Company’s obligations until the mining season began in the spring of 2016.  
Further equity or debt financing will be necessary to sustain operations through the mining season as CJM 
is  responsible  for  the  mining  operations  as  of  the  2016  mining  season.  Through  additional  private 
placements  and  through  collection  of  monies  due  from  related  parties  will  finance  the  current  mining 
season’s  operation  expenses  and  payroll  commitments.    Due  to  the  seasonal  nature  of the  nephrite jade 
business, the Company is reliant on previous year’s Annual Jade Sale revenues to finance  and fund each 
year’s mining costs.
The  Company  expects to  realize  revenues from  its  future  annual jade  sales  which  will contribute to the 
Company’s working capital and increase the Company’s operation cash flow.  As the Company reaches 
its milestones and as it continues to generate revenues, the likelihood that investors will invest increases.
7
Should the Company be unsuccessful in raising capital through the equity financing or not realize enough 
revenues  generated  by  the  sale  of  jade  it  may  need  to  consider  borrowing  funds  from  one  or  more 
directors or shareholders.  While related parties have advanced funds in the past there is no guarantee that 
this  will  occur  in  the  future.    At this  time,  the  Company  has  no  plans  to  borrow  money  and  there have 
been no promises or arrangements made to fund the Company in this manner.
TRANSACTIONS BETWEEN RELATED PARTIES
Name of related
party
Shao Long Li, Chief 
Executive Officer & 
Director 
 
 
Charles Sze Pui Lee, 
Director
Green Mountain, a 
company controlled by 
Shao Long Li, CEO
Owed to related party1
May 31
2016
$
137,045
2015
$ 
61,550
Feb 29 
2016
$ 
11,045
Feb28 
2015
Description for related 
party transactions for three 
month ended May 31, 2016
$ 
61,550  During the period, the CEO
3,100
3,100
3,100
3,100  During the period, the
advanced $126, 000 to the 
company for general working 
capital purposes.
(563,464)
18,396
22,750
director advanced $nil to the 
Company for funding 
purposes
18,396  During the period, GMJ, a 
company controlled by the 
Chief Executive Officer 
advanced $104,523 to the 
Company for general 
working capital purposes. 
During the same period, the 
Company settled $127,273 
advanced by paying the loan 
back.
(423,319)
83,046
36,895
83,046
1.  All funds advanced by related parties are on the same terms:  non-interest bearing and due on
demand.
Contractual agreements with related parties
Name of related party 
Green Mountain, a company 
controlled by Shao Long Li, 
CEO
Description
Further information
Entered into a mining lease on 
July 1, 2015
The Mining Lease is explained 
more fully in the section entitled 
“Mining Lease”
8
Related party participation in financing activities and share issuances
Name of related party
Description for related party transactions for 3 months ended
May 31, 2016
Green Mountain, a company 
controlled by Shao Long Li, 
CEO
On April 1, 2016, the Company issued 24,042,858 common shares 
at $0.07 per share for gross proceeds of $1,683,000 pursuant to a 
non-brokered private placement of which GMJ received 15,871,428 
common shares.
As at May 31, 2016, $130,615 is receivable from GMJ for sales collected by GMJ on behalf of the 
Company during the Annual Jade Sales as per the Mining Lease.  As of the date of writing of this 
MD&A, this amount has been received by the Company.   
 
At the present time there are no arrangements in place to pay consulting fees or director fees to any of the 
Company’s executive officers or directors.   
 
 
SHARE CAPITAL
The Company’s authorized share capital consists of an unlimited number of common shares without par 
value.  As at the date of this report, 51,397,356 common shares are issued and outstanding.
PROPOSED TRANSACTIONS
On July 8, 2016, the Company announced a non-brokered private placement to raise up to $200,000 by 
issuing up to 1,000,000 common shares at a price of $0.20 per share. A finder’s fee may be payable from 
the proceeds of the proposed financing.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The fair value of the Company's financial instruments other than cash, approximates their carrying value 
as at May 31, 2016 because of the demand nature or short-term maturity of these instruments. Cash has 
been measured at fair value using level 1 inputs.
Financial risk management objectives and policies
The Company is exposed to varying degrees to a variety of financial instruments related risks. The risks 
associated  with  these  financial  instruments  and  the  policies  on  how  to  mitigate  these  risks  are  set  out 
below.  Management  manages  and  monitors  these  exposures  to  ensure  appropriate  measures  are 
implemented on a timely and effective manner.
Market Risk
Market  risk  is  the  risk  that  a  loss  may  arise  from  changes  in  the  market  factors  such  as  interest  rates, 
equity prices, commodity prices and foreign currency fluctuations.
9
Currency Risk
Exposure
At the reporting date, the carrying value of the Company’s net financial assets and financial liabilities 
held in United States Dollars expressed in Canadian Dollars and as a percentage of its net assets were 
as follows:
Currency 
USD
May 31, 2016
Canadian Dollars ($)
% of Net Assets
128,629
6.32%
Sensitivity Analysis
The table below sets out the effect on the net assets attributable to a reasonable possible weakening of 
the Canadian Dollar against the US Dollar by 10%.  The analysis assumes that all other variables, in 
particular interest rates, remain constant.
Effect in Canadian Dollars (increase) 
USD
May 31, 2016
12,863
A  strengthening  of  the  Canadian  Dollar  against  the  US  Dollar  would  have  resulted  in  an  equal  but 
opposite  effect  to  the  amounts  shown  above.    Therefore,  management  believes  the  currency  risk  is 
currently low.
Interest Rate Risk
Interest  risk  is  the  risk  that  the  fair  value  or  future  cash  flows  will  fluctuate  as  a  result  of  changes  in 
market risk. The Company's sensitivity to interest rates is currently immaterial.
Price risk
The  Company  is  minimally  exposed  to  price  risk  with  respect  to  commodity  and  equity  prices.  Equity 
price  risk  is  defined  as  the  potential  adverse  impact  on  the  Company’s  earnings  due  to  movements  in 
individual equity prices or general movements in the level of the stock market. Commodity price risk is 
defined  as  the  potential  adverse  impact  on  earnings  and  economic  value  due  to  commodity  price 
movements and volatilities. The Company’s sensitivity to Price Risk is immaterial.
Credit Risk
Credit risk is the risk of an unexpected loss if a customer or third party to a financial instrument fails to 
meet its contractual obligations. The credit risk is limited because management assess accounts receivable 
and deposit as a non-doubtful and collective accounts and decided that there is no doubtful allowance is 
required  to  be  recorded.  All  of  the  Company’s  accounts  receivable  was  collected  in  full  subsequent  to 
May 31, 2016, therefore, the Company is not exposed to significant credit risk.
10
Liquidity risk
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Company will not be able to meet its financial obligations as they fall 
due.  In  the  management  of  liquidity  risk  of  the  Company,  the  Company  maintains  a  balance  between 
continuity of funding and the flexibility through the use of borrowings. Management closely monitors 
the liquidity position to ensure the company will have sufficient liquidity to meet liabilities when 
due.  As  at  May  31,  2016,  the  Company  had  cash  of  $72,  accounts  receivable  of  $130,615  and 
current  liabilities  of  ($396,322).  The  Company  is  able  to  use  its  current  assets  to  meet  its 
obligations as they come due.
The  Board  of  Directors  has  not  established  any  quantitative  return  on  capital  criteria  for  management, 
instead  relying  on  the  expertise  of  the  Company's  management  to  sustain  future  development  of  the 
business.
The Company is dependent on external financing to fund its activities.  In order to carry out activities and 
administration,  the  Company  will  spend  its  existing  working  capital  and  raise  additional  amounts  as 
needed.
CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING POLICIES
There were no changes in accounting policies during the three months ended May 31, 2016.
Certain new standards, interpretations and amendments to existing standards have been issued by the 
IASB that are mandatory for future accounting periods.  Some updates that are not applicable or are not 
consequential to the Company may have been excluded from the list below.
Management is currently assessing the impact each of these standards will have on its financial 
statements.


IFRS 9 – New standard that replaced IAS 39 for classification and measurement, effective for 
annual periods beginning on or after January 1, 2018. 
 
IFRS 15 - In May 2014, the IASB issued IFRS 15, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers”, to 
specify how and when to recognize revenue as well as requiring the provision of more 
informative and relevant disclosures. IFRS 15 supersedes IAS 18, "Revenue”, IAS 11, 
“Construction Contracts”, and other revenue-related interpretations. In September 2015, the IASB 
deferred the mandatory effective date of IFRS 15 to fiscal years beginning on or after January 1, 
2018. Earlier application is permitted.
OFF BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
The Company has no off balance sheet arrangements.
RISK FACTORS
Mining is inherently risky and there can be no guarantee of positive results.  Management considers that 
the  following  factors  could  have  an  adverse  effect  on  its  ability  to  generate  revenues,  or  to  continue  in 
business if they were to occur.
11
We  are  vulnerable  to  market  conditions  and  trends  in  the  world  jade  market  and  in  the  overall 
economy 
We  are  a  mining  Company  restricted  by  the  number  of  months  we  can  operate  per  year  or  per  mining 
season.    The  future  growth  and  well-being  of  the  BC  jade  mining  industry  depends  primarily  on  the 
demand from our main customers in Asia.  This demand is driven and determined by a variety of factors, 
including  the  economic  well-being  of  jade-demanding  countries,  International  Trade  and  Tariff 
legislation, cyclical trends in the economy as a whole, and jadeite’s supply and demand trends. 
 
We may experience labour shortages 
Generally, our mining works are labour intensive and given the seasonal nature of the employment, it is 
harder to guarantee an employee will stay with the Company for multiple years.  Our Company will need 
to manage our mining team and labour force with care, as failing to retain a capable labour team in the 
mining  season  will  greatly  affect  existing  and  future  projects  and  not  able  to  execute  based  on 
management’s strategies and plans. 
 
We rely on key management personnel 
Our  success  and  growth  depends  on  our  ability  to  identify,  hire,  train  and  retain  suitable,  skilled  and 
qualified  employees,  including  management  personnel  with  the  appropriate  industry  experience  and 
expertise.    Our  directors and  senior  management  team  in  general  are crucial to  the  Company’s  success.  
Failure to  retain  the  managers  and  consultants,  or  to  attract  or retain additional  key  personnel,  with  the 
necessary skills and experience could have a materially adverse impact upon our growth and profitability.  
Our Company does not carry key person insurance.  
 
We are subject to environmental liability 
Our  business  and  operations  are  subject  to  the  environmental  regulations  and  guidelines  issued  by  the 
Ministry  of  Mines  and  the  Province  of  British  Columbia.    Though  jade  mining  falls  under  low-
environmental impact mining, the actions of other corporations will still affect the mining industry as a 
whole. 
 
In  addition,  environmental  legislation  is  evolving  in  a  manner  which  will  require  stricter  standards  and 
enforcement, increased fines and penalties for non-compliance, more stringent environmental assessments 
of proposed projects and a heightened degree of responsibility for companies and their officers, directors 
and employees.  
 
There is no assurance that future changes in environmental regulation, if any, will not adversely affect the 
Company’s operations.  Environmental hazards may exist on the properties on which the Company holds 
interests which are unknown to the Company at present, which have been caused, by previous or existing 
owners or operators of the properties. The Company may become liable for such environmental hazards 
caused by previous owners and operators of the properties even where it has attempted to contractually 
limit its liability.  Government approvals and permits are currently, and may in the future be, required in 
connection with the Company’s operations.  To the extent such approvals are required and not obtained; 
the Company may be curtailed or prohibited from proceeding with planned exploration or development of 
mineral properties.
12
Failure  to  comply  with  applicable  laws,  regulations  and  permitting  requirements  may  result  in 
enforcement  actions  thereunder,  including  orders  issued  by  regulatory  or  judicial  authorities  causing 
operations to cease or be curtailed, and may include corrective measures requiring capital expenditures, 
installation  of additional  equipment,  or remedial  actions.    Parties  engaged  in  mining  operations  may  be 
required to compensate those suffering loss or damage by reason of the mining activities and may have 
civil or criminal fines or penalties imposed for violations of applicable laws or regulations.  
 
Amendments  to  current  laws,  regulations  and  permits  governing  operations  and  activities  of  mining 
companies,  or  more  stringent  implementation  thereof,  could  have  a  material  adverse  impact  on  the 
Company  and  cause  increases  in  exploration  expenses,  capital  expenditures  or  production  costs  or 
reduction  in  levels  of  production  at  producing  properties  or  require  abandonment  or  delays  in 
development of new mining properties.
We operate in a remote location exposed to extreme weather conditions 
The  remote  nature  of  our location  means  we are  subject  to  climate  and transportation  risks.    Our  entire 
operation  is  conducted  outdoors  and  is  affected  by  weather  conditions.    If  extreme  weather  conditions 
persist  or  natural  disaster  occurs,  we  may  be  prevented  from  continuing  work  at  our  operations.  
Transportation challenges include limited accessibility, the unavailability of materials and equipment due 
to  weather  conditions,  and  unanticipated  transportation  costs.    Adverse  weather  conditions  may  also 
prevent  the  operation  of  equipment.  The  opening  and  closing  of  our  camps  and  operations  are  highly 
dependent on the weather conditions and snow-level.  These are all factors that affect our mining season 
length and affect our revenues and profits.
We may be subject to aboriginal claims   
Our mining properties may be the subject of aboriginal land claims or aboriginal rights claims. The legal 
basis of an aboriginal land claim and aboriginal rights is a matter of considerable legal complexity and the 
impact  of  the  assertion  of  such  a  claim,  or  the  possible  effect  of  a  settlement  of  such  claim  upon  our 
Company could have deleterious effects on our ability to operate.
We require permits and licenses to operate
The exploitation and development of mineral properties requires that we obtain and maintain regulatory 
or  other  permits  and  licenses  through  various  governmental  licensing  bodies.    While  the  Company 
currently has all the licenses and permits it requires, there can be no assurance that the Company will be 
able to obtain necessary permits and licenses in the future that may be required to continue operations or 
expand exploration, development and mining operations on its properties. 
 
We are subject to government regulation
The  exploration  activities  of  the  Company  are  subject  to  various  federal,  provincial  and  local  laws 
governing  prospecting,  development,  production,  taxes,  labour  standards  and  occupational  health,  mine 
safety, and other matters.   Exploration activities are also subject to various federal, provincial and local 
laws  and  regulations  relating  to  the  protection  of  the  environment.    These  laws  mandate,  among  other 
things,  the  maintenance  of  air  and  water  quality  standards,  and  land  reclamation.    These  laws  also  set 
forth limitations on the generation, transportation, storage and disposal of solid and/or hazardous waste.
13
Although the Company’s exploration activities are currently carried out in accordance with all applicable 
rules and regulations, no assurance can be given that new rules and regulations will not be enacted or that 
existing rules and regulations will not be applied in a manner which could limit or curtail production or 
development.    Amendments  to  current  laws  and  regulations  governing  operations  and  activities  of 
exploration,  mining  and  milling  or  more  stringent  implementation  thereof  could  have  a  substantial 
adverse impact on the Company.
We may experience conflicts of interest 
Certain  of the  directors  of the  Company  may  also  serve  as  directors  and/or  officers  of  other  companies 
involved in natural resource exploration and development.  Consequently, there exists the possibility for 
such  directors  to  be  in  a  position  of  conflict.    Any  decision  made  by  such  directors  involving  the 
Company  will  be  made  in  accordance  with  their  duties  and  obligations  to  deal  fairly  and  in  good  faith 
with the Company and such other companies.   In addition, such directors will declare, and refrain from 
voting on, any matter in which such directors may have a conflict of interest. 
 
We may not be able to insure against all risks 
The  Company  may  carry  insurance  to  protect  against  certain  risks  in  such  amounts  as  it  considers 
adequate.  Risks not insured against include environmental pollution or other hazards against which such 
corporations cannot insure or against which they may elect not to insure. 
 
INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING PROCEDURES
The management of the Company is responsible for establishing and maintaining appropriate information 
systems,  procedures  and  controls  to  ensure  that  information  used  internally  and  disclosed  externally  is 
complete, reliable and timely. Management is also responsible for establishing adequate internal controls 
over  financial reporting  to provide  sufficient  knowledge  to  support the  statements  made  in this  MD&A 
and the Company’s financial statements for the  three months  ended May 31, 2016 (together the “Three 
months interim  Filings”). 
 
The  management  of  the  Company  has  filed  the  Venture  Issuer  Basic  Certificate  with  the  three  months 
interim Filings on SEDAR at www.sedar.com. 
 
In  contrast  to  the  certificate  required  for  non-venture  issuers  under  National  Instrument  52-109 
Certification of Disclosure in Issuers’ Annual and Interim Filings (“NI 52-109”), the venture issuer basic 
certificate  does  not  include  representations  relating  to  the  establishment  and  maintenance  of  disclosure 
controls and procedures (“DC&P”) and internal control over financial reporting (“ICFR”), as defined in 
NI  52-109.  Investors  should  be  aware  that  inherent  limitations  on  the  ability  of  certifying  officers  of  a 
venture issuer to design and implement on a cost effective basis DC&P and ICFR as defined in NI 52-109 
may result in additional risks to the quality, reliability, transparency, and timeliness of interim and annual 
filings and other reports provided under securities legislation.
14