
Prospectus  
MUI Corporation 11   ~ . .3 , /
Amman“? -' ‘
, .  ﬁf‘i‘n‘mrrwl . ‘
‘i‘ﬂOﬂ-Wﬂ‘l ?ﬂh| 011111: I] HI MI I :F; '
. t ‘ V k
a," * ' ,
I ‘ " V
I“ TV, ‘
v». ‘ .y’ ‘1'. 1.: .~ 4 y . . ‘-
, , " ‘
r  , ‘ ;  ~.  n’
 “data; "J" «2-7 \ —. i \  : r_  »
:~-’  i  ~  F. ‘ ‘ , " ' ,
\;::{:.‘;i‘,.;   “ﬂayﬁr ;  "I :53}. ; .  7 ﬂ :77
‘  - ,l‘m ‘ng "  7 r x I ‘
  ,' - ,o  -. y 3"-',.'\"‘:.’ -
,, \  $®p 5 “ﬂ! ’2. 4 ‘“ ~ ‘ 1‘ \ _‘ . _‘ 
 ' 5%}? ,5» W _ 4 ,,
4., nth {L9 v  ’~  l . 33‘; ‘2‘“ 
F‘  “x \ r)? i!“ j! |I K hum, ‘,\\‘§
"q’ﬁé - ‘ ‘ 91‘ CV“ “ simian;
 ,3  .2»: m:- ‘-  v: _ o
,v — :9 9 ' ‘ o -
- ' I‘ T \ " 1“
" ' ‘Q o r T" 9' .
. :-   . ' /13 \ "'55" r ‘  ‘57!
 ;xr   5‘77; ~‘~‘~ .; 4" "V G ‘ "* “1“ 
 h”   "11¢ , " Iii»-   A
 q - «  “‘3 
 «3‘. j; v; r  g _
V   "3TH" -  “Rx ~
. - “Nag, ‘  3a.“  v; ’\ E
 ‘4  13f?»1‘2?*-‘5-‘1'-§‘-"‘ - "  J ' ' -  's'
  “M gag; Emit: . “:f x ;
 ',  - 0535:?“  " ~r 
5:: 1"?» g?  --, g  
»"'< _ m 2:73 351‘ “" V ' "-" ,"‘"  ( 1'51;- ‘ _‘
 "izthW- ~ ~ 7 t o a
 , «— “  *~ “It”? 3 l r a._ ‘
o-owa‘.;2:i“‘;<<§§f-“  i  - * ' w "  
A 39'1""  " ‘ ~M 31:, .. ." 
A h. v - 7"" 3' -""" V3.75"  q
«9)  .. ’h “I ’15:" r A ‘ _ _:f_f.__' V


MUI	  Corporation	  Limited	  (the	  “Company”)	  	  	  
(to	  be	  renamed	  “Skyland	  Petroleum	  Limited”)	  
ABN	  54	  072	  350	  817
PROSPECTUS
In	   relation	   to	   an	  offer	  of	  a	  minimum	  of	  140,000,000	  Shares	  
at	  an	  issue	  price	  of	  $0.10	  per	  Share	  to	  raise	  $14,000,000	  (the	  
“Minimum	   Subscription”)	   with	   the	   ability	   to	   offer	   up	   to	   a	  
maximum	   of	   170,000,000	   Shares	   at	   an	   issue	   price	   of	   $0.10	  
per	  
“Maximum	  
Subscription”)	  (the	  “Public	  Offer”)
raise	   $17,000,000
(the
Share
to
IMPORTANT	  NOTICE
1
Table	  of	  Contents
Letter	  from	  the	  Chairman	  
1.
Investment	  Overview
2.
Details	  of	  the	  Offers
3.
Conditions	  to	  Offers
4.
Investment	  and	  Business	  Risk	  Factors
5.
Financial	  Information
6.
Investigating	  Accountant’s	  Report
7.
Company	  Overview
8.
Oil	  and	  Gas	  Industry	  Sector	  Overview
9.
Overview	  of	  Projects	  and	  Countries	  where	  Projects	  are	  Located
10. Overview	  of	  Specific	  Projects
11.
12. Additional	  Information
13. Applications
14. Questions	  and	  Enquiries
15. Directors’	  Authorisation
16. Definitions
Independent	  Geologist’s	  Report
8	  
9	  
28	  
36	  
38	  
46	  
55	  
62	  
69	  
74	  
83	  
100	  
149	  
162	  
163	  
164	  
165
2
Important	  Notice
Date
This	   is	   a	   replacement	   prospectus	   for	   MUI	   Corporation	   
Limited	     (Company	     or	     MUI)	     dated	   18  February	     2016	  
(Prospectus).	   A	   copy	   of	   this	   Prospectus	   was	   lodged	   with	  
the	  Australian	  Securities	  Commission	  (ASIC)	  on	  that	  date.	  
It	  replaces	  a	  prospectus	  dated	  4	  February	  2016	  (Original	  
Prospectus).	    Neither	    ASIC	    nor	    ASX	   
takes	    any	   
responsibility	   for	   the	   contents	   of	   this	     Prospectus.	   No	  
securities	   will	   be	   allotted	   or	   issued	   on	   the	   basis	   of	   this	   
Prospectus	   later	   than	   13	   months	   from	     the	  date	  of	  this	  
Prospectus.
Replacement	  Prospectus
The	   principal	   differences	   between	  
the	   Original	  
Prospectus	   and	   this	   Prospectus	   may	   be	   summarized	   as	  
follows.	  	  The	  Prospectus	  now	  includes:	  
from
•
An	   amended	   Letter	  
the	   Chairman
including	   incorporating	   the	   highly	   speculative	  
nature	  of	  any	  investment	  in	  the	  Company;	  
An	   update	   in	   sections	   1.2	   and	   9.2	   on	   how	   the
Company	  will	  generate	  income;	  
Enhanced	   disclosure	   of	   key	   risks;	   inclusion	   of	   a
statement	   regarding	   current	   oil	   and	   gas	   prices,
future	   capital	   requirements	   and	   share	   liquidity
risk	  in	  sections	  1.4	  and	  4;	  
Inclusion	   of	   substantial	   shareholder	   percentage
ownership,	   Vendors	   and	  
their	   percentage
ownership	  (section	  1.7);	  
Inclusion	  of	  Historical	  Consolidated	  Statement	  of
Comprehensive	  Income	  of	  MUI	  and	  SPG	  (section
5.2);	  
Enhanced	  disclosure	  of	  the	  analysis	  of	  the	  Kyzyl-­‐
Tumshuk	   Field,	   Tajikistan	   and	   the	   competent
person	  providing	  the	  analysis	  (section	  10.1.7);	  
Enhanced	   disclosure	   of	  
the	   Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk
Investment	  and	  Operating	  Agreement	  (section
10.1.3),	  	  
Enhanced	   disclosure	   of	   the	   Expenses	   of	   the
Offers	  (section	  12.5.13);	  and	  
Various	   consequential	   amendments	   clarifying	  
that	  the	  Public	  Offer	  has	  a	  minimum	  subscription
requirement.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Conditional	  Offers
approving
Shareholders
The	   Offers	   are	   conditional	   on	   a	   number	   of	   factors,	  
including	  
(among	   other	  
matters)	   the	   Acquisition	   and	   the	   Consolidation	   at	   the	  
Meeting	  of	  the	  Company	  on	  18	  February	  2016,	  the	  ASX	  
confirming	   the	   Company's	   compliance	   with	   Chapters	   1	  
and	  2	  of	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules	  and	  the	  ASX	  approving	  the	  
re-­‐admission	   of	   the	   Company	   to	   the	   ASX.	   The	   terms	   of	  
the	   Acquisition	   are	   more	   particularly	   summarised	   in	  
Section	   2	   and	   the	   various	   conditions	   to	   the	   Offers	   are	  
summarised	  in	  Section	  3.
Application	   for	   Quotation
At	   the	   relevant	   time	   the	   Company	   will	   apply	   to	   ASX	   for	  
the	   New	   Shares,	   being	   the	   subject	   of	   the	   Offers,	   to	   be	  
admitted	   to	   quotation	   on	   ASX.	   In	   the	   event	   that	   the	  
New	   Shares	   are	   not	   admitted	   to	   quotation	   on	   ASX,	   they	  
will	   not	   be	   issued	   by	   the	   Company	   and	   all	   Application
Monies	  will	  be	  refunded	  to	  Applicants.	  The	  admission	  of	  
the	   New	   Shares	   to	   quotation	   (and	   the	   re-­‐admission	   of	  
the	  Company	  following	  compliance	  with	  Chapters	  1	  and	  
2	  of	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules)	  is	  not	  to	  be	  taken	  in	  any	  way	  
as	  an	  indication	  by	  ASX	  of	  the	  merits	  of	  the	  Company.
Speculative	  Investment/Risk
It	  is	  important	  that	  Applicants	  read	  this	  Prospectus	  in	  its	  
entirety	  before	  deciding	  to	  invest	  so	  that	  they	  may	  make	  
an	   informed	   assessment	   of	   the	   assets	   and	   liabilities,	  
financial	  position	  and	  prospects	  of	  the	  Company	  and	  the	  
rights	   attaching	   to	   the	   New	   Shares	   offered	   by	   this	  
Prospectus.	   An	   investment	   in	   the	   Company	   must	   be	  
considered	   speculative.	   Please	   refer	   to	   the	   summary	   in	  
the	   Investment	   Overview	   Section	   in	   Section	   1.4	   to	   this	  
Prospectus	   for	   details	   relating	   to	   risks	   involved	   with	   an	  
investment	  in	  the	  Company.
Foreign	  Jurisdictions
This	  Prospectus	  does	  not	  constitute	  an	  offer	  in	  any	  place	  
in	   which,	   or	   to	   any	   person	   to	   whom,	   it	   would	   not	   be	  
lawful	   to	   make	   such	   an	   offer.	   The	   distribution	   of	   this	  
Prospectus	   in	   jurisdictions	   outside	   Australia	   and	   New	  
Zealand	   may	   be	   restricted	   by	   law	   and	   any	   person	   who	  
comes	   into	   possession	   of	   this	   Prospectus	   should	   seek	  
advice	  and	  observe	  any	  such	  restrictions.	   Any	  failure	  to	  
comply	  with	  such	  restrictions	  may	  constitute	  a	  violation	  
of	  applicable	  securities	  laws.
Hong	   Kong
The	  contents	  of	  this	  Prospectus	  have	  not	  been	  reviewed	  
by	   any	   regulatory	   authority	   in	   Hong	   Kong.	   You	   are	  
advised	   to	   exercise	   caution	   in	   relation	   to	   the	   Offers.	   If	  
you	   are	   in	   any	   doubt	   about	   any	   of	   the	   contents	   of	   this	  
Prospectus,	  you	  should	  obtain	  independent	  professional	  
advice.
This	   Prospectus	   does	   not	   constitute	   an	   offer	   or	   sale	   in	  
Hong	  Kong	  of	  any	  Shares	  and	  no	  person	  may	  offer	  or	  sell	  
in	   Hong	   Kong,	   by	   means	   of	   this	   Prospectus,	   any	   Shares	  
other	   than	   (a)	   to	   “professional	   investors”	   within	   the	  
meaning	  of	  the	  Securities	  and	  Futures	   Ordinance	  (Cap.	  
571)	   of	   Hong	   Kong	   and	   any	   rules	   made	   under	   that	  
Ordinance;	   or	   (b)	   in	   other	   circumstances	   which	   do	   not	  
result	   in	   the	   document	   being	   a	   “prospectus”	   as	   defined	  
in	   the	   Companies	   Ordinance	   (Cap.	   32)	   of	   Hong	   Kong	   or	  
which	  do	  not	  constitute	  an	  offer	  to	  the	  public	  within	  the	  
meaning	  of	  that	  Ordinance.
3
any
No	   person	   may	   issue	   or	   have	   in	   his	   possession	   for	  
the	   purposes	   of	   issue,	   whether	   in	   Hong	   Kong	   or	  
elsewhere,	  
or	  
document	   relating	   to	   the	   Shares,	   which	   is	   directed	  
at,	  or	  the	   contents	   of	   which	  are	  likely	  to	   be	  accessed	  
if	  
or	   read	   by,	   the	   public	  
permitted	   to	   do	   so	   under	   the	   securities	  laws	  of	  Hong	  
Kong)	  other	  than	  with	  respect	  to	   Shares	  which	  are	  or	  
are	   intended	   to	   be	   disposed	   of	   only	  
to	   persons	  
“professional	  
outside	   Hong	   Kong	   or	   only	  
investors”	   within	   the	   meaning	   of	   the	   Securities	   and	  
Futures	   Ordinance	   (Cap.	   571)	   of	   Hong	   Kong	   and	   	   any	  
rules	  made	  under	  that	  Ordinance.
in	   Hong	   Kong	   (except
advertisement,
invitation
to
Electronic	  version	   of	  this	  Prospectus
A	   copy	   of	   this	   Prospectus	   may	   be	   viewed	   on	   the	  
company	  announcements	  section	  of	  the	  ASX	  website	  at	  
www.asx.com.au	   and	   can	   be	   downloaded	   from	   the	  
website	  of	  MUI	  Corporation	  Limited	  at	  www.mui.net.au.	  
In	   order	   to	   benefit	   from	   any	  
investor	   protections	  
provided	   by	   applicable	   Australian	   securities	   laws	   and	  
regulations,	  any	  person	  accessing	  the	  electronic	  version	  
of	   this	   Prospectus	   for	   the	   purposes	   of	   becoming	   a	  
shareholder	   must	   be	   an	   Australian	   or	   New	   Zealand	  
resident	   and	   must	   only	   access	   the	   Prospectus	   from	  
within	   Australia	   or	   New	   Zealand.	   The	   Corporations	   Act	  
prohibits	   any	   person	   passing	   on	   to	   another	   person	   the	  
Application	  Form	  unless	  it	  is	  attached	  to	  a	  hard	  copy	  of	  
this	   Prospectus	   or	   accompanied	   by	   the	   complete	   and	  
unaltered	   version	   of	  
this	   Prospectus.	   Prospective	  
Applicants	   should	   read	   this	   Prospectus	   in	   its	   entirety	  
before	   completing	   the	   Application	   Form.	   Any	   person	  
may	  obtain	  a	  hard	  copy	  of	  this	  Prospectus	  free	  of	  charge	  
by	  contacting	  the	  Company.
The	   Company	   reserves	   the	   right	   not	   to	   accept	   an	  
Application	   Form	   from	   a	   person	   if	   the	   Company	   has	  
reason	   to	   believe	   that	   when	   that	   person	   was	   given	  
access	   to	   the	   Application	   Form,	   it	   was	   not	   provided	  
together	   with	  
relevant	  
supplementary	   or	   replacement	   prospectus	   or	   any	   of	  
those	  documents	  were	  incomplete	  or	  altered.
the	   Prospectus	   and	   any
No	   Forecasts
The	   business	   of	   oil	   and	   gas	   exploration,	   appraisal	   and	  
development	   is	   speculative	   where	   there	   are	   no	   proved	  
reserves	   and	  
significant	   uncertainties	  
associated	   with	   forecasting	   revenues	   and	   expenses	   of	  
such	  operations.
there	   are
Accordingly,	  the	  Directors	  believe	  that	  reliable	  forecasts	  
cannot	   be	   prepared	   and	   forecasts	   have	   therefore	   not	  
been	   included	   in	   this	   Prospectus	   in	   accordance	   with	  
ASIC	  Regulatory	  Guide	  170.
Forward-­‐looking	  Statements
This	   Prospectus	   contains	   forward-­‐looking	   statements	  
which	   are	   identified	   by	   words	   such	   as	   “may”,	   “could”,	  
“believes”,	   “estimates”,	   “targets”,	   “expects”,	   “intends”	  
and	   other	   words	   expressing	   a	   similar	   likelihood	   or	   a	  
possibility	   (whether	   objectively	   or	   subjectively	   framed)
occurring.
Such	   forward-­‐looking	   statements	   are	   not	   guarantees	   of	  
future	   performance	   and	   involve	   known	   and	   unknown	  
risks,	   uncertainties,	   assumptions	   and	   other	   important	  
factors,	   may	  of	   which	  	  are	   beyond	  	  the	   control	  	  of	   the	  
Company,	  its	  Directors	  and	  management.
Any	   forward-­‐looking	   statements	   contained	   within	   this	  
Prospectus	  are	  subject	  to	  various	  risk	  factors	  that	  could	  
cause	   actual	   results	   to	   differ	   materially	   from	   those	  
expressed	   or	   anticipating	  
in	   these	   statements.	   The	  
Company	  has	  endeavored	  to	  set	  out	  the	  key	  Risk	  Factors	  
of	   making	   an	   investment	   in	   the	   Company	   under	   this	  
Prospectus	  and	  they	  are	  set	  out	  in	  Section	  4
Disclaimer
No	   person	   named	   in	   this	   Prospectus,	   nor	   any	   other	  
person,	   guarantees	   the	   performance	   of	   the	   Company,	  
the	  repayment	  of	  capital	  or	  the	  payment	  of	  a	  return	  on	  
any	  of	  the	  issued	  securities	  of	  the	  Company.
No	  person	  is	  authorised	  to	  provide	  any	  information	  or	  to	  
make	   any	   representation	   in	   connection	   with	   the	   Offers	  
described	   in	   this	   Prospectus	   which	   is	   not	   contained	   in	  
this	  Prospectus.
Any	  information	  or	  representation	  not	  so	  contained	  may	  
not	   be	   relied	   on	   as	   having	   been	   authorised	   by	   the	  
Company	   or	   any	   other	   person	   in	   connection	   with	   the	  
Offers.
Privacy
The	   Application	   Forms	   accompanying	   this	   Prospectus	  
require	  you	  to	  provide	  information	  that	  may	  be	  personal	  
information	   for	   the	   purposes	   of	   the	   Privacy	   Act	   1988	  
(Commonwealth).	  The	  Company	  (and	  the	  Share	  Registry	  
on	   its	   behalf)	   may	   collect,	   hold	   and	   use	   that	   personal	  
information	   in	   order	   to	   assess	   your	   Application,	   service	  
your	   needs	   as	   an	   investor	   in	   the	   Company,	   provide	  
facilities	   and	   services	   that	   you	   request	   or	   that	   are	  
connected	   with	   your	   investment	   in	   the	   Company	   and	  
carry	  out	  appropriate	  administration.
You	   may	   request	   access	   to	   your	   personal	   information	  
held	  by	  the	  Company	  or	  the	  Share	  Registry	  by	  contacting	  
the	  Company	  Secretary.
Definitions
Certain	  abbreviations	  and	  other	  defined	  terms	  are	  used	  
throughout	  this	  Prospectus.	  Defined	  terms	  are	  generally	  
identifiable	   by	   the	   use	   of	   an	   upper	   case	   first	   letter.	  
Details	  of	  the	  definitions	  and	  abbreviations	  used	  are	  set	  
out	  in	  Section	  16	  of	  this	  Prospectus.
4
Photographs	   and	   Diagrams
Photographs	   used	   in	   this	   Prospectus	   which	   do	   not	  
have	   descriptions	   are	   for	   illustration	   only	   and	   should	  
not	   be	   interpreted	   to	   mean	   that	   any	   person	   shown	  
endorses	   the	   Prospectus	   or	   its	   contents	   or	   that	   the	  
assets	  shown	  in	  them	  are	  owned	  by	  the	  Company.
Diagrams	   used	   in	   this	   prospectus	   are	   illustrative	   only	  
and	  may	  not	  be	  drawn	  to	  scale.
Enquiries
If	  you	  are	  in	  any	  doubt	  as	  to	  how	  to	  deal	  with	  any	  of	  
the	   matters	   raised	   in	   this	   Prospectus,	   you	   should	  
consult	   your	   broker	   or	  
legal,	   financial	   or	   other	  
professional	  advisor	  without	  delay.
Should	   you	   have	   any	   questions	   about	   the	   Offers	   or	  
how	   to	   accept	   the	   Offers,	   please	   call	   the	   Company	  
Secretary,	  Louisa	  Martino,	  on	  +61	  2	  (02)	  8823	  3179.
5
Corporate	  Directory:	  MUI	  Corporation	  Limited	  (ABN	  54	  072	  350	  817)
Directors
Mr.	  John	  Bell	  
Mr.	  Domenic	  Martino	  
Mr.	  Philip	  Silva
(Non-­‐Executive	  Chairman)	  
(Non-­‐Executive	  Director)	  
(Non-­‐Executive	  Director)
Proposed	  Directors	  
Dr.	  David	  Robson	  
Ms.	  Elizabeth	  Landles
Mr.	  Mark	  Sarssam	  
Mr.	  Piers	  Johnson	  
Dr.	  Raden	  Sukhyar	  
Mr.	  Ghassan	  Zok	  
Mr.	  Timothy	  Hargreaves	  
Mr.	  Domenic	  Martino
(Chairman	  and	  Managing	  Director)	  
(Executive	  Director,	  	  	  	  
Group	  Corporate	  Secretary)	  
(Executive	  Director)	  
(Non-­‐Executive	  Director)	  
(Non-­‐Executive	  Director)	  
(Non-­‐Executive	  Director)	  
(Non-­‐Executive	  Director)	  
(Non-­‐Executive	  Director)
Registered	  Office
Level	  5,	  56	  Pitt	  Street	  
Sydney,	  NSW	  2000	  
Telephone:	  +61	  (02)	  8823	  3179	  
Facsimile:	  +61	  (02)	  8823	  3188
Company	  Secretary
Ms.	  Louisa	  Martino
Solicitors	  to	  the	  Offers
Hunt	  and	  Humphry	  
15	  Colin	  Street,	  West	  Perth	  6005	  
www.huntandhumphry.com.au
Corporate	  Adviser
Cedrus	  Investments	  Limited	  
Grand	  Pavillion	  
802	  West	  Bay	  Road	  
Grand	  Cayman,	  Cayman	  Islands
Auditors/Investigating	  Accountant
Independent	  Geologist
William	  Buck	  (Vic)	  Pty	  Limited	  
Level	  20,	  181	  William	  Street	  
Melbourne,	  VIC	  3000	  
Telephone:	  +61	  (03)	  9824	  8555
Share	   Registry*
Computershare	  Investor	  Services	  Pty	  Limited	  
Level	  5,	  115	  Grenfell	  Street	  
Adelaide,	  SA	  5000	  
Telephone:	  +61	  (03)	  9415	  4000	  
*This	  entity	  has	  been	  included	  for	  information	  purposes	  only.
It	  has	  not	  been	  involved	  in	  the	  preparation	  of	  this	  Prospectus.
Gustavson	  Associates	  LLC	  
575	  Central	  Ave.	  
Boulder,	  Colorado	  
USA	  
Telephone:	  +	  1	  (303)	  443	  2209
ASX	   Code
Current:	  MUI	  
Proposed:	  SKP
6
Indicative	  Timetable
Lodge	  Prospectus	  with	  ASIC
Snapshot	  date	  for	  eligibility	  to	  vote	  at	  General	  Meeting
General	  Meeting	  to	  consider	  Resolutions
Suspension	  in	  trading	  in	  Shares
Consolidation	  Date
Opening	  of	  Public	  Offer
Closing	  of	  Public	  Offer
Shares	  issued	  under	  the	  Public	  Offer,	  to	  Vendors	  and	  Convertible	  
Noteholder	  on	  completion	  of	  the	  Acquisition
New	  holding	  statements	  and	  certificates	  dispatched	  to	  
Shareholders	  following	  completion	  of	  Public	  Offer
Normal	  trading	  of	  Shares	  resumes	  (subject	  to	  satisfaction	  of	  
Chapters	  1	  and	  2	  of	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules).	  Normal	  T+2	  trading	  
commences.
4	  February	  2016
16	  February	  2016
18	  February	  2016
18	  February	  2016
18	  February	  2016
19	  February	  2016
11	  March	  2016
17	  March	   2016
22	  March	  2016
24	  March	  2016
Please	  Note:
The	  anticipated	  date	  of	  quotation	  of	  the	  New	  Shares	  is	  subject	  to	  the	  approval	  of	  the	  ASX.	  The	  dates	  shown	  in	  the	  table	  
above	  are	  indicative	  only	  and	  subject	  to	  change.	  The	  Company,	  subject	  to	  the	  Corporations	  Act,	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules	  and	  
other	  applicable	  laws,	  reserves	  the	  right	  to	  change	  any	  of	  these	  dates	  without	  notice.	  This	  may	  include	  varying	  the	  Opening	  
Date	  or	  the	  Closing	  Date,	  extending,	  or	  closing	  early	  of	  the	  date	  of	  issuing	  Shares,	  the	  Offers	  or	  accepting	  late	  Applications,	  
either	  generally	  or	  in	  particular	  cases.	  Any	  variation	  may	  have	  a	  consequential	  effect	  on	  other	  dates.	  You	  are	  encouraged	  
to	  submit	  your	  Application	   Forms	  as	  soon	   as	  possible	   after	  the	  Offers	  open.	  The	  Company	  also	  reserves	   the	  right	   not	   to	  
continue	  with	  the	  Offers	  at	  any	  time	  before	  the	  allotment	  of	  Shares	  to	  successful	  Applicants.
Although	   trading	   would	   ordinarily	   commence	   in	   the	   re-­‐organised	   securities	   on	   a	   deferred	   settlement	   basis	   on	   the	   usual	  
date,	  the	  Company’s	  securities	  will	  remain	  suspended	  until	  the	  Company	  has	  satisfied	  the	  requirements	  of	  Chapters	  1	  &	  2	  
of	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules.
The	  Company	  intends	  to	  make	  all	  efforts	  to	  ensure	  that	  any	  suspension	  of	  any	  of	  its	  listed	  securities	  is	  kept	  to	  as	  brief	  a	  
period	  as	  possible.
7
Letter	  from	   the	  Chairman
Dear	  Investor
On	   behalf	   of	   the	   Board	   of	   Directors,	   I	   introduce	   to	   you	   the	   opportunity	   to	   become	   a	   shareholder	   of	   the	   Company.	   The	  
Public	  Offer	  proposed	  in	  this	  Prospectus	  is	  seeking	  to	  raise,	  at	  a	  minimum	  subscription	  level,	  $14,000,000	  through	  the	  issue	  
of	   140,000,000	   Shares	   at	   a	   price	   of	   $0.10	   per	   Share	   with	   the	   ability	   to	   offer	   up	   to	   a	   maximum	   subscription	   level,	   up	   to	  
$17,000,000	  through	  the	  issue	  of	  170,000,000	  Shares	  at	  a	  price	  of	  $0.10	  per	  Share.
The	  Company	  has	  entered	  into	  an	  agreement	  pursuant	  to	  which	  the	  Company	  has	  agreed	  to	  acquire	  100%	  of	  the	  issued	  
capital	  of	  Skyland	  Petroleum	  Group	  Limited	  (“SPG”)	  to	  be	  affected	  by	  a	  share	  exchange	  agreement	  made	  by	  and	  between	  
the	  Company	  and	  SPG	  on	  29	  January	  2016	  (the	  “Share	  Exchange	  Agreement”).
The	  funds	  raised	  by	  the	  Public	  Offer	  will	  allow	  the	  Company	  to	  meet	  the	  funding	  requirements	  arising	  from	  its	  acquisition	  
of	  SPG	  (the	  “Acquisition”)	  and	  to	  conduct	  exploration	  and	  development	  programmes	  on	  projects	  in	  Tajikistan	  and	  Georgia.
The	   proposed	   Acquisition	   will	   see	   the	   Company	   focus	   its	   commercial	   and	   strategic	   activities	   on	   upstream	   oil	   and	   gas	  
exploration	  and	  production.	  The	  Company	  intends	  to	  establish	  itself	  as	  a	  significant	  player	  in	  oil	  and	  gas	  exploration	  and	  
production	  through	  an	  initial	  focus	  in	  projects	  based	  in	  the	  former	  Soviet	  Union	  (“fSU”).
The	  Company	  has	  convened	  a	  General	  Meeting	  of	  its	  Shareholders	  to	  be	  held	  on	  18	  February	  2016	  to	  seek	  approval	  for,	  
among	   other	   matters,	   the	   issue	   of	   securities	   to	   effect	   the	   Acquisition,	   the	   change	   in	   nature	   and	   scale	   of	   the	   Company’s	  
operations	  and	  the	  change	  of	  the	  name	  of	  the	  Company	  to	  “Skyland	  Petroleum	  Limited”.
This	   Prospectus	   contains	   detailed	   information	   about	   the	   Company.	  This	  is	  a	  highly	  speculative	  investment	  and	  investors	  
should	   refer	   to,	   and	   consider	   carefully,	   the	   Risk	   Factors	   outlined	   in	   this	   Prospectus	   at	   Section	   4	   prior	   to	   making	   any	  
investment	   decision.	   An	   investment	   in	   the	   Company	   therefore	   involves	   a	   number	   of	   risks	   and	   consequently	   such	   an	  
investment	  must	  be	  taken	  having	  paid	  due	  regard	  to	  the	  risks	  involved	  to	  the	  security	  of	  any	  capital	  invested.	  Before	  you	  
make	  any	  investment	  I	  wholly	  recommend	  and	  encourage	  you	  to	  read	  this	  Prospectus	  in	  its	  entirety	  and	  to	  seek	  appropriate	  
financial	  advice.
Yours	  faithfully
John	  Bell	  
Non-­‐Executive	  Chairman
8
1. Investment Overview
- ’ ,//J 'v ’-
3‘ “ii ‘5‘ ﬂ I .
I e
. “ pilli-H ‘
 MM


1.
Investment	  Overview
This	  Section	  is	  a	  summary	  only	  and	  is	  not	  intended	  to	  provide	  full	  information	  for	  investors	  intending	  to	  apply	  for	  Shares	  
offered	  pursuant	  to	  this	  Prospectus.	  This	  Prospectus	  should	  be	  read	  and	  considered	  in	  its	  entirety.
1.1
Introduction
Question	  
Who	  is	  the	  Issuer	  
of	  this	  Prospectus?	  
Who	  is	  the	  
Company?
Who	  is	  Skyland	  
Petroleum	  Group	  
Limited?
Response
MUI	  	  Corporation	  	  Limited	  	  (ABN	  	  54	  	  072	  	  350	  	  817)	  	  (the	  	  “Company”	  	  or	  	  “MUI”)	  
proposed	  to	  be	  renamed	  “Skyland	  Petroleum	  Limited”.	  
The	  Company	  is	  a	  public	  company	  listed	  on	  the	  official	  list	  of	  ASX	  (ASX	  code:	  MUI)	  
with	  a	  historical	  focus	  in	  the	  film	  and	  media	  industry.
Section	  
Page	  1
On	   20	   November	   2015,	   the	   Company	   announced	   it	   had	   entered	   into	   a	   binding	  
term	   sheet	   (the	   “Binding	   Term	   Sheet”)	   to	   acquire	   100%	   of	   the	   issued	   capital	   in	  
SPG;	   an	   exploration	   and	   production	   company	   that	   has	   an	   interest	   in,	   and	   is	  
negotiating	  the	  acquisition	  of,	  a	  portfolio	  of	  oil	  and	  gas	  assets.
Skyland	  Petroleum	  Group	  Limited	  	  (“SPG”)	  	  is	  	  a	  	  company	  	  incorporated	  	  in	  	  the	  
Cayman	  Islands	  on	  19	  February	  2015	  with	  company	  number	  OG-­‐296850.
SPG	  has	  a	  number	  of	  subsidiaries	  to	  facilitate	  its	  operations	  as	  follows:
•
•
•
•
•
•
Skyland	  Services	  Limited	  (Guernsey);
Skyland	  (Taas)	  Limited	  (Cayman	  Islands);
Sogdiana	  Energy	  Corporation	  (Cayman	  Islands);
Skyland	  Management	  Consultancies	  (Dubai,	  U.A.E.);
Skyland	  Services	  LLC	  (Delaware);	  and
Skyland	  Services	  Limited	  (Tajikistan).
2,	  12
What	  does	  Skyland	  
Petroleum	  Group	  
Limited	  do?
SPG	   and	   its	   subsidiaries	   are	   invested	   in	   oil	   and	   gas	   projects	   in	   Tajikistan	   and	  
Georgia	  as	  well	  as	  intending	  to	  gain	  exposure	  to	  further	  projects	  in	  the	  upstream	  
hydrocarbon	  sector	  in	  East	  Siberia.
9	  –10
How	  will	  the	  
Acquisition	  be	  
implemented?
On	  29	  January	  2016,	  the	  Company	  and	  the	  Vendors	  entered	  into	  a	  Share	  Exchange	  
Agreement	  under	  which	  the	  Vendors	  agreed	  to	  sell	  all	  of	  the	  issued	  capital	  of	  SPG	  
to	  the	  Company.
The	  Acquisition	  will	  be	  achieved	  by	  the	  Vendors	  transferring	  all	  their	  shares	  to	  the	  
Company	  in	  exchange	  for	  the	  Company	  issuing	  the	  Vendor	  Shares	  to	  the	  Vendors	  
in	  accordance	  with	  the	  terms	  of	  the	  Share	  Exchange	  Agreement.
At	  the	  General	  Meeting	  to	  be	  held	  on	  18	  February	  2016,	  the	  Company	  is	  seeking	  
shareholder	   approval	   for	   a	   change	   in	   nature	   and	   scale	   of	   its	   activities	   together	  
with	   the	   necessary	   approvals	   to	   complete	   the	   acquisition	   of	   SPG	   and	   for	   the	  
undertaking	  of	  the	  Offers.
2	  –	  3,	  12
Following	  completion	  of	  the	  Acquisition,	  the	  principal	  activities	  and	  assets	  of	  the	  
Company	  will	  be	  the	  current	  activities	  and	  assets	  of	  SPG.	  Details	  regarding	  these	  
activities	  and	  assets	  are	  contained	  in	  this	  Prospectus.
The	   Company	   proposes	   to	   change	   its	   name	   to	   “Skyland	   Petroleum	   Limited”	   on	  
settlement	   of	   the	   Acquisition,	   which	   in	   the	   Proposed	   Directors’	   opinion	   will	   be	  
better	  suited	  to	  the	  Company’s	  new	  strategic	  direction.
Where	  relevant,	  this	  Prospectus	  assumes	  that	  the	  Acquisition	  has	  been	  completed	  
and	  all	  preconditions	  to	  completion	  have	  been	  satisfied.
10
Question
Why	  are	  the	  Offers	  
a	  conditional	  
offer?
What	  happens	  if	  
the	  Minimum	  
Subscription	  is	  not	  
achieved?
If	  the	  Minimum	  Subscription	  of	  the	  Public	  Offer	  is	  not	  reached	  within	  three	  months	  
after	  the	  date	  of	  the	  Prospectus,	  no	  Shares	  will	  be	  issued	  and	  Application	  monies	  
will	  be	  refunded	  as	  soon	  as	  is practicable	  in	  full,	  without	  interest.	  	  In	  addition,	  the	  
Company	  will	  not	  be	  in	  a	  position	  to	  complete	  its	  acquisition	  of	  SPG.
Response
Section
Completion	   of	   the	   Acquisition	   and	   the	   Offers	   is	   subject	   to	   certain	   conditions	  
(detailed	  in	  Sections	  2,	  3	  and	  12.3.1).	   One	  of	  those	   conditions	  is	  the	   approval	  of	  
Shareholders	  of	  the	  Company	  at	  the	  General	  Meeting	  of	  Shareholders	  to	  be	  held	  
on	   18	   February	   2016.	   If	   Shareholders	   do	   not	   approve	   all	   of	   the	   relevant	  
resolutions,	  the	  Company	  will	  be	  unable	  to	  make	  the	  Offers	  and	  the	  Company	  will	  
be	  unable	  to	  complete	  the	  Acquisition.
3
2.1
11
1.2  Key	  Features	  of	  SPG’s	  Business	  Model
Question
What	  market	  does	  
SPG	  Operate	  in?
How	  will	  the	  
Company	  generate	  
revenue	  following	  
completion	  of	  the	  
Acquisition?
Response
SPG	   operates	   in	   the	   oil	   and	   gas	   market	   and,	   more	   specifically,	   in	   the	   evaluation	  
and	  acquisition	  of	  oil	  and	  gas	  assets	  in	  the	  fSU.	  SPG’s	  current	  asset	  is	  in	  Tajikistan	  
and	   SPG	   anticipates	   finalising	   a	   transaction	   to	   enter	   a	   project	   in	   Georgia	   during	  
quarter	  1	  of	  2016.
The	   Company	   intends	   to	   commercialise	   oil	   and	   gas	   reserves	   and	   resources,	  
however	   it	   is	   noted	   to	   investors	   that	   the	   Company’s	   ability	   to	   generate	   revenue	  
shall	   be	  
contingent	   upon	   exploration	   prospects	   being	  successful	   and	  
commercialisation	  of	  the	  reserves	  being	  viable.	  Investors	  should	  be	  aware	  that	  the	  
Company	   cannot	   and	   does	   not	   make	   any	   assurance	   that	   any	   exploration	   on	  
current	  or	  future	  interests	  will	  result	  in	  the	  discovery	  of	  an	  economic	  deposit	  of	  oil	  
and	   gas.	   Even	   if	   an	   apparently	   viable	   deposit	   is	   identified,	   there	   is	   no	   guarantee	  
that	  it	  can	  be	  economically	  developed	  and,	  such	  a	  situation	  would	  be	  likely	  to	  have	  
an	  adverse	  effect	  upon	  the	  Company’s	  ability	  to	  generate	  revenue,	  and	  therefore	  
the	  value	  of	  any	  investment	  made	  by	  investors	  in	  the	  Public	  Offer
Section
9	  –	  10
9	  –	  10
What	  are	  SPG’s	  key	  
costs?
Key	  costs	  for	  SPG	  include:
•
•
•
•
costs	  associated	  with	  exploration	  and	  production	  of	  oil	  and	  gas	  assets;
costs	  associated	  with	  the	  acquisition	  and	  exploration	  and	  development	  of	  oil
and	  gas	  assets;
2.7
employee	  costs	  including	  salaries	  and	  related	  costs	  of	  all	  SPG	  employees	  and
contractors;	  and
administration	  and	  finance	  costs.
SPG’s	  strategy	  following	  the	  completion	  of	  the	  Offers	  is:
•
•
•
•
to	  continue	  to	  expand	  its	  portfolio	  of	  assets	  in	  the	  oil	  and	  gas	  sector;
to	  maintain	  its	  current	  obligations	  under	  its	  existing	  agreements;
to	  expand	  into	  additional	  targeted	  geographical	  markets	  complementary	  to
the	  business	  of	  SPG;
9	  –	  10
to	   investigate	   the	   development	   of	   potential	   strategic	   partnerships	   and/or
potential	  strategic	  acquisition	  opportunities	  in	  the	  oil	  and	  gas	  sectors;	  and
leverage	  the	  skills	  and	  expertise	  of	  SPG’s	  executive	  and	  leadership	  team.
What	  will	  be	  the	  
Company’s	  key	  
business	  strategies	  
following	  
completion	  of	  the	  
Acquisition?
What	  will	  be	  the	  
Company’s	  major	  
asset	  upon	  
admission?	  
Who	  will	  be	  the	  
Company’s	  
customers?	  
Who	  will	  be	  the	  
Company’s	  
competitors?
The	   Company’s	   major	   asset	   and	   interest	   upon	   admission	   will	   be	   the	   Kyzyl-­‐	  
Tumshuk	   Field	   in	   Tajikistan,	   as	   well	   as	   its	   cash	   reserves	   and	   management	   team	  
and	  senior	  officers.
It	  is	  envisaged	  that	  the	  Company’s	  customers	  will	  be	  commercial	  oil	  and	  gas	  buyers.
The	  Company’s	  direct	  competition	  is	  from	  other	  upstream	  oil	  and	  gas	  companies	  
operating	  in	  the	  fSU	  and	  Central	  Asia.
9	  –	  10
9	  –	  10
9	  –	  10
12
Question
What	  are	  the	  
Company’s	  key	  
material	  contracts?
Response
Section
Upon	  Acquisition	  of	  SPG,	  the	  material	  contracts	  of	  the	  Company	  shall	  include:
•
•
an	  Investment	  and	  Operating	  Agreement	  in	  respect	  of	  operations	  on	  the
Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	  Field,	  Tajikistan;	  and
12
a	   binding	   heads	   of	   agreement	   in	   respect	   of	   a	   farm-­‐in	   to	   a	   production
sharing	  contract	  concerning	  Block	  XIG	  in	  Georgia.
13
1.3  Key	   Highlights
Question
Response
Long-­‐term	  growth	  
of	  the	  Company
Given	  the	  Company’s	  limited	  capital	  and	   lack	  of	  income,	  it	  will	   have	  difficulty	  in	  
creating	  significant	  long-­‐term	  value	  for	  the	  Shareholders	  in	  its	  current	  situation.
The	   Directors	   of	   MUI	   have	   determined	   that	   the	   acquisition	   of	   SPG	   has	   the	  
potential	  to	  increase	  MUI	  shareholder	  value	  and	  to	  provide	  the	  Company	  with	  a	  
future	  business	  direction.
Increase	  in	  liquidity
Management	  
team
The	  Acquisition	  will	  increase	  the	  market	  capitalisation	  	  of	  	  the	  	  Company	  	  and	  
provide	  liquidity	  for	  the	  Company’s	  shares.
The	   proposed	   management	   team	   of	   SPG	   are	   highly	   experienced	   oil	   and	   gas	  
professionals	   with	   a	   deep	   knowledge	   of	   conducting	   upstream	   oil	   and	   gas	  
operations	  in	  the	  fSU.
Asset	  highlights
Through	  the	  acquisition	  of	  SPG	  the	  Company	  will:
Section
Chairman’s	  
Letter,	  2
2
7
•
•
•
acquire	  a	  producing	  oil	  and	  gas	  asset	  in	  the	  Republic	  of	  Tajikistan	  under
attractive	  fiscal	  terms;
acquire	  an	  interest	  in	  an	  attractive	  exploration	  prospect	  in	  the	  Republic
of	  Georgia;	  and
2,	  9,	  10
have	  the	  benefit	  of	  a	  series	  of	  Memoranda	  of	  Understanding	  (“MOUs”),
cooperation	   agreements	   and	   other	   such	   early	   stage	   documentation
relating	   to	   a	   series	   of	   production	   and	   exploration	   assets	   in	   Tajikistan
and	  East	  Siberia,	  (including	  the	  Taas-­‐Yuriakh	  Project).
The	   Proposed	   Directors	   anticipate	   that	   revenue	   generation	   may	   be	   possible	  
following	   completion	   of	   the	   Offers	   as	   a	   result	   of	   oil	   and	   gas	   production	   in	  
Tajikistan.
14
1.4  Key	  Risks
Question
Response
Section
What	  are	  the	  key	  
risks	  of	  investing	  in	  
the	  Company?
The	  business,	  assets	  and	  operations	  of	  the	  Company	  following	  the	  Acquisition	  are	  
subject	  to	   certain	   risk	   factors	   that	   have	   the	   potential	   to	   influence	   the	  operating	  
and	  financial	  performance	  of	  the	  Company	  in	  the	  future.	   These	  risks	  can	  impact	  
on	  the	  value	  of	  an	  investment	  in	  the	  securities	  of	  the	  Company.
The	   Proposed	   Directors	   aim	   to	   manage	   these	   risks	   by	   carefully	   planning	   its	  
activities	   and	   implementing	   risk	   control	   measures.	   Some	   of	   the	   risks	   are,	  
however,	   highly	   unpredictable	   and	   the	   extent	   to	   which	   they	   can	   be	   effectively	  
managed	  is	  limited.
Some	  of	  the	  key	  risks	  of	  investing	  in	  the	  Company	  are	  detailed	  below.	  The	  list	  of	  
risks	  is	  not	  exhaustive	  and	  further	  details	  of	  those	  risks	  and	  other	  risks	  associated	  
with	  an	  investment	  in	  the	  Company	  are	  detailed	  in	  Section	  4.
Limited	  Trading	  History	  and	  Losses	  
SPG	  is	  an	  early-­‐stage	  business	  with	  a	  limited	  trading	  history.
Since	   incorporation	   in	   February	   2015,	   SPG’s	   activities	   have	   principally	   been	   the	  
identification	   of	   exploration	   and	   production	   targets	   for	  oil	   and	   gas.	   SPG	   has	  
incurred	  continuing	  losses	  since	  its	  inception	  totaling	  $2,755,478	  at	  30	  September	  
2015.
Given	  SPG’s	  limited	  trading	  history,	  no	  assurance	  can	  be	  given	  that	  SPG’s	  business	  
and	  operations	  will	  achieve	  commercial	  viability	  through	  the	  implementation	  of	  its	  
business	  plan.
4
Reliance	  on	  Key	  Personnel	  
The	  emergence	  and	  development	  of	  SPG’s	  business	  has	  been	  in	  large	  part	  due	  to	  
the	  experience	  and	  leadership	  of	  its	  management	  team;	  including	   its	  Executives:	  
Dr.	  David	  Robson,	  Ms.	  Elizabeth	  Landles	  and	  Mr.	  Mark	  Sarssam.
The	   responsibility	   of	   overseeing	   the	   day-­‐to-­‐day	   operations	   and	   the	   strategic	  
management	   of	   the	   Company	   depends	   substantially	   on	   senior	   management	   and	  
its	  key	  personnel.
SPG	   is	   also	   substantially	   dependent	   on	   the	   continued	   service	   of	   its	   existing	  
personnel	   because	   of	   the	   nature	   of	   its	   operations	   and	   the	   countries	   in	   which	   it	  
operates.
Regulatory	  Environment	  
SPG’s	  operations	  are	  subject	  to	  applicable	  laws	  and	  regulations	  in	  the	  jurisdiction	  
in	  which	  it	  operates.
SPG	  takes	  appropriate	  legal	  advice	  in	  each	  of	  the	  jurisdictions	  in	  which	  it	  operates	  
but	   there	   can	   be	   no	   guarantee	   that	   the	   legal	   advice	   will	   always	   be	   valid	   or	   will	  
remain	   valid	   in	   the	   event	   of	   any	   change	   to	   the	   regulatory	   environment.	   In	   the	  
event	  that	   the	  advice	   is	  incorrect	  or	  no	   longer	  applicable	  then	  the	  operations	  of	  
the	  Company	  may	  become	  at	  risk.
The	   Company’s	   operations	   may	   become	   subject	   to	   onerous	   regulatory	  
requirements,	   which	   would	   increase	   the	   costs	   and	   resources	   associated	   with	  
regulatory	   compliance.	   Any	   such	   increase	   in	   the	   costs	   and	   resources	   associated	  
with	  regulatory	  compliance	  could	  impact	  upon	  the	  Company's	  profitability.
In	   addition,	   if	   regulators	   took	   the	   view	   that	   the	   Company	   had	   failed	   to	   comply	  
with	   regulatory	   requirements,	   this	   could	   lead	   to	   enforcement	   action	   resulting	   in	  
public	   warnings,	   infringement	   notices	   or	   the	   imposition	   of	   a	   pecuniary	   penalty.	  
This	   could	  
lead	   to	   significant	   damage	   to	   the	   Company's	   reputation	   and	  
consequently	  impact	  on	  its	  revenue	  and	  profits.
15
Question
Response
Section
What	  are	  the	  key	  
risks	  of	  investing	  in	  
the	  Company?	  
(continued)
Oil	  and	  Gas	  Price	  Volatility	  
The	   operations	   of	   the	   Company	   will	   naturally	   be	   exposed	   to	   fluctuations	   in	   the	  
price	  of	  oil	  and	  gas.	  The	  demand	  for,	  and	  price	  of	  oil	  and	  gas	  is	  highly	  dependent	  
on	   a	   variety	   of	   factors	   including:	   international	   supply	   and	   demand,	   the	   level	   of	  
consumer	   product	   demand,	   weather	   conditions,	   actions	   taken	   by	   governments	  
and	  international	  cartels	  and	  global	  economic	  and	  political	  developments.
Fluctuations	  in	  oil	  and	  gas	  prices	  and,	  in	  particular,	  a	  material	  decline	  in	  the	  price	  
of	   oil	   and	   gas	   may	   have	   a	   material	   adverse	   effect	   on	   the	   Company's	   business,	  
financial	  condition	  and	  results	  of	  operations.
Investors	   should	   note	   that	  the	   prices	  in	   the	   current	   oil	   and	   gas	   market	   are	  
regarded	  as	  being	  low,	  with	  little	  obvious	  short	  term	  indication	  of	  recovery.
ultimately	  affect	  the	  viability	  of	  exploration	  activities	  within	  the	  Company’s	  focus
Investors	   should	   be	   aware	   that	   further	   decreases	   in	   oil	   and	   gas	   price	   levels	   may
areas,	  which	  could	  result	  in	  a	  negative	  effect	  on	  the	  Company’s	  future	  cash	  flow	  
and	  the	  viability	  of	  potential	  future	  projects,	  which	  in	  turn	  may	  affect	  the	  value	  of	  
the	  Company’s	  Shares.	   It	  is	  noted	  that	  SPG	  is	  not	  involved	  in	  any	  high	  operating	  
cost	  projects	  such	  as	  offshore	  developments.
Re-­‐Quotation	  of	  Shares	  on	  ASX	  
The	  acquisition	  of	  SPG	  constitutes	  a	  significant	  change	  in	  the	  nature	  and	  scale	  of	  
the	  Company’s	  activities	  and	  the	  Company	  therefore	  must	  seek	  to	  re-­‐comply	  with	  
Chapters	   1	   and	   2	   of	   the	   ASX	   Listing	   Rules	   as	   if	   it	   were	   seeking	   admission	   to	   the	  
Official	  List	  of	  ASX.
4
There	  is	  a	  risk	  that	  the	  Company	  may	  not	  be	  able	  to	  meet	  the	  requirements	  of	  the	  
ASX	   for	   re-­‐quotation	   of	   its	   Shares	   on	   the	   ASX.	   Should	   this	   occur,	   the	   Shares	   will	  
not	  be	  able	  to	  be	  traded	  on	  the	  ASX	  until	  such	  time	  as	  those	  requirements	  can	  be	  
met,	  if	  at	  all.	  Shareholders	  may	  be	  prevented	  from	  trading	  their	  Shares	  should	  the	  
Company	  be	  suspended	  until	  such	  time	  as	  it	  does	  re-­‐comply	  with	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  
Rules.
In	  the	  event	  the	  Company	  does	  not	  receive	  conditional	  approval	  for	  re-­‐quotation	  
of	  its	  securities	  on	  ASX,	  the	  Acquisition	  will	  not	  be	  implemented.
Acquisitions	  
As	  part	  of	  its	  future	  business	  strategy,	  the	  Company	  may	  make	  acquisitions	  of,	  or	  
significant	   investments	   in,	   companies	   and/or	   assets	   that	   are	   complementary	   to	  
the	  Company’s	  business.
Any	   such	  
future	   transactions	   are	   accompanied	   by	   the	   risks	   commonly	  
encountered	   in	   making	   acquisitions	   of	   companies,	   or	   assets:	   such	   as	   integrating	  
cultures	  and	  systems	  of	  operation,	  relocation	  of	  operations,	  short	  term	  strain	  on	  
working	   capital	   requirements,	   achieving	   the	   sales	   and	   margins	   anticipated	   and	  
retaining	  key	  staff	  and	  customer	  and	  supplier	  relationships.
Future	  Capital	  Requirements	  
The	   funds	   raised	   under	   the	   Public	   Offer	   are	   currently	   considered	   sufficient	   to	  
meet	  the	  immediate	  objectives	  of	  the	  Company.
The	   funds	   raised	   under	   this	   Prospectus	   will	   enable	   the	   Company	   to	   perform	   the	  
following	  activities	  in	  relation	  to	  its	  Georgian	  projects:	  	  
(i)
to	  acquire	  the	  project	  interest	  (being	  20%	  of	  the	  PSC)	  through	  acquisition	  
cost	  funding;	  and	  	  
provide	   an	   equity	   contribution	   to	   the	   minimum	   work	   programme	  
including	  drilling,	  testing	  and	  completion	  of	  the	  Kumisi	  #2	  Well.;	  and
(ii)
16
Question
Response
Section
What	  are	  the	  key	  
risks	  of	  investing	  in	  
the	  Company?	  
(continued)
The	   funds	   raised	   under	   this	   Prospectus	   will	   enable	   the	   Company	   to	   perform	   the	  
following	  activities	  in	  relation	  to	  its	  Tajikistan	  projects:	  	  
(i) 
geophysical	  logging	  (of	  existing	  well	  bores);	  	  
(ii) 
instillation	  of	  upgraded	  pumps	  and	  related	  equipment;	  
(iii) 
well-­‐stimulation	  (including	  acidisation);	  and	  	  
(iv) 
potential	  short-­‐reach	  radial	  completion.
It	   is	   the	   view	   of	   the	   Proposed	   Directors	   that	   completion	   of	   these	   activities	   may	  
lead	  to	  the	  practical	  commercialisation	  of	  the	  projects	  of	  the	  Company.
Further	  funding	  may	  be	  required	   by	  the	  Company	  in	  the	  event	  costs	  exceed	  the	  
Company’s	   estimates	   or	   revenues	   do	   not	   meet	   estimates,	   to	   support	  
its	  
ongoing	   activities	   and	   operations,	   and	   to	   take	   advantage	   of	   opportunities	   for	  
acquisitions,	  joint	  ventures	  or	  other	  business	   and	   technology	   opportunities,	   and	  
to	   meet	   any	   unanticipated	   liabilities	   or	   expenses	  which	  the	  Company	  may	  incur.	  
If	   such	   events	   occur,	   additional	   financing	   will	   be	   required.	   Accordingly,	   the	  
Company	  may	  seek	   to	  raise	  further	  funds	  through	  equity	   or	  debt	  financing,	  joint	  
ventures,	   or	   other	   means	   to	   secure	   additional	   funds.	   Failure	   to	   obtain	   sufficient	  
financing	  for	  the	  Company’s	  activities	  and	  future	  projects	  may	  result	  in	  delay	  and	  
indefinite	  postponement	  of	  its	  activities	  and	   potential	  development	  programmes	  
which	   would	   be	   likely	   to	   adversely	   affect	   the	   business	   and	   financial	   condition	   of	  
the	  Company	  and	  consequently	  its	  performance.
There	  can	  be	  no	  assurance	  that	  additional	  finance	  will	  be	  available	  when	  needed	  
or,	   if	   available,	   the	   terms	   of	   such	   financing	   might	   not	   be	   favourable	   to	   the	  
Company	  	  	  	  	  and	  	  	  	  	  might	  	  	  	  	  involve	  	  	  	  	  substantial	  	  	  	  	  dilution	  	  	  	  	  to	  	  	  	  	  Shareholders.
4
Contractual	  Risk	  
The	  business	  of	  SPG	  has	  a	  significant	  dependence	  on	  its	  counterparties	  and	  their	  
ability	  to	  meet	  their	  contractual	  obligations	  pursuant	  to	  the	  agreements	  entered	  
into	  with	  SPG.
In	  particular,	  SPG	  relies	  on	  the	  continuation	  of	  its	  key	  material	  agreements	  as	  set	  
out	  in	  this	  Prospectus.
The	   ability	   of	   the	   Company	   to	   achieve	   its	   stated	   objectives	   will	   depend	   upon	  
counterparties	   to	   each	   of	   these	   agreements	   being	   able	   to	   perform	   their	  
respective	  obligations.
If	   any	   counterparty	   defaults	   in	   the	   performance	   of	   their	   obligations,	   it	   may	   be	  
necessary	   for	   the	   Company	   to	   approach	   a	   court	   to	   seek	   a	   legal	   remedy.	   Legal	  
action	   can	   be	   costly	   and	   there	   can	   be	   no	   guarantee	   that	   a	   legal	   remedy	   will	   be	  
ultimately	  granted	  on	  the	  appropriate	  terms.
SPG	   has	   no	   current	   reason	   to	   believe	   that	   any	   of	   the	   parties	   which	   it	   has	  
contracted	  with	  will	  not	  meet	  and	  satisfy	  their	  obligations	  under	  their	  respective	  
agreements.
Foreign	  Operations	  and	  Compliance	  with	  Law	  
SPG	   conducts	   foreign	   operations,	   and	   will	   market	   and	   sell	   products	   in	   foreign	  
jurisdictions	  and	  will,	  therefore,	  be	  exposed	  to	  risks	  relating	  to	  operating	  in	  such	  
foreign	  jurisdictions.
Many	  of	  these	  risks	  are	  inherent	  in	  doing	  business	  internationally	  and	  these	  will	  
include,	   but	   not	   be	   limited	   to:	   changes	   in	   the	   regulatory	   environment,	   trade	  
barriers	  or	  the	  imposition	  of	  taxes,	  difficulties	  with	  staffing	  and/or	  managing	  any	  
foreign	  operations,	  issues	  or	  restriction	  on	  the	  free	  transfer	  of	  funds,	  technology	  
export	   or	   import	   and	   delays	   in	   dealing	   across	   borders	   caused	   by	   customers	   or	  
governmental	  agencies.
17
Question
What	  are	  the	  key	  
risks	  of	  investing	  in	  
the	  Company?	  
(continued)
Response
Section
Share	  Liquidity	  risk	  
The	  Company	  currently	  has	  3,693,857,804	  Shares	  on	  issue	  (on	  a	  pre-­‐Consolidation	  
basis),	   if	   the	   Resolutions	   are	   approved	   at	   the	   General	   Meeting,	   the	   Company’s	  
Shares	  will	  be	  consolidated	  on	  a	  one	  for	  fifty	  basis	  into	  approximately	  73,877,160	  
Shares	   (subject	   to	   rounding	   of	   fractional	   entitlements).	  	   On	   Completion,	   the	  
Company	  will	  issue	  a	  further	  951,647,010	  Shares	  (Minimum	  Subscription)	  or	  up	  to	  
981,647,010	  Shares	  (Maximum	  Subscription)	  (on	  a	  post-­‐Consolidation	  basis).
4
A	  portion	  of	  the	  shares	  on	  issue	  will	  be	  subject	  to	  escrow	  restrictions	  in	  accordance	  
with	  Chapter	  9	  of	  the	  ASX.	  	  This	  could	  be	  considered	  an	  increased	  liquidity	  risk	  as	  a	  
large	  portion	  of	  issued	  capital	  may	  not	  be	  able	  to	  be	  tradable	  freely	  for	  a	  period	  of	  
time.	  	   Conversely,	   if	   the	   Company	   is	   successful	   in	   achieving	   some	   or	   all	   of	   its	  
objectives,	   this	   relative	   lack	   of	   liquidity	   may	   lead	   to	   volatility	   in	   the	   price	   of	   the	  
Company’s	  securities.
18
1.5  Financial	  Information
Question	  
What	  key	  financial	  
information	  do	  you	  
need	  to	  know	  
about	  the	  
Company’s	  
financial	  position,	  
performance	  and	  
prospects?
Response	  
Following	   the	   change	   in	   the	   nature	   of	   its	   activities	   and	   completion	   of	   the	  
Acquisition,	  the	  Company	  will	  be	  focused	  on	  developing	  the	  SPG	  business	  whereas	  
the	  Company’s	  current	  operations	  are	  focused	  on	  media	  and	  film.
Section
Therefore,	   the	   Company’s	   past	   operations	   and	   financial	   historical	   performance	  
will	  not	  be	  of	  significant	  relevance	  to	  future	  activities.
Key	  financial	  information	  is	  summarised	  in	  Section	  5.
Set	   out	   below	   is	   a	   selected	   summary	   of	   the	   Company’s	   Pro-­‐Forma	   Consolidated	  
Statement	  of	  Financial	  Position	  post-­‐Acquisition.
($14,000,000)
($17,000,000)
As	   detailed	   in	   Section	   5,	   the	   Company’s	   Historical	   Pro-­‐forma	   Consolidated	  
Statement	   of	   Financial	   Position	   includes	   a	   number	   of	   adjustments	   as	   if	   they	  
occurred	  on	  30	  September	  2015,	  including	  but	  not	  limited	  to	  closure	  of	  the	  capital	  
raising	  and	  costs	  of	  the	  Offers;	  and	  adjustments	  for	  the	  acquisition	  of	  SPG.
The	  financial	  information	  detailed	  in	  Section	  5	  and	  the	  Investigating	  Accountant’s	  
Report	  detailed	  in	  Section	  6	  is	  based	  on	  various	  best	  estimate	  assumptions.
These	  assumptions	  should	  be	  read	  in	  conjunction	  with	  the	  risk	  factors	  set	  out	  in	  
Section	  4.
How	  has	  the	  
Company	  been	  
performing?
The	  historical	  financial	  information	  of	  the	  Company	  as	  at	  30	  June	  2013,	  30	  June	  
2014	  and	  30	  June	  2015	  is	  set	  out	  in	  Section	  5	  of	  the	  Prospectus.
The	  reviewed	  pro-­‐Forma	  statement	  of	  financial	  position	  for	  the	  Company	  as	  at	  30	  
September	  2015	  is	  set	  out	  in	  Section	  5.4	  of	  the	  Prospectus.
5
5
How	  does	  the	  
Company	  expect	  to	  
fund	  its	  
operations?
The	  initial	  funding	  for	  the	  Company’s	  future	  activities	  following	  completion	  of	  the	  
Acquisition	  will	  be	  generated	  from	  the	  Public	  Offer	  pursuant	  to	  this	  Prospectus.
The	   Company	   may	   need	   to	   raise	   further	   capital	   in	   the	   future	   to	   continue	   to	  
develop	  its	  business,	  and	  such	  amounts	  may	  be	  raised	  by	  further	  equity	  raisings,	  
or	   the	   Company	   may	   consider	   other	   forms	   of	   debt	   or	   quasi-­‐debt	   funding	   if	  
required.
2,	  9,	  10
What	  are	  the	  
Company’s	  
forecast	  prospects?
The	   Directors	   and	   Proposed	   Directors	   are	   of	   the	   opinion	   that	   as	   the	   financial	  
performance	   of	   the	   Company	   in	   any	   period	   will	   be	   influenced	   by	   various	   factors	  
that	  are	  outside	  their	  control.
N/A
The	  Directors	  have,	  therefore,	  concluded	  that	  it	  is	  not	  appropriate	  to	  provide	  any	  
forecast	  financial	  information	  in	  relation	  to	  the	  Company.
19
1.6  Experience	  and	   Background	   of	  the	  Directors	  and	   Senior	  Management
Question
Response	  
Dr.	  David	  Robson	  
(Executive	  Chairman	  and	  Managing	  Director)
Section
Dr.	   Robson	   is	   a	   geologist	   having	   obtained	   a	   First	   Class	   B.Sc.	   (Hons.)	   degree	   in	  
Geology	   and	   a	   Ph.D.	   in	   Geochemistry	   from	   the	   University	   of	   Newcastle-­‐upon-­‐	  
Tyne.	  He	  holds	  an	  MBA	  from	  Strathclyde	  Business	  School.
He	   has	   spent	   over	   30	   years	   working	   in	   the	   oil	   and	   gas	   industry	   for	   major	  
companies	   such	   as	   Mobil	   and	   Britoil	   and	   for	   independents	   such	   as	   Hamilton	  
Brothers	  Oil	  &	   Gas	  (BHP	  Petroleum).	  Since	  1990	   he	  has	  worked	  in	  the	  USSR	  and	  
fSU,	  in	  Russia,	  Kazakhstan,	  Uzbekistan,	  Georgia,	  Tajikistan	  and	  Ukraine.
He	   is	   a	   founder	   of	   SPG	   and	   as	   Executive	   Chairman	   and	   Managing	   Director,	   Dr.	  
Robson	  will	  be	  responsible	  for	  overall	  strategy	  and	  management	  of	  the	  company.
Mr.	  Mark	  Sarssam	  	  
(Chief	   Operating	  Officer)
Mr.	   Sarssam	   is	   an	   Executive	   Director	   and	   the	   Chief	   Operating	   Officer	   for	   SPG,	  
responsible	   for	   managing	   and	   coordinating	   the	   exploration,	   appraisal	   and	  
development	  of	  SPG’s	  oil	  and	  gas	  assets.
Who	  will	  be	  on	  the	  
board	  of	  Directors?
Mr.	   Sarssam	   graduated	   from	   Imperial	   College	   London	   with	   a	   Master’s	   Degree	   in	  
Petroleum	  Engineering.
In	   total,	   Mr.	   Sarssam	   has	   25	   years	   of	   continuous	   experience	   in	   the	   oil	   &	   gas	  
industry,	  having	  worked	   with	  Shell,	  Dragon	   Oil	  plc,	  Amerada	  Hess	  and	  FINA,	  and	  
has	  worked	  on	  a	  variety	  of	  both	  offshore	  and	  onshore	  projects	  in	  the	  North	  Sea,	  
Middle	  East,	  Africa,	  Central	  Asia	  (fSU)	  and	  the	  Far	  East.
7
In	   addition	   to	   his	   technical	   skills	   and	   experience,	   Mr.	   Sarssam	   has	   a	   strong	  
background	  
international	   new	   business	  
development.
in	   commercial	   evaluation	   and
Ms.	  Elizabeth	  Landles	  
(Executive	   Director,	   Group	   Corporate	   Secretary	   and	   Chief	   Administrative	  
Officer)
Ms.	   Landles	   is	   an	   Executive	   Director,	   Chief	   Administrative	   Officer	   and	   Corporate	  
Secretary	  of	  SPG.	   She	  is	  also	  one	  of	  the	  founders	  of	  SPG.
Ms.	   Landles	   holds	   an	   Advanced	   Diploma	   in	   Business	   Administration	   from	  	  the	  
Institute	   of	   Business	   Administration	   and	   Management	   and	   is	   a	   Fellow	   of	   the	  
Institute	   of	   Business	   Administration.	   She	   is	   also	   a	   member	   of	   the	   Institute	   of	  
Directors	   and	   holds	   their	   Certificate	   of	   Company	   Direction.	   In	   addition,	   	   Ms.	  
Landles	  is	  a	  member	  of	  the	  AIPN	  and	  has	  over	  18	  years	  experience	  of	  working	  on	  
corporate	  and	  administrative	  issues	  in	  fSU	  oil	  and	  gas	  related	  companies.
Going	  forward,	  Ms.	  Landles	  will	  have	  overall	  responsibility	  for	  the	  administration	  
of	   the	   Company	   including	   human	   resources,	   investor	   relations,	   external	   affairs	  
management	  as	  well	  as	  logistics	  and	  support.
20
Question
Response	  
Mr.	  Piers	  Johnson	   	  
(Non-­‐Executive	  Director)
Section
Mr.	  Johnson	  is	  an	  experienced	  petroleum	  engineer	  with	  30	  years’	  experience.	  He	  
holds	   a	   B.Sc.	   (Hons)	   degree	   	   in	   Mechanical	   Engineering	   	   from	   Nottingham	  
University,	   and	   is	   a	   Chartered	   Engineer	   with	   the	   Institution	   of	   Mechanical	  
Engineers.
He	  is	  past	  Chairman	  of	  the	  London	  Section	  of	  the	  Society	  of	  Petroleum	  Engineers	  
(SPE),	   a	   Member	   of	   the	   Petroleum	   Exploration	   Society	   of	   Great	   Britain	   and	   a	  
member	  of	  the	  Institute	  of	  Energy.
Dr.	  Raden	  Sukhyar	   	  
(Non-­‐Executive	  Director)
Dr.	   Sukhyar	   was	   appointed	   President	   Commissioner	   PT	   Ant	   Am	   (Indonesia)	   on	  
May	   31,	   2012.	   Dr.	   Sukhyar	   graduated	   from	   Monash	   University	   in	   Melbourne,	  
Australia	  in	  1990	  with	  a	  Doctor	  of	  Philosophy	  degree	  (Ph.D.)	  in	  Earth	  Science	  and	  
the	  National	  Resilience	  Institute	  (LEMHANAS)	  in	  2003.
Dr.	   Sukhyar	   currently	   holds	   the	   post	   of	   General	   Director	   of	   Mineral	   and	   Coal	   of	  
the	   Ministry	   of	   Energy	   and	   Mineral	   Resources	   of	   the	   Republic	   of	   Indonesia	  
(MEMR)	   and	   previously	   held	   the	   post	   of	   the	   Head	   of	   the	   Geological	   Agency	   of	  
MEMR	  (2008-­‐2013).
Mr.	  Ghassan	  Zok	  
(Non-­‐Executive	  Director)
Mr.	   Zok	   brings	   over	   31	   years	   of	   extensive	   management	   experience	   in	   the	  
pharmaceutical	   industry	   at	   world	   class	   companies,	   Sandoz	   and	   Novartis	   (merger	  
of	  Sandoz	  and	  Ciba-­‐Geigy),	  where	  he	  served	  as	  Chief	  Executive	  Officer	  for	  Sandoz	  
Pharmaceuticals	   in	   South	   Africa,	   followed	   by	   Managing	   Director	   for	   Sandoz	  
Pharmaceuticals	   in	   Greece,	   followed	   by	   Chief	   Executive	   Officer	   for	   Sandoz	  
Pharmaceuticals	  in	  Belgium	  and	  finally	  Country	  President	  for	  Novartis	  in	  Belgium.
7
Mr.	  Timothy	  Hargreaves	  
(Non-­‐Executive	  Director)
Mr.	   Hargreaves	   has	   40	   years’	   experience	   in	   international	   resource	   businesses	   in	  
Asia,	  Australia,	  Europe	  and	  the	  Middle	  East.
His	   early	   career	   was	  
in	   petroleum	   exploration,	   appraisal	   and	   business	  
development	  with	  major	  companies	  such	  as	  BHP,	  Union	  Texas,	  Fletcher	  Challenge	  
and	  British	  Gas	  up	  to	  vice	  president	  and	  country	  manager	  levels.	  He	  then	  worked	  
in	  smaller	  entrepreneurial	  independents	  such	  as	  ROC	  Oil,	  Scimitar	  Hydrocarbons,	  
Tethyan	   Copper	   Company	   and	   Orient	   &	   Gulf	   Investments	   at	   levels	   up	   to	  
CEO/Board.	  He	  has	  played	  significant	  roles	  in	  over	  25	  oil	  and	  gas	  discoveries	  that	  
were	  subsequently	  developed	  into	  producing	  fields.
Mr.	  Domenic	  Martino	  
(Non-­‐Executive	  Director)
Mr.	  Martino	  is	  a	  Chartered	  Accountant	  and	  an	  experienced	  director	  of	  ASX	  listed	  
companies.
Previously,	  Mr.	  Martino	  was	  CEO	  of	  Deloitte	  Touche	  Tohmatsu	  in	  Australia	  and	  he	  
has	  significant	  experience	  in	  the	  development	  of	  “micro-­‐cap”	  companies.	  
Following	   the	   Acquisition,	   Mr.	   Martino	   will	   continue	   to	   be	   a	   Director	   of	   the	  
Company.
The	  Company	  will	  be	  led	  by	  the	  Proposed	  Executive	  Directors	  and	  Senior	  Officers.	  
Please	  see	  Section	  7	  for	  further	  details	  of	  their	  credentials.
7
21
Who	   will	   be	   the	  
leadership	   team	  
and	  what	  is	  their	  
expertise?
1.7  Significant	  Interests	   of	  Key	   Shareholders	   and	   Related	   Party	   Transactions
Question	  
Who	  will	  be	  the	  
substantial	  
Shareholders	  of	  
the	  Company?
Response	  
Based	   on	   the	   current	   shareholders	   of	   SPG	   and	   the	   Company,	   the	   substantial	  
shareholders	   of	   the	   Company	   at	   completion	   of	   the	   Acquisition	   (assuming	   a	   Public	  
Offer	   of	   either	   a	   minimum	   of	   $14,000,000	   (the	   “Minimum	   Subscription”)	   or	  
$17,000,000	   (the	   “Maximum	   Subscription”)	   and	   no	   exercise	   of	   the	   Options	   as	  
detailed	  in	  the	  Options	  Offer)	  are	  expected	  to	  be	  as	  follows:
Section
Substantial	  Shareholders	  (being	  a	  Shareholder	  holding	  in	  excess	  of	  5%	  of	  the
Name
Vazon	  Associates	  Limited	  *	  
Mancliff	  Investments	  Ltd	  
Augment	  Holdings	  Limited
%	   Holding	  
in	  
Company	  
post-­‐
Acquisition
Company’s	  Issued	  Share	  Capital	  
%	   Holding	  
in	  
Company	   post-­‐
Public	   Offer	   at	  
Minimum	  
Subscription	  
27.84	  
11.51	  
10.72
32.25	  
13.33	  
12.41
in	  
%	   Holding	  
Company	  
post-­‐
Public	   Offer	   at	  
Maximum	  
Subscription	  
27.05	  
11.19	  
10.41
Who	  are	  the	  
Vendors	  and	  
what	  will	  be	  
their	  holdings
*It	   is	   noted	   that	   Vazon	   Associates	   Limited	   is	   associated	   with	   Dr.	   David	   Robson	   and
Ms.	  Elizabeth	  Landles	  (both	  individuals	  being	  two	  of	  the	  Proposed	  Directors).
The	  Vendors,	  as	  detailed	  in	  the	  Share	  Exchange	  Agreement	  and	  being	  those	  persons	  
who	  are	  transferring	  all	  of	  their	  shareholdings	  in	  SPG	  to	  the	  Company	  in	  exchange	  for	  
the	  Company	  issuing	  the	  Vendor	  Shares	  to	  them,	  are	  as	  follows:
Vendor
Vazon	  Associates	  Limited	  *	  
Mancliff	  Investments	  Ltd	  
Augment	  Holdings	  Limited	  
Fortune	   Luck	   Consultants	  
Limited	  
Phoenician	  Group	  Limited	  
Merit	  Group	  Limited	  
Mark	  Sarssam	  
PacificLink	  Advisors	  LLC	  
Tardigrade	  
LLC	  
Senior	  SPG	  Staff	  
Total
Investments
%	   Holding	  
in	  
Company	  
post-­‐
Acquisition
32.25	  
13.33	  
12.41
4.96	  
4.90	  
4.38	  
4.35	  
1.60
0.83	  
11.17	  
90.18
in	  
%	   Holding	  
Company	   post-­‐
Public	   Offer	   at	  
Minimum	  
Subscription	  
27.84	  
11.51	  
10.72
in	  
%	   Holding	  
Company	  
post-­‐
Public	   Offer	   at	  
Maximum	  
Subscription	  
27.05	  
11.19	  
10.41
4.29	  
4.23	  
3.78	  
3.76	  
1.38
0.72	  
9.65	  
77.88
4.16	  
4.11	  
3.67	  
3.66	  
1.34
0.70	  
9.37	  
75.66
*It	  is	  noted	  that	  Vazon	  Associates	  Limited	  is	  associated	  with	  Dr.	  David	  Robson	  and	  Ms.
Elizabeth	  Landles	  (both	  individuals	  being	  two	  of	  the	  Proposed	  Directors).
22
Indirect	  interest	  in	  285,650,000	  Shares	  via	  Vazon	  Associates	  Limited	  
representing	  (i)	  32.25%	  holding	  in	  the	  Company	  post-­‐Acquisition;	  (ii)	  27.84%	  
holding	  in	  the	  Company	  post-­‐Public	  Offer	  at	  Minimum	  Subscription;	  and	  (iii)	  
27.05%	  holding	  in	  the	  Company	  post-­‐Public	  Offer	  at	  Maximum	  Subscription.	  
Direct	  interest	  in	  4,000,000	  Options.
Indirect	  interest	  in	  285,650,000	  Shares	  via	  Vazon	  Associates	  Limited	  
representing	  (i)	  32.25%	  holding	  in	  the	  Company	  post-­‐Acquisition;	  (ii)	  27.84%	  
holding	  in	  the	  Company	  post-­‐Public	  Offer	  at	  Minimum	  Subscription;	  and	  (iii)	  
27.05%	  holding	  in	  the	  Company	  post-­‐Public	  Offer	  at	  Maximum	  Subscription.	  
Direct	  interest	  in	  3,000,000	  Options
Direct	  interest	  in	  38,546,470	  Shares	  representing	  (i)	  4.35%	  holding	  in	  the	  
Company	  post-­‐Acquisition;	  (ii)	  3.76%	  holding	  in	  the	  Company	  post-­‐Public	  
Offer	  at	  Minimum	  Subscription;	  and	  (iii)	  3.66%	  holding	  in	  the	  Company	  post-­‐
Public	  Offer	  at	  Maximum	  Subscription.	  
Direct	  Interest	  in	  3,000,000	  Options.
Dr.	  Robson:
Ms.	  Landles:
Mr.	  Sarssam:
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Mr.	  Johnson:
Dr.	  Sukhyar:
Direct	  interest	  in	  1,250,000	  Options.
Mr.	  Zok:
-
Direct	  interest	  in	  1,250,000	  Options.
Direct	  interest	  in	  1,250,000	  Options.
Mr.	  Hargreaves:
Mr.	  Martino:
Direct	  interest	  in	  1,250,000	  Options.
Direct	  interest	  in	  1,250,000	  Options.
What	  escrow	  
restrictions	  apply	  
to	  the	  key	  
Shareholders’	  
Shares?
Please	  refer	  to	  Section	  12	  for	  full	  details	  on	  all	  of	  the	  interests	  of	  the	  Directors.
At	  the	  date	  of	  this	  Prospectus,	  the	  Company	  does	  not	  have	  any	  restricted	  
securities	  held	  in	  escrow.
Subject	  to	  the	  Company	  re-­‐complying	  with	  Chapters	  1	  and	  2	  of	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules;	  
certain	  securities	  on	  issue	  prior	  to	  the	  Offers	  and	  certain	  securities	  issued	  as	  part	  of	  
the	  Offers	  may	  be	  classified	  by	  ASX	  as	  restricted	  securities	  and	  will	  be	  required	  to	  be	  
held	   in	   escrow	   for	   up	   to	   24	   months	   from	   the	   date	   of	   reinstatement	   to	   Official	  
Quotation	  or	  date	  of	  issue.
During	   the	   period	   in	   which	   these	   securities	   are	   prohibited	   from	   being	   transferred,	  
trading	  in	  Shares	  may	  be	  less	  liquid	  which	  may	  impact	  on	  the	  ability	  of	  a	  Shareholder	  
to	  dispose	  of	  his	  or	  her	  Shares	  in	  a	  timely	  manner.
The	  Company	  shall	  comply	  with	  any	  necessary	  and	  appropriate	  escrow	  requirements	  
as	  stipulated	  by	  the	  ASX.
What	  important	  
contracts	  with	  
related	  parties	  is	  
or	  will	  the	  
Company	  be	  a	  
party	  to?
The	  Company	  has	  entered	  into	  agreements	  to	  acquire	  the	  entire	  issued	  share	  capital	  
of	   SPG.	   The	   consideration	   for	   the	   Acquisition	   consists	   of	   the	   issue	   of	   Shares	   to	   the	  
Vendors.	   It	   is	   noted	   that	   the	   current	   SPG	   Directors	   and	   or	   their	   related	   parties	   are	  
Vendors.	   Accordingly,	   each	   of	   these	   Directors	   (or	   entities	   with	   whom	   they	   are	  
associated)	   will	   be	   receiving	   a	   proportion	   of	   the	   consideration	   payable	   by	   the	  
Company	  in	  respect	  to	  the	  Acquisition	  and/or	  pursuant	  to	  the	  Vendor	  Offer.
SPG	   currently	   is	   a	   party	   to	   agreements	   with	   related	   parties.	   These	   agreements	   are	  
primarily	   for	   the	   employment	   of	   the	   executive	   directors	   of	   SPG	   and	   also	   for	   office	  
services	   administration.	   Please	   refer	   to	   Section	   12.3.2	  
information	   on	  
Personnel	   Service	  Agreements.
for
Response	  
Those	  Directors	  with	  interests	  upon	  completion	  of	  the	  Acquisition	  are	  set	  out	  below:
Section
Question
At	  Completion,	  
what	  will	  be	  the	  
Directors’	  
security	  holdings	  
in	  the	  Company?
12
12
12
23
Question	  
Post	  Completion,	  
what	  significant	  
benefits	  and	  
interests	  are	  
payable	  to	  
Directors	  and	  
other	  persons	  
connected	  with	  
the	  Company	  or	  
the	  Offer?
Response	  
On	   Acquisition,	   the	  current	   Directors	   (excluding	   Mr.	   Domenic	   Martino)	   will	   step	  
down	   and	   following	   the	   Acquisition,	   the	   Proposed	   Directors	   will	   receive	   or	   will	   be	  
entitled	  to	  receive	  (on	  an	  accruals	  basis)	  remuneration.
Section
At	  this	  time,	  the	  Remuneration	  Committee	  has	  not	  been	  formed	  due	  to	  the	  need	  for	  
restructuring	   of	   the	   Board	   of	   Directors	   which,	   as	   specified	   above,	   is	   subject	   to	  
relevant	   Shareholder	   approval,	   and	   shall	   occur	   on	   18	   February	   2016	   following	   the	  
General	  Meeting	  of	  the	  Company.
At	   this	   time,	   the	   Proposed	   Directors	   and	   Mr.	   Martino	   cannot	   specify	   their	  
remuneration	  given	  that	  the	  Remuneration	  Committee	  cannot	  make	  a	  statement	  to	  
this	  effect,	  and	  in	  the	  opinion	  of	  the	  incoming	  Directors,	  to	  do	  so	  at	  this	  stage	  could	  
risk	   compromising	   the	   independence	   of	   the	   Remuneration	   Committee	   in	   making	   a	  
decision	  for	  the	  best	  interests	  of	  the	  Shareholders	  and	  of	  the	  Company.
12.3.2/	  
12.4.12
SPG	  has	  agreements	  with	  Vazon	  Energy	  Limited	  for	  the	  provision	  of	  the	  services	  of	  Dr.	  
David	  Robson	  and	  Ms.	  Elizabeth	  Landles	  who	  receive	  an	  annual	  fee	  of	  USD	  541,752	  
and	   USD	   314,000	   respectively.	   	  Mr.	   Mark	   Sarssam	   has	   a	   contract	   with	   SPG	   for	   his	  
engagement	   as	   Chief	   Operating	   Officer	   and	   is	   entitled	   to	   be	   paid	   a	   salary	   of	  
USD	  310,000	   per	   annum.	   It	   is	   anticipated	   that	   these	   fees	   will	   not	   increase	   upon	  
appointment	  as	  Directors	  of	  the	  Company.
Mr.	   Martino	   (as	   an	   existing	   Director	   of	   the	   Company)	   currently	   receives	   a	   director	  
salary	  of	  $36,000.
Non-­‐executive	   Director	   fees	   will	   not	   exceed	   $500,000	   per	   annum	   in	   aggregate	  
(subject	  to	  Shareholder	  approval	  at	  the	  General	  Meeting).
Please	   refer	   to	   Section	   12.5	   of	   this	   Prospectus	   for	   further	   information	   on	   the	  
Company’s	  proposed	  Corporate	  Governance	  structure.
24
1.8  The	   Offers
Question	  
What	  is	  the	  Public	  
Offer?
Response	  
The	   Public	   Offer	   is	   a	   public	   offering	   of	   a	  minimum	  of	   140,000,000	   new	   fully	   paid	  
ordinary	   Shares	  in	  the	  Company	  at	  an	  Offer	  Price	  of	  $0.10	  per	  Share	  to	  raise	  a	  total	  
of	   $14,000,000	   (the	   “Minimum	   Subscription”)	   with	   the	   ability	   to	   offer	   up	   to	  
170,000,000	   new	  fully	  paid	  ordinary	  Shares	  in	  the	  Company	  at	  an	  Offer	  Price	  of	  $0.10	  
per	  Share	  to	   raise	  a	  total	  of	  up	  to	  $17,000,000	  (the	  “Maximum	  Subscription”).
What	  are	  the	  
Transaction	  Offers?
The	  Transaction	  Offers	  are	  made	  to	  the	  Vendors,	  the	  Noteholder	  and	  those	  entitled	  
to	   the	   Options.	   You	   should	   not	   complete	   an	   Application	   Form	   in	   relation	   to	   the	  
Transaction	  Offers	  unless	  specifically	  directed	  to	  do	  so	  by	  the	  Company.
What	  is	  the	  purpose	  
of	  the	  Public	  Offer?
The	  purpose	  of	  the	  Public	  Offer	  is:
•
•
•
•
•
to	  fund	  the	  ongoing	  immediate	  working	  capital	  needs	  of	  the	  Company	  and
direct	  project	  costs	  of	  the	  Company;
to	   raise	   primary	   capital	   in	   order	   to	   strengthen	   the	   	   Company’s	   	   balance
sheet	   and	   provide	   financial	   flexibility	   to	   pursue	   its	   identified	   growth
opportunities	  and	  objectives	  as	  set	  out	  in	  this	  Prospectus;
to	   provide	   a	   liquid	   market	   for	   shares	   and	   an	   opportunity	   for	   others	   to
invest	  in	  the	  Company;
to	   provide	   SPG	   with	   the	   benefits	   of	   an	   increased	   profile	   that	   arises	   from
being	  a	  listed	  public	  company;	  and
to	   meet	   the	   requirements	   of	   the	   ASX	   and	   satisfy	   Chapters	   1	   and	   2	   of	   the
ASX	  Listing	  Rules.
The	  Company	  currently	  intends	  to	  apply	  funds	  raised	  from	  the	  Public	  Offer	  over	  the	  
first	   fifteen	   months,	   following	   reinstatement	   of	   the	   Company	   to	   quotation	   on	   the	  
official	  list	  of	  ASX,	  in	  the	  manner	  set	  out	  in	  the	  table	  in	  Section	  2.7.
What	  are	  the	  
purposes	  of	  the	  
Transaction	  Offers?
The	   primary	   purposes	   of	   the	   Transaction	   Offers	   are	   to	   facilitate	   the	   completion	   of	  
the	  Acquisition	  and	  to	  remove	  the	  need	  for	  an	  additional	  disclosure	  document	  to	  be	  
issued	  upon	  the	  sale	  of	  any	  Shares	  that	  are	  issued	  under	  the	  Transaction	  Offers.
What	  are	  the	  
conditions	  of	  the	  
Offers?
Completion	   of	   each	   of	   the	   Offers	   is	   conditional	   upon	   the	   Company’s	   Shareholders	  
approving	   the	   respective	   resolutions	   in	   order	   to	   complete	   the	   Acquisition,	   the	  
Company	   receiving	   conditional	   approval	   for	   the	   re-­‐quotation	   of	   the	   Company’s	  
Shares	  by	  the	  ASX	  and	  the	  Company	  completing	  the	  Public	  Offer.
How	  will	  the	  
proceeds	  of	  the	  
Offer	  be	  used?
Please	  refer	  to	  Section	  3	  for	  further	  details	  about	  Shareholder	  approvals.
The	  proceeds	  of	  the	  Public	  Offer	  together	  with	  existing	  cash	  reserves	  will	  be	  used	  to:
•
•
•
•
fund	  work	  programmes	  on	  current	  projects;
fund	  the	  evaluation	  of	  new	  projects;
provide	  working	  capital	  of	  the	  Company;	  and
fund	  the	  costs	  of	  the	  Acquisition	  and	  the	  Offers.
Section
2
2
2
3
2
2
25
Question	  
What	  will	  be	  the	  
capital	  structure	  of	  
the	  Company	  on	  
completion	  
of	  the	  Offer?
Response	  
The	  capital	  structure	  of	  the	  Company	  following	  completion	  of	  the	  Offers	  (assuming	  
full	  subscription)	  is	  summarised	  below:
Section
(%)
798,647,010
1,025,524,170
Maximum	  Subscription	  (170,000,000)
Number	  of	  Shares
MUI
Ownership
(%)
Pre	  1:50	  Consolidation
Current	  MUI	  Shareholders	  (pre-­‐	  
Consolidation)
Current	  MUI	  Shareholders	  (post-­‐	  
Consolidation
Post	  1:50	  Consolidation
Current	  MUI	  Shareholders	  (post-­‐	  
Consolidation)
Issued	  Pursuant	  to	  Public	  Offer	  
(Maximum	  Subscription)
Issued	  pursuant	  to	  Vendor	  Offer
Issued	  pursuant	  to	  the	  Conversion	  
Offer
3,693,857,804
100.00
73,877,160
100.00
73,877,160
170,000,000
798,647,010
13,000,000
7.00
16.11
75.66
1.23
Total
1,055,524,170
100.00
Will	  the	  Shares	  be	  
listed?
Within	   seven	   days	   of	   the	   date	   of	   the	   Prospectus,	   the	   Company	   will	   make	   an	  
application	   to	   the	   ASX	   for	   re-­‐admission	   to	   the	   Official	   List	   of	   ASX	   and	   Official	  
Quotation	  of	  the	  Shares.
Completion	   of	   the	   Offers	   is	   conditional	   on	   the	   ASX	   approving	   this	   application.	   If	  
approval	   is	   not	   given	   within	   three	   months	   after	   such	   Application	   is	   made	   (or	   any	  
longer	   period	   permitted	   by	   law),	   the	   Offers	   will	   be	   withdrawn	   and	   all	   Application	  
Monies	   received	   will	   be	   refunded	   without	   interest	   as	   soon	   as	   practicable	   in	  
accordance	  with	  the	  requirements	  of	  the	  Corporations	  Act.
2
26
Question	  
Is	  the	  Public	  Offer	  
underwritten?
Response	  
The	  Public	  Offer	  is	  not	  underwritten.	  Cedrus	  Investments	  Limited	  is	  entitled	  to	  a	  fee	  
of	   4%	   of	   the	   dollar	   amount	   of	   shares	   issued	   to	   investors	   as	   a	   direct	   result	   of	   their	  
services	  (provided	  Minimum	  Subscription	  is	  met).	  The	  Company	  anticipates	  that	  it	  will	  
make	  this	  payment,	  assuming	  Minimum	  Subscription	  is	  obtained.
Section	  
12.3.5/	  
12.5.13
Who	  can	  participate	  
in	  the	  Public	  Offer?	  
How	  do	  I	  apply	  for	  
Shares?
The	  Public	  Offer	  is	  open	  to	  Australian	  and	  New	  Zealand	  residents	  and	  institutions	  and	  
certain	  other	  exempt	  investors	  where	  not	  prohibited	  by	  law.
By	   submitting	  the	  	   valid	  	   Application	  	   Form	  	   attached	  	   to,	  	   or	  	   accompanying,	  	   this	  
Prospectus	  in	  accordance	  with	  the	  instructions	  set	  out	  on	  the	  Application	  Form.
What	  is	  the	  
minimum	  
Application	  under	  
the	  Offer?
To	  the	  extent	  permissible	  by	  law,	  an	  Application	  by	  an	  Applicant	  under	  the	  Offers	  is	  
irrevocable.	  
Applicants	   must	   apply	   for	   a	   minimum	   of	   20,000	   Shares	   representing	   a	   minimum	  
investment	  of	  $2,000.00.
Applicants	  applying	  for	  additional	  Shares	  must	  apply	  for	  Shares	  in	  multiples	  of	  2,000	  
Shares	  (representing	  a	  further	  investment	  of	  $200.00).
What	  is	  the	  
allocation	  policy?
All	  decisions	  regarding	  the	  allocation	  of	  Shares	  under	  the	  Offers	  will	  be	  made	  by	  the	  
Company.
The	  Company	  reserves	  the	  right,	  in	  its	  absolute	  discretion,	  to	  allot	  the	  Shares	  applied	  
for	   under	   any	   Application	   under	   the	   Offer	   in	   full	   or	   in	   the	   event	   of	   an	   over	  
subscription,	  to	  scale	  back	  any	  Application,	  to	  allot	  any	  lesser	  number	  or	  to	  decline	  
any	   Application.	   The	   Company	   may	   in	   its	   absolute	   discretion	   give	   preference	   to	  
certain	  investors	  in	  accepting	  Applications	  under	  the	  Offer.
Where	   possible,	   the	   Company	   intends	   to	   provide	   existing	   Shareholders	   of	   the	  
Company	   with	   a	   preference	   to	   apply	   for	   the	   Public	   Offer	   taking	   into	   account	   the	  
register	  and	  ASX	  requirements.
Allocation	  of	  the	  Transaction	  Offers	  is	  guaranteed	  subject	  to	  receiving	  necessary	  
Shareholder	  approvals.
No	  brokerage,	  commission	  or	  stamp	  duty	  is	  payable	  by	  Applicants	  on	  Shares	  allotted	  
under	  the	  Offers.
The	   taxation	   implications	   of	   investing	   in	   the	   Company	   will	   depend	   on	   an	   investor’s	  
individual	   circumstances.	  	  Applicants	  	  should	   obtain	  their	  	  own	  tax	  	  advice	  prior	  	  to	  
making	  an	  investment.
The	   Company	   reserves	   the	   right	   not	   to	   proceed	   with	   the	   Offers	   at	   any	   time	   before	  
the	  issue	  of	  Shares	  or	  Options	  to	  successful	  Applicants.	  No	  Shares	  or	  Options	  will	  be	  
issued	  until	  the	  conditions	  to	  the	  Acquisition	  are	  satisfied.
If	   the	   Offers	   do	   not	   proceed,	   the	   Share	   Registry,	   your	   Broker	   or	   the	   Company	   will	  
refund	  Application	  Monies.
2
No	   interest	   will	   be	   paid	   on	   any	   Application	   Monies	   refunded	   as	   a	   result	   of	  the	  
withdrawal	  of	  the	  Offers.
2
13
13
13
N/A
N/A
Is	  there	  any	  
brokerage,	  
commission	  or	  
stamp	  duty	  payable	  
by	  the	  Applicants?	  
What	  are	  the	  tax	  
implications	  of	  
making	  an	  
investment	  in	  the	  
Company?	  
Can	  the	  Offer	  be	  
withdrawn?
Will	  I	  receive	  
dividends?
The	   Company	   does	   not	   currently	   have	   a	   dividend	   policy.	   The	   board	   will	   make	   a	  
determination	   in	   its	   discretion	   in	   relation	   to	   the	   payment	   of	   any	   future	   dividends,	  
depending	  on	  the	  Company’s	  performance.
How	  can	  further	  
information	  be	  
obtained?
If	   you	   require	   assistance	   or	   additional	  copies	   of	   this	   Prospectus,	   please	   contact	   the	  
Company.	   For	   advice	   on	   the	   Offers,	   you	   should	   speak	   to	   your	   stockbroker,	  
accountant	  or	  other	  professional	  financial	  adviser.
Contact	  details
For	  contact	  details,	  refer	  to	  the	  Corporate	  Directory.
N/A
13
Page	  6
27
1‘ 2, DQLWHS OF Eh") Off-Q'l‘g
I J \ ‘\ ’1 
0'.' v \\ . a}; "
. / k “’i/ﬂxl ﬂ
‘ ‘Bﬂg‘
' M.
"I
x :-
hs‘. ‘ .. Q
‘/‘--h __ / J< \“ 
if"  ~ :7 ., I
u—=;i.\"' 
I L A
r  . l/lI-I , I
'1 >  ‘\ ‘1
I. 'b' ‘5 \ ‘  \' {I


2. Details	  of	  the	  Offers
2.1  The	  Public	  Offer
Conversion	  Offer	  
An	   offer	   of	   up	   to	   13,000,000	   Shares	   to	   the	   Noteholder	  
(the	  “Conversion	  Offer”).
The	   Public	   Offer	   is	   a	   public	   offer	   of	   a	   minimum	   of	  
140,000,000	   new	   fully	   paid	   ordinary	   Shares	   in	   the	  
Company	  at	  an	  offer	  price	  of	  $0.10	  per	  Share	  to	  raise	  a	  
total	  of	  $14,000,000	  (the	  “Minimum	  Subscription”);	  with	  
the	   ability	   to	   accept	   oversubscriptions	   of	   a	   further	  
3,000,000	  new	  fully	  paid	  ordinary	  Shares	  in	  the	  Company	  
at	  an	  Offer	  Price	  of	  $0.10	  per	  Share	  to	  raise	  a	  total	  of	  up	  
to	  $17,000,000	  (the	  “Maximum	  Subscription”).
If	   the	   Minimum	   Subscription	   of	   the	   Public	   Offer	   is	   not	  
reached	   within	   three	   months	   after	   the	   date	   of	   the	  
Prospectus,	   no	   Shares	   will	   be	   issued	   and	   Application	  
monies	  will	  be	  refunded	  as	  soon	  as	  is	  practicable	  in	  full,	  
without	  interest.	  	  In	  addition,	  the	  Company	  will	  not	  be	  in	  
a	  position	  to	  complete	  its	  acquisition	  of	  SPG.
2.2  Disclosure	   of	   Transaction	   Offers
The	   following	   Transaction	   Offers	   (the	   Vendor	   Offer,	  
Conversion	  Offer	  and	  Option	  Offer)	  are	  available	  only	  to	  
the	   respective	   offerees	   of	   such	   Offers	   and	   are	   not	  
available	   for	   subscription	   to	   the	   general	   public.	   A	  
personalised	  Application	  Form	  in	  relation	  to	  the	  relevant	  
Offer	   along	   with	   a	   copy	   of	   this	   Prospectus	   shall	   be	  
provided	   to	   the	   relevant	   offerees.	   The	   securities	  
subscribed	   for	   under	   these	   Transaction	   Offers	   may	   be	  
subject	   to	   escrow	   restrictions	   imposed	   by	   Chapter	   9	   of	  
the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules.
The	   Board	   has	   chosen	   to	   provide	   details	   of	   these	  
Transaction	   Offers	   in	   order	   to	   remove	   the	   need	   for	   an	  
additional	   disclosure	   document	   to	   be	   issued	   upon	   the	  
sale	   of	   any	   Shares	   which	   are	   issued	   in	   accordance	   with	  
the	   terms	   and	  	  conditions	   of	   the	  	  relevant	   Transaction	  
Offer.
Brief	   details	   of	   the	   Transaction	   Offers	   are	   located	   in	  
Sections	  12.4.16	  –	  12.4.17.
Vendor	   Offer	  
An	   offer	   of	   798,647,010	   Shares	   to	   the	   Vendors	   in	  
relation	  to	  the	  Acquisition	  (the	  “Vendor	  Offer”).
The	  Vendor	  Offer	  is	  an	  offer	  of	  up	  to	  798,647,010	  Shares	  
to	   the	   Vendors	   (the	   “Vendor	   Shares”).	   On	   29	   January	  
2016	   the	   Company	   and	   the	   Vendors	   entered	   into	   the	  
Share	  Exchange	  Agreement,	  the	  material	  terms	  of	  which	  
are	  summarised	  at	  Section	  12.3.1	  of	  this	  Prospectus.
Accordingly,	   the	   Company	  
is	   offering	   the	   Vendor	  
Shares	   to	   the	   Vendors	   in	   satisfaction	   of	   the	   terms	   of	  
the	  	   Share	  Exchange	  Agreement.
The	   Conversion	   Offer	   is	   an	   offer	   of	   up	   to	   13,000,000	  
Shares	   to	   the	   Noteholder	   (“Conversion	   Shares”).	   The	  
is	   offering	   the	   Conversion	   Shares	   to	   the	  
Company	  
Noteholder	  
the	  
Convertible	  Note,	  the	  terms	  of	  which	  are	  summarised	  in	  
Section	  12.4.16	  of	  this	  Prospectus.
in	   satisfaction	   of
terms	   of
the
Option	   Offer	  
An	   offer	   of	   Options	   is	   to	   be	   made	   to	   (among	   others)	  
employees	   and	   consultants	   of	   the	   Company	   under	   the	  
terms	  of	  a	  Stock	  Incentive	  Plan	  (the	  “Option	  Offer”)	  the	  
details	  of	  which	  are	  set	  out	  in	  the	  Notice	  of	  Meeting	  and	  
at	  Section	  12.4.17	  of	  this	  Prospectus.
2.3  The	   Offers	  Are	  Conditional
The	  Offers	  under	  this	  Prospectus	  are	  conditional	  upon	  a	  
number	  of	  events	  occurring,	  including:
•
•
•
•
Shareholders	   approving	   the	   Acquisition	   and
approving	  
resolutions
interdependent	   on	   the	   Acquisition	   put	   	   to
them	  at	  the	  General	  Meeting;
the
all
of
ASX	   confirming	   the	   Company's	   compliance
with	  Chapters	  1	  and	  2	  of	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules;
ASX	  approving	  quotation	  of	  the	  Shares;	  and
Completion	   of	   the	   acquisition	   of	   SPG	   on	   the
terms	   and	   conditions	   summarised	   in	   Section
12.3.1.
If	   all	   of	   the	   conditions	   specified	   in	   the	   Share	   Exchange	  
Agreement	   are	   not	   satisfied	   within	   three	   (3)	   months	  
from	   the	   date	   of	   the	   Prospectus,	   no	   Shares	   will	   be	  
issued	  and	  Application	  Monies	  will	  be	  refunded	  as	  soon	  
as	  is	  practicable	  in	  full,	  without	  interest.
2.4
Investment	  Highlights
The	   Directors	   are	   of	   the	   opinion	   that	   the	   following	   are	  
the	  key	  highlights	  of	  the	  Public	  Offer.
Through	  the	  acquisition	  of	  SPG:
•
•
•
the	   Company	   will	   acquire	   a	   producing	   oil	   and
gas	  asset	  in	  the	  Republic	  of	  Tajikistan;
the	   Company	   will	   acquire	   an	   interest	   in	   an
exploration	   prospect	  
the	   Republic	   of
Georgia;
in
the	   Company	  will	   have	   the	   benefit	  of	  a	   series
of	   MOUs,	   cooperation	   agreements	   and	   other
such	   early	   stage	   documentation	   relating	   to	   a
29
series	   of	   production	   and	   exploration	   assets	  
in	   Tajikistan	   and	   East	   Siberia,	   including	   the	  
Taas-­‐	   Yuriakh	  Project;
the	   projects	   are	   well	   located	   with	   respect
to	   international	  energy	  markets,	  in	  particular
the	  
growing	  	  	   energy	  	  	   markets	  	  	   of	  	  	   Eastern	  	  	   and
Southern	  Asia;	  and
the	   Proposed	   Directors	   anticipate	   that	  
its
revenue	  will	  increase	  after	  the	  Acquisition	  as	  a
result	   of	   oil	   and	   gas	   production	   in	   Tajikistan
(expected	  in	  quarter	  2	  of	  2016).
•
•
2.5
Investment	   Risks
An	  investment	  in	  the	  Company	  has	  similar	  general	  risks	  
to	   those	   associated	   with	   any	   share	   market	   investment.	  
In	  addition,	  there	  are	  a	  number	  of	  business	  risks	  that	  are	  
specific	  to	  an	  investment	  in	  the	  Company.	  A	  description	  
of	  these	  risks	  is	  set	  out	  in	  Section	  4	  of	  this	  Prospectus.
Before	   deciding	   to	   invest	   in	   the	   Company,	   Applicants	  
should	   read	   the	   Prospectus	   in	   its	   entirety	   and	   consider	  
the	   risk	   factors	   that	   could	   affect	   the	   operating	   and	  
financial	  performance	  of	  the	  Company.
This	   is	   a	   highly	   speculative	   investment	   and	   investors	  
should	   refer	   to,	   and	   consider	   carefully,	   the	   Risk	   Factors	  
outlined	  in	  this	  Prospectus	  at	  Section	  4	  prior	  to	  making	  
an	  investment	  decision.	  	  An	  investment	  in	  the	  Company	  
therefore	   involves	   a	   number	   of	   risks	   and	   consequently	  
such	  an	  investment	  must	  be	  taken	  having	  paid	  full	  regard	  
to	   the	   risks	   involved	   to	   the	   security	   of	   any	   capital	  
invested.
The	   Directors	   are	   of	   the	   opinion	   that	   the	   following	   are	  
the	   key	   risks	  of	  making	   an	   investment	  in	   the	   Company.	  
Please	   refer	   to	   Section	   4	  of	   this	   Prospectus	   for	   more	  
detail	  on	  these	  key	  investment	  risks	  and	  information	  on	  
other	   risk	   factors	   which	   may	   affect	   the	   value	   of	   any	  
subscription	  for	  securities	  in	  the	  Company	  based	  on	  the	  
operations	  and	  business	  of	  SPG.
Oil	  and	  Gas	  Price	  Volatility	  
The	  demand	  and	  price	  of	  oil	  and	  gas	  is	  highly	  dependent	  
on	   a	   variety	   of	   factors,	   including	   international	   supply	  
and	   demand,	   the	   level	   of	   consumer	   product	   demand,	  
weather	   conditions,	   actions	   taken	   by	   governments	   and	  
international	   cartels,	   and	   global	   economic	   and	   political	  
developments.
Fluctuations	   in	   oil	   and	   gas	   prices	   and,	   in	   particular,	   a	  
material	  decline	  in	  the	  price	  of	  oil	  and	  gas,	  may	  have	  a	  
material	   adverse	   effect	   on	   the	   Company's	   business,	  
financial	  condition	  and	  results	  of	  operations.
Country	   Risk	  
Operating	   in	   foreign	   countries	   has	   inherent	   risks	   which	  
may	  impact	  adversely	  on	  the	  financial	  position,	  financial	  
performance,	   cash	   flows,	   growth	   prospects,	   ability	  	  to	  
pay	  dividends	  and	  the	  share	  price	  of	  the	  Company.
The	  following	  risks	  are	  specifically	  noted:	  
changes	  in	  government	  policies;
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
economic	  considerations;
legal	  considerations;
foreign	  investment	  requirements;
challenges	  to	  the	  ownership	  or	  nature	  of	  titles
and	  other	  rights;	  
devaluation	  or	  appreciation	  of	  currencies;	  and
timing	  considerations.
Exploration	   and	   Development	   Risks	  
The	   business	   of	   oil	   and	   gas	   exploration,	   project	  
development	   and	   production,	   by	   its	   nature,	   contains	  
elements	   of	   significant	   risk	   with	   no	   guarantee	   	   of	  
success.	   Ultimate	   and	   continuous	   success	   of	   these	  
activities	  is	  dependent	  on	  many	  factors	  such	  as:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
discovery
the	  
economically	  recoverable	  reserves;
and/or
acquisition
of
access	  
development;
to	   adequate	   capital
for	   project
the	   design	   and	   construction	   of	   efficient
development	   and	   production	  
infrastructure
within	  capital	  expenditure	  budgets;
securing	  and	  maintaining	  title	  to	  interests;
obtaining	   consents	   and	   approvals	   necessary
for	   the	   conduct	   of	   oil	   and	   gas	   exploration,
development	  and	  production;
access	  to	  competent	  operational	  management
and	  prudent	  financial	  administration,	  including
the	   availability	   and	   reliability	   of	   appropriately
skilled	  
employees,
contractors	  and	  consultants;
experienced
and
undergoing
income	   will	   result	   from
whether	   or	   not	  
and
projects	  
development	  
on
successful	   exploration	   and	   establishment	   of
production	  facilities;
programmes
exploration
depends
factors	  
including	   costs,	   actual	   oil	   and	   gas
reserves	   and	   resources,	   grade,	   transportation
and	   reliability	   and	   commodity	   prices	   affect
successful	  
and
operations;
development
project
exploration	   and	   production	   activities	   carry
risk,	   as	   such,	   activities	   may	   be	   curtailed,
delayed	   or	  	  cancelled	  	  as	   a	   result	   of	   weather
conditions,	   mechanical	   difficulties,	   	   shortages
or	  delays	  in	  the	  delivery	  of	  drilling	  rigs	  and/or
other	  equipment;
30
•
industrial	   disputes,
oil	   and	   natural	   gas	   exploration,	   development
and	   production	   operations	   are	   subject	   to	   all
the	  risks	  and	  hazards	  typically	  associated	  with
such	  operations,	  including	  hazards	  such	  as	  fire,
explosions,	  
cave-­‐ins,
unexpected	  shortages	   or	  increases	  in	  the	  cost
of	   consumables,	   spare	   parts,	   plant	   and
equipment,	   mechanical	  
and
breakdown,	  blow	  outs,	  environmental	  hazards
such	  as	  accidental	  sour	  gas	  releases	  and	  spills,
ruptures,	  discharge	  of	  toxic	  gases	  or	  geological
uncertainty.
failure
interests	   will	   result
There	  is	  no	  assurance	  that	  any	  exploration	  on	  current	  or	  
future	  
in	   the	   discovery	   of	   an	  
economic	   deposit	   of	   oil	   and	   gas.	   Even	   if	   an	   apparently	  
viable	  deposit	  is	  identified,	  there	  is	  no	  guarantee	  that	  it	  
can	  be	  economically	  developed.
2.6  Purpose	  of	  the	  Offers
The	  principal	  purpose	  of	  the	  Offers	  is	  to	  complete	  the	  Acquisition	  and	  to	  raise	  funds:
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
to	  ensure	  the	  viability	  of	  the	  Company's	  business	  following	  the	  Acquisition	  of	  SPG;
for	   exploration	   and/or	   development	   work	   programmes	   in	   relation	   to	   the	   Tajikistan	   and	   Georgia	   oil	   and	   gas
Projects;
for	  evaluation	  of	  additional	  project	  opportunities;
for	  administration	  and	  for	  the	  costs	  of	  the	  Offers	  and	  the	  Acquisition;	  and
for	  general	  working	  capital.
A	   summary	   of	   the	   Tajikistan,	   Georgia	   and	   potential	   East	   Siberia	   oil	   and	   gas	   projects	   is	   contained	   in	   Section	   10	  of	   this	  
Prospectus	  and	  the	  Independent	  Geologist's	  Report	  on	  Block	  XI	  G,	  Georgia	  is	  contained	  in	  Section	  11.
2.7  Proposed	  Use	  of	  Funds
The	  Public	  Offer	  will	  raise	  a	  minimum	  of	  $14,000,000	  on	  the	  Minimum	  Subscription	  with	  the	  ability	  to	  offer	  up	  to	  $17,000,000	  
on	  the	  Maximum	  Subscription	  basis	  before	  costs.
The	  funds	  raised	  from	  the	  Public	  Offer	  are	  currently	  intended	  to	  be	  used	  as	  set	  out	  in	  the	  Section	  above.
The	   following	   is	   a	   summary	   of	   the	   Company’s	   proposed	   funding	   and	   expenditure	   over	   approximately	   15	   months	   post	  
Completion	  of	  the	  Acquisition	  under	  the	  Minimum	  Subscription	  scenario	  and	  Maximum	  Subscription	  scenario:
31
Cash	  at	  bank	  
-­‐ MUI	  Cash	  at	  Bank	  
-­‐ SPG	  Cash	  at	  Bank	  
-­‐	  Public	  Offer	  
Total	  funds	  budgeted	  to	  be	  available	  over	  the	  next	  15	  months:	  
Committed	  expenditure:	  
-­‐	  Work	  programme	  on	  current	  projects	  
-­‐	   Capital	   Costs	   associated	   with	   current	   projects	   (see	   sections	   9.2,	   9.4,	  
10.1.3	   and	  10.2.4)	  
Costs	  associated	  with	  the	  acquisition	  of	  new	  projects	  (see	  section	  9)	  
Estimated	  costs	  of	  Offers	  	  (see	  section	  12.5.13)	  
Budgeted	  administration,	  finance	  and	  operating	  costs	  
Total	  funds	  budgeted	  to	  be	  used	  over	  next	  approximate	  15	  months:	  
Working	  Capital
Public	  Offer
Minimum	  
$14,000,000	  
$	  
20,000	  
125,000	  
14,000,000	  
14,145,000
Maximum	  
$17,000,000	  
$	  
20,000	  
125,000	  
17,000,000	  
17,145,000
4,558,521
4,558,521
3,616,902	  
-­‐	  
990,000	  
3,479,577	  
12,645,000	  
1,500,000
3,616,902	  
2,880,000	  
1,100,000	  
3,489,577	  
15,645,000	  
1,500,000
Whilst	  the	  Proposed	  Directors	  are	  satisfied	  that	  upon	  completion	  of	  the	  Offers,	  the	  Company	  will	  have	  sufficient	  working	  
capital	  to	  meet	   its	   current	   stated	   objectives,	   investors	   should	   be	   aware	   that	   the	   Company	   may	   use	   and	   expend	   its	   cash	  
reserves	  more	  quickly	  than	  contemplated.
The	  Company's	  actual	  allocation	  of	  funds	  may	  change	  depending	  on	  the	  circumstances	  in	  which	  its	  business	  develops	  and	  
operates.	  The	  exact	  timing	  of	  the	  implementation	  of	  any	  programme	  is	  also	  dependent	  on	  weather,	  conditions	  for	  drilling	  
and	  the	  timely	  availability	  of	  drilling	  and	  ancillary	  equipment	  as	  well	  as	  government	  permits	  and	  approvals.
The	  use	  of	  further	  equity	  funding	  or	  share	  placements	  (subject	  to	  any	  necessary	  shareholder	  approvals)	  will	  be	  considered	  
by	  the	  Directors	  where	  it	  is	  appropriate	  to	  accelerate	  a	  project.
The	   Company	   will	   provide	   details	   of	   its	   actual	   expenditure	   in	   its	   periodic	   reports	   and	   as	   otherwise	   required	   by	   the	   ASX	  
Listing	  Rules.
32
2.8	  	  	  	  	  Capital	  Structure	  and	  Ownership
Should	  the	  Acquisition	  be	  approved	  by	  the	  Shareholders	  and,	  following	  satisfaction	  of	  all	  other	  conditions	  to	  the	  Acquisition	  (including	  the	  Consolidation),	  the	  Company	  will	  issue	  798,647,010	  
Shares	   (on	   a	   post-­‐Consolidation	   basis)	   to	   the	   Vendors.	   The	   effect	   of	   the	   Consolidation,	   the	   issue	   of	   the	   Acquisition	   Shares,	   the	   issues	   of	   Shares	   under	   the	   Public	   Offer,	   conversion	   of	   the	  
Convertible	  Note	  and	  issue	  of	  Options	  is	  set	  out	  in	  the	  table	  below:
Current	  issued	  share
Current	  issued	  share	  capital
capital	  (pre-­‐	  
Consolidation)
(post-­‐Consolidation)
Conversion	  of
Convertible	  Note
Shares	  to	  be	  issued
pursuant	  to	  the	  Vendors
Public	  Offer	  (Minimum
Subscription)*
Pro-­‐forma	  total	  issued	  
share	  capital	  (Minimum
Subscription)
Public	  Offer	  
(Maximum
Subscription)**
Pro-­‐forma	  total
issued	  share	  capital
(Maximum
Subscriptions)
3,693,857,804
73,877,160
13,000,000
798,647,0101
140,000,000
1,025,524,170
170,000,000
1,055,524,170
Options	  (pre-­‐	  
Consolidation)
Options	  (post-­‐	  
Consolidation)
50,000,000
1,000,000
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
Options	  to	  Directors
Exercise	  Price	  ($)
Expiry
Pro-­‐forma	  total	  number	  of
and	  Proposed
Directors
-­‐
6,250,000
10,000,000
0.05
0.125
0.125
Options
1,000,000
6,250,000
3	  December	  2016
Five	  years	  from	  the	  date
of	  issue
Five	  years	  from	  the	  date
10,000,000
of	  issue
*In	  the	  case	  of	  the	  Company	  fulfilling	  the	  Minimum	  Subscription	  under	  the	  Public	  Offer,	  following	  the	  Acquisition	  the	  Vendors	  will,	  in	  aggregate,	  own	  77.88%	  of	  the	  Company’s	  issued	  share
capital	  post	  Public	  Offer.	  	  	  
**In	  the	  case	  of	  the	  Company	  fulfilling	  the	  Maximum	  Subscription	  under	  the	  Public	  Offer,	  following	  the	  Acquisition	  the	  Vendors	  will	  in	  aggregate,	  own	  75.66%	  of	  the	  Company’s	  issued	  share	  
capital	  post	  Public	  Offer.
33
2.9  Applications
Completed	   Application	   Forms,	   together	   with	   the	   full	   amount	   of	   Application	   Monies	   payable,	   may	   be	   lodged	   at	   any	   time	  
after	  the	  date	  of	  this	  Prospectus	  but	  no	  later	  than	  the	  Closing	  Date.	  For	  information	  as	  to	  how	  you	  may	  accept	  the	  Offers	  
refer	  to	  Section	  Error!	  Reference	  source	  not	  found.	  of	  this	  Prospectus.
The	  Company	  reserves	  the	  right	  to	  vary	  the	  Closing	  Date	  without	  prior	  notice;	  which	  may	  have	  a	  consequential	  effect	  on	  
the	  other	  dates.	  Applicants	  are	  therefore	  urged	  to	  lodge	  their	  Application	  Forms	  as	  soon	  as	  possible.
Vendors,	   offerees	   of	   Options	   and	   the	   Noteholder	   will	   receive	   personalised	   Application	   Forms	   for	   completion	   of	   their	  
respective	  Applications.	  No	  money	  is	  payable	  by	  the	  Vendors	  or	  the	  Noteholder.
2.10  Application	  Money	  Held	  in	  Trust
Application	   Monies	   will	   be	   held	   in	   trust	   in	   a	   subscription	   account	   until	   allotment.	   The	   subscription	   account	   will	   be	  
established	  and	  kept	  on	  behalf	  of	  the	  Applicants	  until	  allotment	  of	  the	  Shares	  to	  those	  Applicants.
In	  the	  event	  that	  an	  Applicant	  is	  not	  issued	  with	  Shares	  in	  full	  satisfaction	  of	  the	  Application	  Monies	  provided,	  the	  relevant	  
Application	  Monies	  will	  be	  refunded	  without	  interest.
2.11  Allotment
Under	   the	   current	   indicative	   timetable,	   the	   Shares	   are	   expected	   to	   be	   issued	   on	   17	   March	   2016	   and	   holding	   statements	  
despatched	   on	   22	   March	   2016	   (such	   indicative	   timetable	   being	   subject	   to	   change	   without	   notice)	   (see	   the	   Indicative	  
Timetable	  on	  page	  9	  of	  this	  Prospectus).
It	   is	   the	   responsibility	   of	   Applicants	   to	   confirm	   the	   number	   of	   Shares	   allotted	   to	   them	   prior	   to	   trading	   in	   the	   securities.	  
Applicants	  who	  sell	  Shares	  before	  they	  receive	  notification	  of	  the	  number	  of	  securities	  allocated	  to	  them	  do	  so	  at	  their	  own	  
risk.
If	   an	   Application	   Form	   is	   not	   completed	   correctly,	   or	   if	   the	   accompanying	   payment	   of	   the	   Application	   Monies	   is	   for	   the	  
wrong	   amount,	   it	   may	   still	   be	   treated	   as	   a	   valid	   Application.	   The	   Directors'	   shall	   decide	   whether	   or	   not	   to	   treat	   the	  
Application	  as	  valid	  and	  how	  to	  construe,	  amend	  or	  complete	  the	  Application	  Form	  is	  final.	   However,	  an	  Applicant	  will	  not	  
be	  treated	  as	  having	  applied	  for	  more	  Shares	  than	  is	  indicated	  by	  the	  sum	  of	  the	  cheque	  for	  the	  Application	  Monies.
2.12  ASX	   Listing
Within	  7	  days	  after	  the	  date	  of	  this	  Prospectus,	  the	  Company	  will	  apply	  to	  ASX	  for	  the	  Shares	  issued	  under	  this	  Prospectus	  
to	  be	  admitted	  to	  quotation.
If	  the	  Shares	  are	  not	  admitted	  to	  quotation	  within	  3	  months	  after	  the	  date	  of	  this	  Prospectus,	  all	  Application	  Monies	  will	  be	  
refunded	  without	  interest.
2.13  Recent	  Market	  Prices	  of	  Shares	  on	  ASX
The	   lowest	   and	   highest	   market	   sale	   price	   of,	   the	   Company	   on	   ASX	   during	   the	   12	   months,	   3	   months	   and	   1	   month	  
immediately	  preceding	  the	  date	  of	  this	  Prospectus	  are	  set	  out	  in	  the	  table	  below:
Timeframe
High
12	  months	  
3	  months	  
1	  month
$0.001	  
$0.001	  
$0.001
High
(adjusted	  for	  Consolidation)
(approximate)
$0.05	  
$0.05	  
$0.05
Low
$0.001	  
$0.001	  
$0.001
Low
(adjusted	  for	  Consolidation)
(approximate)
$0.05	  
$0.05	  
$0.05
34
2.14  CHESS	   and	   Issuer	   Sponsored	   Holdings
2.16  Taxation	  Implications
The	   Company	   participates	  
in	   the	   security	   transfer	  
system	   known	   as	   CHESS.	   ASTC,	   a	   wholly	   owned	  
subsidiary	   of	   ASX,	   operates	   CHESS	   in	   accordance	   with	  
the	   ASX	   Listing	   Rules	   and	   the	   ASTC	   Settlement	   Rules.	  
Under	   CHESS,	   Applicants	   will	   not	   receive	   a	   share	  
certificate	   but	   will	   be	   issued	   a	   statement	   of	   holding	   of	  
shares.
If	   you	   are	   broker	   sponsored,	   and	   you	   are	   allocated	  
Shares	   under	   the	   Public	   Offer,	   ASTC	   will	   send	   you	   a	  
CHESS	  holding	  statement.	  The	  CHESS	  holding	  statement	  
will	   set	   out	   the	   number	   of	   Shares	   issued	   to	   you	   under	  
this	   Prospectus	   and	   provide	   details	   of	   your	   holder	  
identification	   number	   and	   the	   participant	   identification	  
number	   of	   the	   sponsor.	   If	   you	   are	   registered	   on	   the	  
issuer	   sponsored	   sub-­‐register,	   and	   you	   are	   allocated	  
Shares,	  your	  statement	  will	  be	  despatched	  by	  the	  Share	  
Registry	  and	  will	  contain	  the	  number	  of	  Shares	  issued	  to	  
you	   under	   this	   Prospectus	   and	   a	   security	   holder	  
reference	  number.
A	   CHESS	   statement	   or	   issuer-­‐sponsored	   statement	  
will	   routinely	   be	   sent	   to	   security	   holders	   at	   the	   end	  
of	   any	   calendar	   month	   during	   which	   the	   balance	   of	  
their	   security	   holding	   changes.	   Security	   holders	   may	  
request	  a	   statement	   at	   any	   other	   time.	   However,	   a	  
fee	   may	   be	   charged	  for	  additional	  statements.
If	   investors	   have	   enquiries	   about	   CHESS,	   they	   should	  
contact	  their	  broker	  or	  ASX.
2.15  Foreign	  Shareholders
come
into	   possession	   of
The	   distribution	   of	   this	   Prospectus	   in	   jurisdictions	  
outside	   of	   Australia	   may	   be	   restricted	   by	   law	   and	  
persons	   who	  
this	  
Prospectus	   should	   seek	   their	   own	   advice	   on	   and	  
observe	   any	   such	   restrictions.	   Any	   failure	   to	   comply	  
with	   such	   restrictions	   may	   constitute	   a	   violation	   of	  
applicable	   securities	   laws.	   This	   Prospectus	   (and	   the	  
accompanying	   Application	   Form)	   does	   not	   constitute	  
an	   offer	   of,	   or	   invitation	   to	   subscribe	   for,	   securities	  
in	   any	   place	   in	   which,	   or	   to	   any	   person	   to	   whom,	   it	  
would	   not	   be	  
lawful	   to	   make	   such	   an	   offer	   or	  
invitation.
is	   available
this	   Prospectus
to	   persons	  
Where	  
domiciled	  
in	   a	   country	   other	   than	   Australia,	   and	  
where	   that	   country’s	   securities	   code	   or	   legislation	  
requires	   registration,	   this	   Prospectus	   is	   provided	   for	  
information	   purposes	   only.	   No	   action	   has	   been	   taken	  
to	   register	   or	   qualify	   this	   Prospectus	   or	   to	   otherwise	  
permit	   a	   public	   offering	   of	   Shares	   and/or	   Options	  
outside	  of	  Australia.
Applicants	   should	   be	   aware	   that	   there	   may	   be	   taxation	  
liabilities	   arising	   from	   the	   subscription	   for	   Shares	   New	  
Options	  and	  the	  sale	  of	  those	  Shares	  and	  Options.
For	   this	   reason,	   it	   is	   very	   important	   that	   Applicants	  
consult	   their	   own	   taxation	   or	   other	   advisers	   in	   relation	  
to	   the	   taxation	   laws	   and	   regulations	   applicable	   to	   their	  
personal	   circumstances.	   The	   Company	   and	   its	   officers	  
accept	  no	   liability	  or	  responsibility	  in	  respect	  of	  any	  tax	  
consequences	   connected	   with	   an	   investment	   in	   Shares	  
or	  Options	  or	  the	  sale	  of	  those	  Shares	  or	  Options.
2.17  Share	   Ranking
The	   Shares	   will	   be	   issued	   fully	   paid	   and	   will	   rank	   pari-­‐	  
passu	   with	   the	   Existing	   Shares	   of	   the	   Company.	   A	  
summary	   of	   the	   rights	   and	   liabilities	   attaching	   to	   the	  
Shares	  is	  set	  out	  in	  Section	  12.4	  of	  this	  Prospectus.
2.18  Option	   Rights
A	   summary	   of	   the	   terms	   of	   the	   Options	   is	   set	   out	   in	  
Section	  12.4.17	  and	  12.4.19	  of	  this	  Prospectus.
2.19  Restricted	  Securities
Subject	   to	   the	   Company's	   Shares	   being	   re-­‐instated	   to	  
quotation,	   some	   of	   the	   Shares	   to	   be	   issued	   pursuant	   to	  
the	   Acquisition	   may	   be	   subject	   to	   restriction	   agreements	  
in	  accordance	  with	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules.
The	   ASX	   may,	   in	  
its	   absolute	   discretion,	   impose	   an	  
escrow	   for	   a	   period	   up	   to	   24	   months	   from	   the	   date	   of	  
issue	  of	  some	  or	  all	  of	  the	  Shares	  and	  the	  Company	  shall	  
comply	   with	   any	   necessary	   and	   appropriate	   escrow	  
requirements	  as	  stipulated	  by	  the	  ASX.
2.20  No	   Forecasts
there	   are
The	   business	   of	   oil	   and	   gas	   exploration,	   appraisal	   and	  
development	   is	   speculative	   where	   there	   are	   no	   proved	  
reserves	   and	  
significant	   uncertainties	  
associated	   with	   forecasting	   revenues	   and	   expenses	   of	  
such	   operations.	   Accordingly,	   the	   Directors	   believe	   that	  
reliable	   forecasts	   cannot	   be	   prepared	   and	   forecasts	  
have	  therefore	  not	  been	  included	  in	  this	  Prospectus.
35
3. Conditions	  to	  Offers
3.1  Conditions
The	   Offers	   are	   conditional	   upon	   each	   of	   the	   matters	  
referred	  to	  below	  being	  satisfied:
Shareholders	   approving	   all	   of	   the	   resolutions
put	   to	   them	  at	  	  the	   General	   Meeting	   of	   the
Company	   which	  
are
interdependent	  with	  the	  Acquisition;
approve
and/or
ASX	  approving	  the	  quotation	  of	  the	  Shares;
•
•
•
•
the	  election	  of	  Proposed	  Directors;
the	  change	  of	  the	  name	  of	  the	  Company	  from
MUI	  
Corporation	  
“Skyland
Petroleum	  Limited”;
Limited
to
the	   conversion	   of	   the	   Convertible	   note	   to
Roadhound	   Electronics	   Pty	   Limited	   through
the	   issue	   of	   13,000,000	   Shares	   (on	   a	   post-­‐
Consolidation	  basis);	  and
the	  approval	  of	  a	  Stock	  Incentive	  Plan	  (and	  the
issue	   of	   Options	   to	   Non-­‐Executive,	   proposed
Non-­‐Executive	  
Executive
Directors).
proposed
and
•
•
•
•
the	  Company	  complying	  with	  Chapters	  1	  and	  2
of	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules;	  and
3.3  Chapters	  1	  &	  2	  of	  the	  Listing	  Rules
the	  Acquisition	  of	  SPG	  by	  the	  Company	  on	  the
terms	   and	   conditions	   summarised	   in	   Section
12.3.1.
The	  Company	  seeks	  to	  re-­‐comply	  with	  the	  requirements	  
of	  Chapters	  1	  and	  2	  of	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules.	   Compliance	  
with	   the	   admission	   requirement	  
involves,	   amongst	  
other	  things,	  the	  following:
The	   meeting	   of	   each	   of	   the	   conditions	   above	   is	   a	  
requirement	   for	   the	   allotment	   of	   Shares	   and	   Options	  
under	   this	   Prospectus.	   In	   the	   event	   that	   all	   of	   these	  
conditions	   are	   not	   met	   within	   three	   (3)	   months	   of	   the	  
date	   of	   this	   Prospectus,	   all	   Application	   Monies	   will	   be	  
returned	   to	   Applicants	   without	   interest	   as	   soon	   as	  
possible	  thereafter.
3.2  Shareholder	  Approval
A	  General	  Meeting	  of	  the	  Company	  is	  to	  be	  held	   on	   18	  
February	   2016,	   at	   which	   a	   number	   of	   resolutions	   in	  
connection	   with	   the	   Offers	   and	  
the	   Company's	  
Acquisition	   of	  SPG	  will	  be	  put	  to	  the	  Shareholders.	   The	  
Offers	   pursuant	   to	   this	   Prospectus	   are	   subject	   to	   and	  
conditional	   upon	   Shareholders	   passing	   each	   of	   the	  
resolutions	  proposed	  at	  the	  General	  Meeting.
The	   relevant	   resolutions	   proposed	   at	   the	   General	  
Meeting	  are:
•
•
•
•
•
approval	   of	   a	   new	   constitution	   of	  
Company;
the
approval	   of	   the	   Acquisition	   of	   all	   the	   issued
capital	  of	  SPG;
the	   Consolidation	   of	   the	   Existing	   Shares	   on	   a
50	  for	  1	  basis;
issue	   of	   the	   Shares	   and
approval	   of	   the	  
Options	   pursuant	   to	   the	   Offers	   under	   this
Prospectus;
approval	   of	   change	   of	   activities	   of	   the
Company	  from	   film	   distribution	  to	  oil	  and	   gas
business	  operations;
•
issuing	  a	  Prospectus;
• meeting
the	   spread
requirements	   under
Guidance	  Note	  12,	  being:
o
o
at	   least	   400	   holders	   each	   with	   a
parcel	  of	  the	  main	  class	  of	  securities
with	  a	  value	  of	  at	  least	  $2,000;	  or
350	   holders	   with	   a	   parcel	   of
securities	  	  with	  	  a	  	  value	  	  of	  	  at	  	  least
$2,000,	   and	   persons	   who	   are	   not
related	   parties	   must	   hold	   at	   least
25%	  of	  securities	  quoted.
• meeting	  the	  capital	  composition	  requirements
permitting	  the	  issue	  of	  shares	  beneath	  a	  value
of	  $0.20	  under	  Guidance	  Note	  12,	  being:
o
o
o
the	  	   issue	  	   of	  	  the	  	   Shares	  	   at	  	  above
$0.02	  per	  share;
shareholder	  approval	  for	  the	  issue	  of
shares	   at	   $0.10	   (to	   be	   approved
under	   Resolution	   4	   of	   the	   Notice	   of
General	  Meeting;	  and
waiver	   of	   the	   	   “20	   cents”	   capital
composition	   rule	  
the	   ASX
(which	   has	   been	   obtained	   by	   the
Company)
from
• meeting	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules	  assets	  test.
Shareholders	   should	   be	   aware	   that	   following	   the	  
General	   Meeting,	   the	   Company	   may	   be	   suspended	   by	  
the	  ASX	  until	  it	  has	  re-­‐complied	  with	  Chapters	  1	  and	  2	  of	  
the	   ASX	   Listing	   Rules,	   as	   summarised	   above.	   It	   is	   the
36
Company's	   intention	   to	   meet	   these	   requirements	   as	  
soon	  as	  practicable.
3.4  ASX	   Approval
Further,	  prospective	  investors	  should	  be	  aware	  that	  the	  
ASX	   will	   not	   quote	   the	   Shares	  
issued	   under	   this	  
Prospectus	   until	   such	   time	   as	   the	   Company	   complies	  
with	   Chapters	   1	   and	   2	   of	   the	   Listing	   Rules	   and	   as	   such	  
there	   is	   a	   risk	   that	   the	   Shares	   will	   not	   be	   able	   to	   be	  
traded	   for	   some	   time	   and	   the	   Company	   cannot	  
guarantee	  that	  the	  Shares	  will	  be	  publicly	  traded	  at	  all.
As	  such	  investors	  should	  be	  aware	  that	  the	  Shares	  may	  
not	   be	   allotted	   at	   all	   and,	   in	   such	   case,	   the	   Company	  
shall	  then	  return	  any	  Application	  Money	  to	  the	  relevant	  
Applicants	  without	  interest.
As	   stated	   above,	   the	   Offers	   are	   conditional	   upon	   the	  
Company	   and	   its	   Shares	   being	   reinstated	   to	   quotation	  
on	  the	  Official	  List	  of	  ASX.	  This	  condition	  will	  be	  deemed	  
to	  be	  satisfied	  upon	  the	  Company	  receiving	  a	  letter	  from	  
ASX	   confirming	   that	   ASX	   sees	   no	   impediment	   to	   the	  
Company	   and	   its	   Shares	   being	   reinstated	   to	   quotation	  
on	  the	  Official	  List	  of	  ASX.
37
4. Risk Factors
ur-J I _ I . .
,v Liv". _ a 
It . , |
 ~ A; m


4.
Investment	  and	  Business	  Risk
Factors
4.1  General
Shareholders	   should	   be	   aware	   that	   if	   the	   Acquisition	  
proceeds,	   the	   Company	   will	   be	   changing	   the	   scale	   and	  
nature	  of	  its	  activities	  to	  that	  of	  an	  oil	  and	  gas	  company	  
which	   is	   subject	   to	   various	   risk	   factors	   including	   the	   risk	  
that	   investors	   may	   lose	   some	   or	   all	   of	   their	   investment.	   	  
Based	  on	  the	  information	  available,	  a	  non-­‐exhaustive	  list	  
of	  risk	  factors	  are	  as	  follows.
Speculative	  Investment
The	   above	   list	   of	   risk	   factors	   ought	   not	   to	   be	   taken	   as	  
exhaustive	   of	   the	   risks	   faced	   by	   the	   Company	   or	   by	  
investors	  in	  the	  Company.	  The	  above	  factors,	  and	  others	  
not	   specifically	   referred	   to	   above,	   may	   in	   the	   future	  
materially	   affect	   the	  
financial	   performance	   of	   the	  
Enlarged	   Company	   and	   the	   value	   of	   the	   Company's	  
securities.
4.2  Specific	   Risks
Future	  Capital	  Needs
Further	   funding	   will	   be	   required	   by	   the	   Company	   to	  
support	   its	   ongoing	   activities	   and	   operations.	   There	   can	  
be	   no	   assurance	   that	   funding	   will	   be	   available	   on	  
satisfactory	   terms	   or	   at	   all.	   Any	  
inability	   to	   obtain	  
finance	   will	   adversely	   affect	   the	   business	   and	   financial	  
condition	   of	   the	   Company	   and	  
If	  
additional	   funds	   are	   raised	   through	   the	   issuance	   of	   new	  
equity	   or	   equity-­‐linked	   securities	   of	   the	   Company	   other	  
than	   on	   a	   pro	   rata	   basis	   to	   existing	   shareholders,	   the	  
percentage	   ownership	   of	   shareholders	   may	   be	   reduced.	   	  
Shareholders	   may	   experience	  
subsequent	   dilution.	  
There	   can	   be	   no	   guarantee	   that	   any	   capital	   raisings	   will	  
be	  successful.
its	   performance.
The	   funds	   raised	   under	   this	   Prospectus	   will	   enable	   the	  
Company	   to	   perform	   the	   following	   activities	   in	   relation	  
to	  its	  Georgian	  projects:	  	  
(i)
to	   acquire	   the	   project	   interest	   (being	   20%	   of	  
the	  PSC)	  through	  acquisition	  cost	  funding;	  and	  	  
provide	   an	   equity	   contribution	  
the	  
minimum	   work	   programme	   including	   drilling,	  
testing	  and	  completion	  of	  the	  Kumisi	  #2	  Well.
(ii)
to
The	   funds	   raised	   under	   this	   Prospectus	   will	   enable	   the	  
Company	   to	   perform	   the	   following	   activities	   in	   relation	  
to	  its	  Tajikistan	  projects:	  	  
(i) 
(ii)
geophysical	  logging	  (of	  existing	  well	  bores);	  	  
instillation	   of	   upgraded	   pumps	   and	   related	  
equipment;	  	  
well-­‐stimulation	  (including	  acidisation);	  and	  	  
potential	  short-­‐reach	  radial	  completion.
(iii) 
(iv)
these
of	  
commercialisation	  of	  the	  projects	  of	  the	  Company.
activities	   may
lead
to
the	   practical
Further	   funding	   may	   be	   required	   by	   the	   Company	   in	   the	  
event	  costs	  exceed	  the	  Company’s	  estimates	  or	  revenues	  do	  
not	   meet	   estimates,	   to	   support	   its	   ongoing	   activities	   and	  
operations,	   and	   to	   take	   advantage	   of	   opportunities	   for	  
acquisitions,	  joint	  ventures	  or	  other	  business	  and	  technology	  
opportunities,	   and	   to	   meet	   any	   unanticipated	   liabilities	   or	  
expenses	  which	  the	  Company	  may	  incur.
Exploration
Oil	   and	   gas	   exploration	   is	   inherently	   associated	   with	   risk.	  
Notwithstanding	   the	   experience,	   knowledge	   and	   careful	  
evaluation	   a	   company	   brings	   to	   an	   exploration	   project	  
is	   no	   assurance	   that	   recoverable	   oil	   and	   gas	  
there	  
resources	   will	   be	  
identified,	   other	  
factors	   such	   as	   technical	   difficulties,	   geological	   conditions,	  
adverse	   changes	   in	   government	   policy	   or	  
legislation	   or	  
lack	   of	   access	   to	   sufficient	   funding	   may	   mean	   that	   the	  
resource	  is	  not	  economically	  recoverable	   or	  may	  otherwise	  
preclude	   the	   Company	   from	   successfully	   exploiting	   the	  
resource.
identified.	   Even
if
Exploration	   Costs
their	   nature,
Exploration	   expenditure	   estimates	   are	   based	   on	   certain	  
assumptions	   with	   respect	   to	   the	   method	   and	   timing	   of	  
exploration.	   By	  
these	   estimates	   and	  
assumptions	   are	   subject	   to	   significant	   uncertainties	   and	  
accordingly,	   the	   actual	   costs	   may	   materially	   differ	   from	  
these	   estimates	   and	   assumptions.	   Accordingly,	   no	  
assurance	   can	   be	   given	   that	   the	   cost	   estimates	   and	   the	  
underlying	   assumptions	   will	   be	   realised	   in	   practice,	   which	  
may	   materially	   and	   adversely	   affect	   the	   Company's	  
viability.
Country	   Risk
The	   Company's	   operations	   initially	   will	   predominantly	  
be	  in	  the	  states	  of	  the	  fSU	  whose	  economies	  are	  subject	  
to	  many	  global	  and	  internal	  forces	  beyond	  the	  control	  of	  
the	   Company.	   The	   Company	   and	   its	   operations	   may	   be	  
impacted	   by	   changes	  
in	   the	   general	   economic	   and	  
political	   climate	  
in	   which	   the	  
Company	   operates	   and	   on	   a	   global	   basis	   that	   could	  
impact	   on	   economic	   growth,	  
the	   reformation	   of	  
government	   structure	   or	   industry,	   oil	   and	   gas	   prices,	  
interest	   rates,	   the	   rate	   of	   inflation,	   taxation	   and	   tariff	  
laws	   and	   domestic	   security	   which	   may	   affect	   the	   value	  
and	  viability	  of	  any	  oil	  and	  gas	  activity	  conducted	  by	  the	  
Company.
jurisdictions
in	   the
Operating	   in	   foreign	   countries	   has	   inherent	   risks	   which	  
may	  impact	  adversely	  on	  the	  financial	  position,	  financial	  
performance,	   cash	   flows,	   growth	   prospects,	   ability	   to	  
pay	  dividends	  and	  the	  share	  price	  of	  the	  Company.
The	  following	  risks	  are	  specifically	  noted:
It	  is	  the	  view	  of	  the	  Proposed	  Directors	  that	  completion
39
Changes	   in	   government	   policies
•
Industry	   is	   subject	   to	   the	   policies	   which	   are
implemented	  by	  the	  relevant	  governments	  from
time	   to	   time.	   These	   policies	   may	   have	   a
material	  
the
Company.	  These	   governments	  may,	  for	  instance,
withdraw	   subsidies	   or	   forms	   of	   preferential
treatment	   such	   as	   tax	   benefits	   or	   favourable
financing	  arrangements.
the	   business	   of
impact	   on
Economic	  considerations
•
It	   is	   unclear	   how	   future	   economic	   reforms	   and
macroeconomic	   measures	   to	   be	   adopted	   by
governments	   will	   affect	   the	   development	   of	   a
country’s	   economy.	   Further,	   there	   can	   be	   no
assurance	   that	   such	   measures	   will	   be	   applied
consistently	   and	   effectively	   or	  
the
Company	   will	   be	   subject	   to	   such	   reforms.	   The
business	   of	   the	   Company	   may	   be	   adversely
affected	  by	  any	  reform.
that
Legal	  considerations
•
Statutes,	   regulations	   and	   government	   policies
are	   subject	   to	   change	   from	   time	   to	   time,	   as	   is
the	   interpretations	   of	   statutes	   and	   regulations
and	  the	   application	  of	  policy.	  Such	  uncertainties
may	   affect	  
the	   Company's	   operations	   and
accordingly,	   its	   profitability.
Foreign	   investment	   requirements
Many	  governments	  have	  foreign	  exchange	  controls	  
which	  need	  to	  be	  considered	  as	  far	  as	  repatriation	  
of	   funds	   to	   Australia	   and	   elsewhere	   is	   concerned.	  
These	  controls	  may	  have	  an	  adverse	  effect	  on	  the	  
financial	  	  	  position,	  financial	  performance,	  cash	  
flows,	   growth	   prospects,	   ability	   to	   pay	   dividends	  
and	  the	  share	  price	  of	  the	  Company.
Challenges	   to	   the	   ownership	   or	   nature	   of	  
titles	  and	  other	  rights
•
The	   Company	   may	   potentially	   be	   exposed	   to
challenges	   to	   the	   ownership	   or	   nature	   of	   titles	   and
other	   rights	   by	   its	   partners,	   government	   authorities
or	  third	  parties.
Devaluation	   or	   appreciation	   of	   currencies
•
to
The	   external	   value	   of	   the	   various	   currencies	   is
affected	   by	   changes	   in	   policies	   of	   the	   government
and	  
international	   economic	   and	   political
developments.	  
in
many	   fSU	   countries	   have	   in	   the	   past	   experienced
severe	   volatility.	   As	   a	   result,	   some	   fSU	   currencies
have	   been	   subject	   to	   significant	   devaluation	   from
time	  
the	   value	   of
In	   addition,	   financial	   markets
time.	   Movements
to
in
currencies	   could	   have	   an	   adverse	   effect	   on	   the	  
Company's	  
its	  
profitability.
accordingly
operations
and
Timing	  considerations
•
It	   may	   take	   many	   years	   to	   get	   from	   a	   discovery	   to
extraction	  of	  an	  oil	  and	   gas	  asset.	  	   As	  such,	  there	  is	   a
risk	   that	   the	   initial	   investment	   involved	   in	   discovery
will	   not	   get	  
Such
uncertainties	   as	   to	   timing	   may	   affect	   the	   Company's
operations	   and	   accordingly	   its	   profitability.
the	   exploitation
stage.
to
Lack	  of	  Infrastructure	  in	  Tajikistan
•
•
•
•
lead
to
for
issues
imposed
in	   whole	   or
is	   dependent	   upon
Tajikistan	  
cooperation	   of
neighbouring	  countries	  in	  its	  access	  to	  world	   markets.
the
This	   dependence	   may	  
Company	  in	  importing	  equipment	  and	  services	   as	  well
as	   during	   the	   export	   of	   products.	   There	   are	   limited
refining	   capabilities	   in	   the	   country	   and	   consequently
crude	   oil	   products	   are	   likely	   	   to	   require	   export	   to
regional	  refineries	  or	  to	  world	   markets.
The	   Company	   can	   give	   no	   guarantees	   that	   any	   export
in	   part,	   by	   such
will	   be	   permitted,	  
neighbouring	   countries	   and/or	   the	   levy	   of	   additional
in	   such	   circumstances	   which
taxes	   being	  
may	   be	   at	   prices	   substantially	   less	  than	  world	  market
prices.	  
The	   gas	  
is	   poorly
developed	   and	   despite	   the	   existence	   of	   pipelines	   it	   is
possible	   that	   any	   such	   infrastructure	   would	   not	   be
accessible	   to	   the	   Company	   on	   attractive	   commercial
terms.	  
The	   export	   of	   gas	   in	   this	   case	   to	   world	   markets	   (if
commercially	   warranted)	   may	  
to
pipelines	   and	   infrastructure	   in	   neighbouring	   countries
which	   may	   not	   be	   given	   (or	   may	   be	   given	   on	   terms
which	   are	   not	   financially	   optimal	   for	   the	   Company’s
operations).
require	   access
in	   Tajikistan
infrastructure
Tajikistan	   Legal	   and	   Regulatory	   Framework	  
and	  Taxation	  Risks
•
the
In	   2007	   (with	   some	   amendments	   in	   2008)	   the
introduced	   production
government	   of	   Tajikistan	  
sharing	  
legislation.	   Given	  
that	  
legal	   and
regulatory	  framework	  for	  oil	  and	  gas	  is	  emerging	  in
the	  country,	  there	  are	  risks	  for	  investors	  where	  it	  is
possible	   that	   the	   terms	   of	   any	   PSC,	   IOA	   or	   other
material	   contract	   to	   which	   the	   Company	   is	   a	   party
may	   be	   challenged,	   additional	   taxes	   imposed	   or
found	   to	   be	   in	   conflict	   with	   other	   local	   laws	   and
regulations.
40
•
•
•
to	   potential	   disputes	   between
Such	   legal	   and/or	   regulatory	   frameworks	   may
lead	  
the
Company	   and	  
relevant	   authorities	   (including
Tajik	  tax	  authorities)	   and	  this	  risk	  may	  result	  in	  a
material	  adverse	  effect	   on	  the	  Company’s	  overall
financial	   performance.	   There	   is	   also	   a	   risk	   of
currency	   repatriation	   from	   Tajikistan	   through
the	   use	   of	   local	   banking	   channels.
Similar	  to	  the	  legal	  and	  regulatory	  framework	  (as
discussed,	  above)	  the	  Tajik	  taxation	  system	  is	  also
at	   an	   early	   stage	   of	   development	   and,	   with
evolving	   tax	   legislation	   this	   poses	   a	   risk	   to	   the
Company	   of	   changing	   interpretations	   of	   the	   law
and	   inconsistent	   enforcement	   actions	   at	   both
local	  and	  state	  levels.
risks
areas
impose
compliance
The	   existence	   of	   tax	   declarations	   and	   other
legal	  
in
Tajikistan	   above	   those	   which	   may	   be	   found
typically	   in	   countries	   with	   more	   developed	   tax
regimes.	   Such	   factors,including	   any	   alterations
to	   the	   existing	   tax	   legislation	   and/or	   tax	   rates
may	   have	   a	   material	   adverse	   impact	   upon	   the
overall	   financial	   performance	  of	  the	  Company.
• With	   particular	   reference	   to	   the	   Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk
IOA	  (refer	  to	  Section	  10),	  the	  Company	  draws	  the
attention	   of	   investors	   that	   Naftugaz,	   as	   a	   state
company,	  has	  all	  rights	  to	  operations	  on	  the	  field
and	  these	  rights	  can	  be	  enjoyed	  by	  SPG	  under	  the
IOA.	  No	  further	  approvals	  are	  necessary	  except	  as
in	  the	  event	  that	  as	  yet	  unplanned	  extensions	  to
the	  field	  are	  to	  be	  agreed	  which	  may	  impinge	  on
land	  requiring	  negotiation	  with	  the	  landowner.	  At
in
which	   point,	   an	   established	   system	   exists	  
Tajikistan	  
and
approvals.	  The	  current	  intention	  of	  SPG	  is	  to	  work
within	   the	   field	   limits	   and	   as	   such,	   no	   other
approvals	  are	  deemed	  necessary.
negotiations
such
for
Georgia	  
Although	  Georgia	  is	  enjoying	  a	  period	  of	  relative	  political	  
stability	   there	   can	   be	   no	   guarantee	   that	   the	   political	  
parties	   and	   factions	   in	   Georgia	   will	   continue	   to	   work	  
together	  and	  agree	  on	  material	  policy	  decisions.
Furthermore,	   Georgia	   may	   experience	   the	   effects	   of	  
disturbances	  or	  hostilities	  in	  surrounding	  regions	  such	  as	  
Abkhazia,	   South	   Ossetia	   and	   potentially	   Adjaria,	  
in	  
addition	  to	  the	  effects	  of	  regional	  policies	  of	  neighbouring	  
countries	  such	  as	  Russia,	  Iran,	  Armenia	  and	  Turkey.
In	   2008,	   Georgia	   became	   engaged	   in	   a	   brief	   armed	  
conflict	   with	   Russia	   over	   two	   break-­‐away	   regions,	   South	  
Ossetia	   and	   Abkhazia.	   Following	   an	  
internationally	  
sponsored	   ceasefire,	   both	   South	   Ossetia	   and	   Abkhazia	  
were	  recognized	  as	  independent	  countries	  by	  Russia	  and	  
have	  
from	  
Georgia’s	   jurisdiction,	   with	   a	   substantial	   Russian	   military	  
presence	  on	  their	  territories.
remained	   de
separated
largely
facto
Georgia	   currently	   enjoys	   good	  
its	  
neighbours	  and	   while	  SPG’s	   assets	   are	  not	  located	  on	  or	  
near	   to	   areas	   within	   Georgia	   that	   have	   been	   involved	   in	  
such	   disturbances	   or	   hostilities,	   Georgia	   could	   be
relations	   with
affected	   by	   military	   action	   taken	   in	   the	   region,	   and	   the	  
effect	   such	   military	   action	   may	   have	   on	   the	   Georgian	  
economy,	   political	   stability	   of	   Georgia,	   or	   the	   business,	  
operations	  and	  prospects	  of	  SPG	  cannot	  be	  predicted.
investment,	   petroleum,	   sub-­‐soil	   use,
In	  addition,	  the	  laws	  and	  regulations	  of	  Georgia	  relating	   to	  
foreign	  
licensing,	  
companies,	   tax,	   customs,	   currency,	   banking	   and	   anti-­‐	  
monopoly	   are	   still	   developing	   and,	  
in	   some	   cases,	  
uncertain.	   Many	   such	   laws	   provide	   substantial	   discretion	  
in	  
interpretation	   and	   enforcement.	  
Although	   Georgia	   has	   made	   significant	   progress	   on	   the	  
reform	   of	   its	   judiciary,	   the	   judicial	   system	   may	   not	   be	  
fully	   immune	   from	   outside	   social,	   economic	  and	   political	  
forces.
their	   application,
fSU	   Operational	   Risk
The	  fSU	  countries	  in	  which	  the	  Company	  will,	  following	   the	  
Acquisition,	   conduct	   operations	   in	   are	   primarily	   former	  
constituent	   republics	   of	   the	   Soviet	   Union.	   Due	   to	   their	  
respective	   recent	   independence	   during	   the	   early	   1990s	  
this	   poses	   a	   risk	   for	   the	   Company	   that	   such	   jurisdictions	  
may	   be	   subject	   to	  
instability	   (political,	   economic,	   or	  
otherwise).
Risks	  include,	  among	  other	  matters:
•
•
•
•
•
•
incidences	   affecting
terrorist	   attacks	   or	  
the
Company’s	   assets	   and	   ability	   to	   do	   business	   in
these	  regions;	  
civil	  disturbances;
changes	   in	   crude	   oil	   and	   natural	   gas	   exportation
and	  transportation	  regulations;	  
imposition	  of	  additional	  obligations/restriction	   on
investors;	  
local	  currency	  devaluations;	  and
nationalisation	  
Company’s	  assets.
expropriation
the
or
of
As	   such,	   investors	   are	   advised	   to	   be	   aware	   of	   the	   risks	   of	  
investing	   in	   the	   Company	   given	   its	   operations	   in	   these	  
areas.
It	  is	  brought	  to	  the	  attention	  of	  investors	  that,	  in	  particular,	  
Tajikistan	   borders	   Afghanistan	   which	   is	   a	   country	   prone	   to	  
political	  and	  military	  instability.	  Such	  instability	  may	  have	  an	  
adverse	   affect	   on	   the	   ability	   of	   the	   Company	   to	   conduct	  
operations	  in	  countries	  in	  and	  around	  Afghanistan	  (including	  
Tajikistan)	  as	  well	  as	  an	  adverse	  effect	  on	  the	  willingness	  of	  
debt	   and	   equity	   providers	   to	   provide	   ongoing	   financing	   to	  
the	  Company	  moving	  forward.
International	  Operations	  (Generally)
including
(but	   not
International	   operations	   are	   subject	   to	   a	   wide	   variety	   of	  
uncertainties:	  
limited	   to)	   political,	  
economic	   and	   other	   risks	   which	   may	   include:	   terrorism,	  
revolution,	  border	  disputes,	  expropriation,	  renegotiations	  or	  
modifications	   of	   existing	   contracts,	  
import,	   export	   and	  
transportation	   regulations	   and	   tariffs,	   taxation	   policies,	  
including	   royalty	   and	   tax	   increases	   and	   retroactive	   tax	  
claims,	   exchange	   controls,	   limits	   on	   allowable	   levels	   of
41
production,	   currency	   fluctuations,	   labour	   disputes	   and	  
other	   uncertainties	   arising	   out	   of	   foreign	   government	  
sovereignty	  over	  the	  Company’s	  international	  operations.
Exploration	   and	   Development	   Risks
The	   business	   of	   oil	   and	   gas	   exploration,	   project	  
development	   and	   production,	   by	   its	   nature,	   contains	  
elements	  of	  significant	  risk	  with	  no	  guarantee	  of	  success.	  
Ultimate	   and	   continuous	   success	   of	   these	   activities	   is	  
dependent	  on	  many	  factors	  such	  as:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
to
for
project
capital
adequate
the	   discovery	   and/or	   acquisition	   of	   economically
recoverable	  reserves;	  
access	  
development;	  
design	  
and	  
development	  
within	  capital	   expenditure	  budgets;
securing	  and	  maintaining	  title	  to	  interests;
obtaining	   consents	   and	   approvals	   necessary	   for
the	  
conduct	   of	   oil	   and	   gas	   exploration,
development	   and	  production;
of	  
efficient
infrastructure
and	   production
construction
in
and
plant
activity,
suitable
securing	  
equipment,
particularly	   given	   equipment	   utilisation	   rates
the	   current	   period	   of	   global
are	   high	  
exploration/production	  
hence
competition	   for	   such	   equipment	   may	   also	   be
high;	  and	  
access	   to	   competent	   operational	   management
and	   prudent	   financial	   administration,	   including
the	   availability	   and	   reliability	   of	   appropriately
skilled	   and	   experienced	   employees,	   contractors
and	   consultants.
income	   will	   result
Whether	   or	   not	  
from	   projects	  
undergoing	   exploration	   and	   development	   programmes	  
depends	   on	   successful	   exploration	   and	   establishment	   of	  
production	   facilities.	   Factors	   including	   costs,	   actual	   oil	  
and	   gas	   reserves	   and	   resources,	   grade,	   transportation	  
and	   reliability	   and	   commodity	   prices	   affect	   successful	  
project	  development	  and	  operations.
Exploration	   and	   production	   activities	   carry	   risk	   as	   such	  
activities	   may	   be	   curtailed,	   delayed	   or	   cancelled	   as	   a	  
result	   of	   weather	   conditions,	   mechanical	   difficulties,	  
shortages	  or	  delays	  in	  the	  delivery	  of	  drilling	  rigs	  or	   other	  
equipment.
Oil	   and	   natural	   gas	   exploration,	   development	   and	  
production	   operations	   are	   subject	   to	   all	   the	   risks	   and	  
typically	   associated	   with	   such	   operations,	  
hazards	  
including	   hazards	   such	   as	   fire,	   explosions,	  
industrial	  
disputes,	   cave-­‐ins,	   unexpected	   shortages	   or	   increases	   in	  
the	   cost	   of	   consumables,	   spare	   parts,	   plant	   and	  
equipment,	   mechanical	   failure	   and	   breakdown,	   blow	  
outs,	   environmental	   hazards	   such	   as	   accidental	   sour	   gas	  
releases	   and	   spills,	   ruptures,	   discharge	   of	   toxic	   gases	   or	  
geological	   uncertainty.	   The	   occurrence	   of	   any	   of	   these	  
risks	   could	   result	  
legal	   proceedings	   against	   the	  
Company	   and	   substantial	   losses	   due	   to	   injury	   or	   loss	   of	  
life,	   damage	   to	   or	   destruction	   of	   property,	   natural
in
damage,
pollution
equipment,
resources	  
or	  
other	  
environmental	  
responsibilities,	  
regulatory	   investigation,	   and	   penalties	   or	   suspension	   of	  
operations.	  Damage	  occurring	  to	  third	  parties	  as	  a	  result	   of	  
such	   risks	   may	   give	   rise	   to	   claims	   against	   the	   Company.
clean
up
or
interests	   will	   result
There	   is	   no	   assurance	   that	   any	   exploration	   on	   current	   or	  
future	  
the	   discovery	   of	   an	  
economic	   deposit	   of	   oil	   and	   gas.	   Even	   if	   an	   apparently	  
viable	   deposit	   is	   identified,	   there	   is	   no	   guarantee	   that	   it	  
can	  be	  economically	  developed.
in
In	   addition,	   the	   Company	   will	   be	   subject	   to	   multi-­‐	  
jurisdictional	   compliance	   with	   governmental	   regulations	   in	  
licence	   conditions,	   the	   environment	   and	  
relation	   to	  
operational	  conduct.
Oil	  and	  Gas	  Price	  Volatility
revenue
it	   will	   derive
If	   the	   Company	   achieves	   success	   leading	   to	   production,	  
the	  
sale	   of	  
commodities	  exposes	  the	  potential	  income	  of	  the	   Company	  
to	   commodity	   price	   and	   exchange	   rate	   risks.	   Commodity	  
prices	   fluctuate	   and	   are	   affected	   by	   many	   factors	  beyond	  
the	  control	  of	  the	  Company.
through
the
The	   demand	   for,	   and	   price	   of	   oil	   and	   gas	  
is	   highly	  
dependent	   on	   a	   variety	   of	   factors,	   including	   international	  
level	   of	   consumer	   product	  
supply	   and	   demand,	   the	  
actions	  
demand,	   weather	  
by	  
governments	   and	  
cartels,	   and	   global	  
economic	  and	  political	  developments.
conditions,	  
international
taken
Fluctuations	   in	   oil	   and	   gas	   prices	   and,	   in	   particular,	   a	  
material	   decline	   in	   the	   price	   of	   oil	   and	   gas	   may	   have	   a	  
material	  adverse	  effect	  on	  the	  Company's	  business,	  financial	  
condition	  and	  results	  of	  operations.
Investors	   should	   note	   that	  the	   prices	  in	   the	   current	   oil	   and	  
gas	   market	   are	   regarded	   as	   being	   low,	   with	   little	   obvious	  
short	  term	  indication	  of	  recovery.	  SPG	  is	  not	  involved	  in	  any	  
high	  
as	  
offshore	  developments.
operating
projects
such
cost
Investors	  should	  be	  aware	  that	  further	  decreases	  in	  oil	  and	  
gas	   price	  
levels	   may	   ultimately	   affect	   the	   viability	   of	  
exploration	   activities	   within	   the	   Company’s	   focus	   areas,	  
which	   could	   result	   in	   a	   negative	   effect	   on	   the	   Company’s	  
future	  cash	  flow	  and	  the	  viability	  of	  potential	  future	  projects,	  
which	  in	  turn	  may	  affect	  the	  value	  of	  the	  Company’s	  Shares
Joint	   Venture	   Parties,	   Contractors	   and	  
Contractual	  Disputes
With	   respect	   to	   this	   issue,	   the	   Directors	   are	   unable	   to	  
predict	  the	  risk	  of:
•
•
financial	   failure	   or	   default	   by	   a	   participant	   in	   any
joint	   venture	   to	   which	   the	   Enlarged	   Company	   may
become	  a	  party;	  or
insolvency	  or	  other	  managerial	  failure	  by	  any	  of	  the
operators	   and	   contractors	   used	   by	   the	   Enlarged
Company	  in	  its	  exploration	  activities;	  or
42
insolvency	   or	   other	   managerial	   failure	   by	   any	   of
the	   other	  service	  providers	  used	  by	  the	  Enlarged
Company	  or	  its	  operators	  for	  any	  activity;	  or
perform	   as	   a	   company	   operating	  
in	   the	   oil	   and	   gas	  
industry.	   The	   Company	   can	   give	   no	   guarantee	   that	   the	  
Company’s	  products	  or	  prospects	  will	  remain	   competitive	  in	  
the	  future	  due	  to	  changes	  in	  the	   marketplace.
title	  and	  payment	  obligations.
Landowner	   Risk
•
•
Under	  the	  relevant	  joint	  venture	  agreements	  and	  certain	  
other	  contractual	  agreements	  to	  which	  the	  Company	  may	  
in	   the	   future	   become	   party,	   the	   Company	   is	   or	   may	  
become	  subject	  to	  payment	  and	  other	  obligations.	  If	  any	  
contractual	  obligations	  are	  not	  complied	  with	  when	  due,	  
in	  addition	  to	  any	  other	  remedies	  which	  may	  be	  available	  
to	  other	  parties,	  this	  could	  result	  in	  dilution	  or	  forfeiture	  
of	  interests	  held	  by	  the	  Company.
Availability	   of	   Drilling	   Equipment	   and	   Access
Oil	   and	   natural	   gas	   exploration	   and	   development	  
activities	   are	  dependent	  on	  the	  availability	  of	   drilling	  
and	   related	   equipment	   (typically	   leased	   from	   third	  
parties)	   in	   the	   particular	   areas	   where	   such	   activities	  
are	   conducted.	   Demand	   for	   such	   limited	   equipment	  
or	   access	   restrictions	   may	   affect	   the	   availability	   of	  
such	   equipment	   and	   may	   delay	   exploration	   and	  
development	   activities.
significant
The	   oil	   and	   gas	   industry	   is	   known	   for	   seeing	   rapid	  
and	  
technological	   advancements	   and	  
introduction	   of	  new	  technologies	  relating	  to	  drilling	  or	  
other	   relevant	   operations.	   The	   Company	   cannot	  
guarantee	   that	   it	   will	   be	   able	   to	   respond	   to	   the	  
existence	   of	   new	   and	   emerging	   technologies	   which	  
maybe	   available	   to	   its	   competitors	   and	   this	   may	  
result	  
the	  
Company’s	   overall	   financial	   performance.
in	   a	   material	   adverse	   effect	   upon
Marketability	   of	   Production
characteristics,	   market
The	  marketability	  and	  commerciality	  of	  oil	  and	  gas	  to	  be	  
acquired	   and/or	   produced	   by	   the	   Company	   is	   subject	   to	  
several	   factors	   which	   include	   (but	   are	   not	   limited	   to):	  
reservoir	  
the	  
proximity	   and	   capacity	   of	   oil	   and	   gas	   pipelines	   and	  
processing	   equipment,	   the	   market	   price	   of	   oil	   and	   gas	  
and	  governmental	  regulations.	  Restrictions	  on	   the	  ability	  
of	   the	   Company	   to	   market	   the	   Company’s	   production	  
may	   have	   a	   material	   adverse	   effect	   on	   the	   Company’s	  
revenues	  and	  financial	  position.
fluctuations,
Substitution	  of	  Oil	  and	  Gas	  Products	  as	  
Energy	   Sources
The	   Company	   notes	   the	   existence	   and	   the	   development	  
of	   alternative	   energy	   sources	   acting	   as	   substitution	  
products	  for	  oil	  and	  gas	  as	  energy	  sources.
include	   renewable	  
Such	   alternative	   energy	   sources	  
(e.g.	   wind	   power	   or	   hydroelectric	   power),	  
energy	  
nuclear	   power,	   Liquefied	   Natural	   Gas	   (“LNG”),	   Liquefied	  
Petroleum	   Gas	   (“LPG”),	   biofuel	   or	   biomass.	   If	   the	   costs	  
and	   commercial	   prices	   for	   such	   alternative	   energy	  
sources	   fall	   this	   may	   have	   a	   significant	   effect	   upon	   the	  
Company’s	   overall	   financial	   performance	   and	   ability	   to
required
The	   Enlarged	   Company	   may	   be	  
to	   pay	  
compensation	   to	   landowners,	   local	   authorities,	   traditional	  
land	   users	   and	   others	   who	   have	   an	   interest	   in	   the	   area	  
covered	  by	  the	  licences.	  The	  Enlarged	   Company's	   ability	   to	  
issues	   and	   compensation	   costs	  
resolve	   compensation	  
involved	   will	   have	   an	   impact	   on	   the	   future	   success	   and	  
financial	   performance	   of	   the	   Enlarged	   Company's	   oil	   and	  
gas	   operations.	   If	   the	   Enlarged	   Entity	   is	   unable	   to	   resolve	  
such	   compensation	   claims	   on	   economic	   terms,	   this	   could	  
have	   a	   materially	   adverse	  effect	  on	  the	  business,	  results	  or	  
operations	  and	   financial	  condition	  of	  the	  Enlarged	  Company.
Foreign	   Exchange	   Risk
The	   operations	   of	   the	   Company	   will	   initially	   be	   in	   the	  
fSU	  and	  the	  costs	  of	  and	  revenues	   from	  operations	  will	   be	  
in	   various	   local	   currencies	   such	   as	   the	   Tajik	   Somoni,	   the	  
Georgian	   Lari	   as	   well	   as	   the	   United	   States	   Dollar.	   The	  
Company	   may	   deal	  
in	   other	   currencies	   from	   time-­‐to-­‐	  
time,	   as	   appropriate.	   As	   the	   Company's	   financial	   reports	  
will	  be	  presented	  in	  Australian	  dollars,	  the	  Company	  will	   be	  
exposed	   to	   the	   volatility	   and	   fluctuations	   of	   the	   exchange	  
rate	   between	  
local	   currencies,	   the	   US	   dollar	   and	   the	  
Australian	  dollar.
Global	   currencies	   are	   affected	   by	   a	   number	   of	   factors	  
that	  are	  beyond	  the	  control	  of	  the	  Company.	  These	   factors	  
include	   economic	   conditions	   in	   the	   relevant	   country	   and	  
elsewhere	   and	   the	   outlook	   for	   interest	   rates,	  inflation	  and	  
other	  economic	  factors.	  	  These	   factors	   may	   have	   a	   positive	  
or	   negative	   effect	   on	   the	   Company's	   exploration,	   project	  
development	   and	   production	   plans	   and	   activities	   together	  
with	  the	  ability	   to	  fund	  those	  plans	  and	  activities.
Reserves	   and	   Resource	   Estimates
techniques	   become	   available.
Reserve	   and	   resource	   estimates	   are	   expressions	   of	  
judgement	   based	   on	   knowledge,	   experience	   and	  
industry	   practice.	   Estimates	   which	   were	   valid	   when	  
originally	   calculated	   may	   alter	   significantly	   when	   new	  
information	   or	  
In	  
addition,	   by	   their	   very	   nature,	   resource	   and	   reserve	  
estimates	   are	   imprecise	   and	   depend	   to	   some	   extent	   on	  
interpretations,	   which	   may	   prove	   to	   be	   inaccurate.	   As	  
further	  
through	  
additional	  drilling	  and	  analysis	  the	  estimates	  are	  likely	  to	  
change.	   This	   may	   result	   in	   alterations	   to	   development	  
and	   production	   plans	   which	   may	   in	   turn,	   adversely	  
affect	  the	  Company	  and	  its	  operations.
information
becomes
available
43
Environmental	  Risks
inherent
The	   Company's	   activities	   will	   be	   subject	   to	   the	  
in	   the	   oil	   and	   gas	  
environmental	   risks	  
industry.	   The	   Company	   will	   be	   subject	   to	  
local	  
environmental	   laws	   and	   regulations	   in	   connection	  
with	   operations	   it	   may	   pursue	   in	   the	   oil	   and	   gas	  
industry.	   Environmental	   compliance	   is	   an	   ongoing	  
liability	   of	   the	   Company.	   The	   Company	   intends	   to	  
conduct	  
in	   an	  
environmentally	  
responsible	   manner	   and	  
in	   accordance	   with	   all	  
applicable	   laws.	   However,	  the	   Company	  may	   be	   the	  
subject	   of	   accidents	   or	   unforeseen	   circumstances	  
that	  could	  subject	  the	  Company	  to	  extensive	  liability.
its	   activities
liable
The	   Company	   may	   also	   become	  
for	  
environmental	   damage	   caused	   by	   previous	   owners	  
licence	   areas	   the	   Company	   will	  
of	   any	   subsoil	  
hold.	   As	   a	   result,	   substantial	  
liabilities	   to	   third	  
parties	   or	   governmental	   entities	   may	   be	   incurred,	  
the	   payment	   of	   which	   could	   reduce	   or	   eliminate	  
funds	   available	   for	   acquisitions,	   exploration	   and	  
development	   or	   cause	   the	   Enlarged	   Company	   to	  
suffer	  losses.
Further,	   the	   Company	   may	   require	   approval	   from	  
the	   relevant	   authorities	   before	   it	   can	   undertake	  
activities	   that	   are	   likely	   to	   impact	   the	   environment.	  
Failure	   to	   obtain	   such	   approvals	   will	   prevent	   the	  
Company	   from	   undertaking	  its	  desired	  activities.	  The	  
Company	  is	   unable	  to	  predict	  the	  effect	  of	  additional	  
environmental	  
laws	   and	   regulations	   that	   may	   be	  
adopted	   in	   the	   future,	   including	   whether	   any	   such	  
laws	   or	   regulations	   would	   materially	   increase	   the	  
Company's	   cost	   of	   doing	   business	   or	   affect	   its	  
operations	  in	  any	  area.
Retention	   of	   Key	   Business	   Relationships
The	   Enlarged	   Company	   may	   rely	   on	   strategic	  
relationships	   with	   other	   entities	   such	   as	  
joint	  
venture	   and	   farm-­‐in	   parties	   and	   also	   on	   good	  
relationships	   with	  
regulatory	   and	   governmental	  
departments.	   It	   will	   also	  rely	   upon	   third	   parties	   to	  
provide	  essential	  contracting	   services.
While	  the	  Company	  has	  no	  reason	  to	  believe	  otherwise,	  
there	   can	   be	   no	   assurance	   that	   the	   Company's	   existing	  
relationships	  will	  continue	  to	  be	  maintained	  or	  that	  new	  
ones	  will	  be	  successfully	  formed	  and	  the	  Company	  could	  
be	   adversely	   affected	   by	   changes	   to	   such	   relationships	  
or	   difficulties	   in	   forming	   new	   ones.	   Any	   circumstance,	  
which	   causes	   the	   early	   termination	   or	   non-­‐renewal	   of	  
one	  or	  more	  of	  these	  key	  business	  alliances	  or	  contracts,	  
could	   adversely	  
its	   business,	  
operating	  results	  and	  prospects.
impact	   the	   Company,
Competition
The	   Company	   will	   compete	   with	   other	   companies,	  
including	   major	   oil	   and	   gas	   companies.	   Some	   of	   these	  
companies	   have	   greater	   financial	   and	   other	   resources	  
than	   the	   Company	   and,	   as	   a	   result,	   may	   be	   in	   a	   better
position	   to	   compete	   for	   future	   business	   opportunities.	   In	  
addition,	   new	   entrants	   may	   commence	   oil	   and	   gas	  
exploration	   and	   development	  
the	  
Company	   operates.	   There	   can	   be	   no	   assurance	   that	   the	  
Company	   can	   compete	   effectively	   with	   these	   companies.	  
Competition	   may	   also	   be	   presented	   by	   alternative	  energy	  
sources.
in	   areas	   where
Management	   of	   Growth
The	   Company	   may	   be	   subject	   to	   growth-­‐related	   risks	  
including	   capacity	   constraints	   and	   pressure	   on	   its	   internal	  
systems	   and	   controls.	   The	   ability	   of	   the	   Company	   to	  
manage	   growth	   effectively	   will	   require	   it	   to	   continue	   to	  
implement	   and	  
financial	  
systems	   and	   to	   expand,	   train	   and	   manage	   its	   employee	  
base.	   The	   inability	   of	   the	   Company	   to	   deal	   with	   this	  
growth	   could	   have	   a	   material	   adverse	   effect	   on	  
the	  
results	   of	  
Company’s	   business,	  
operations	  and	  prospects.
its	   operational	   and
financial	   condition,
improve
Insurance
Insurance	   against	   all	   risks	   associated	   with	   oil	   and	   gas	  
exploration	   is	   not	   always	   available	   or	   affordable.	   The	  
Company	   will	   maintain	   insurance	   where	   it	   is	   considered	  
appropriate	   for	   its	   needs,	   however	   it	   will	   not	   be	   insured	  
against	   all	   risks	   either	   because	   appropriate	   cover	   is	   not	  
available	   or	   because	   the	   Directors	   consider	   the	   required	  
premiums	   to	   be	   excessive	   having	   regard	   to	   the	   benefits	  
that	  would	  accrue.
Uninsurable	   Risks
and
other
earthquakes
Exploration,	  development	  and	  production	  operations	  on	  
oil	  and	   gas	   properties	   involve	  numerous	   risks,	   including	  
unexpected	   or	   unusual	   geological	   operating	   conditions,	  
floods,	  
environmental	  
occurrences,	  and	   political	  and	  social	  instability.	   It	  is	  not	  
always	  possible	  to	  obtain	  insurance	  against	  all	  such	  risks	  
and	   the	   Company	   may	   decide	   not	   to	   insure	   against	  
certain	  risks	  because	  of	  high	  premiums	  or	  other	  reasons.	  
liabilities	   arise,	   they	   could	   reduce	   or	  
Should	   such	  
eliminate	   any	  
in	  
increasing	   costs	   and	   a	   decline	   in	   the	   value	   of	   the	  
securities	   of	   the	   Company.	   Initially,	   the	   Company	   will	  
not	   maintain	   insurance	   against	   operational,	   political	   or	  
environmental	  risks.
further	   profitability	   and
result
Taxation	   Liability	   Risk
ambiguity
The	   tax	   environments	   of	   fSU	   countries	   are	   subject	   to	  
continuous	   development	   and	   can	   be	   subject	  
to	  
inconsistent	  
retroactive	  
change,	  
application,	  
interpretation	   and	   enforcement	   which	  
could	   result	   in	   unfavourable	   changes	   to	   the	   Company’s	  
tax	   position.	   Non	   compliance	   with	  
laws	   and	  
regulations	  as	  interpreted	  by	  local	  authorities	  could	  lead	  
to	   the	   assessment	   of	   additional	   taxes,	   penalties	   and	  
interest.
local
and
In	   accordance	   with	   the	   directors’	   ongoing	   fiduciary	  
duties	   to	   the	   shareholders	   of	   the	   Company,	   the	  
44
A	  portion	  of	  the	  shares	  on	  issue	  will	  be	  subject	  to	  escrow	  
restrictions	  
in	   accordance	   with	   Chapter	   9	   of	   the	  
ASX.	  	  This	  could	  be	  considered	  an	  increased	  liquidity	  risk	  
as	  a	  large	  portion	  of	  issued	  capital	  may	  not	  be	  able	  to	  be	  
tradable	   freely	   for	   a	   period	   of	   time.	  	   Conversely,	   if	   the	  
Company	   is	   successful	   in	   achieving	   some	   or	   all	   of	   its	  
objectives,	   this	   relative	   lack	   of	   liquidity	   may	   lead	   to	  
volatility	  in	  the	  price	  of	  the	  Company’s	  securities.
Company	   will	   structure	   a	   number	   of	   its	   operations	  
(financial,	   professional	  
services,	   or	   otherwise)	  
through	   some	   low-­‐tax	   jurisdictions	   (please	   refer	   to	  
the	   SPG	   structure	   chart	   contained	   within	   this	  
Prospectus).	   Given	   the	   current	   governmental	   and	  
political	  
focus	   upon	   multinational	   corporations	  
acting	   both	   inside	   and	   outside	   of	   Australia,	   the	  
Company,	   following	   the	   Acquisition,	  may	  be	  subject	  
to	   heightened	   regulatory	   risk	   from	   tax	   authorities	  
and	   this	   may	   possibly	   represent	   a	   financial	   risk	   to	  
Investors	   receiving	   Shares	   under	   the	   Offers.
4.3  General	   Risks
Economic	  Risks
inflation,	   currency
Factors	   such	   as	  
fluctuations,	  
interest	   rates,	   supply	   and	   demand	   of	   capital	   and	  
industrial	   disruption	   have	   an	   impact	   on	   business	  
costs,	   commodity	   prices	   and	   stock	   market	   prices.	  
The	   Company's	   operating	   costs,	   possible	   future	  
revenues	   and	   future	   profitability	   can	   be	   affected	   by	  
these	   factors,	   which	   are	   beyond	   the	   control	   of	   the	  
Company.
Share	   Market	   Conditions
securities
regardless	   of
Share	   market	   conditions	   may	   affect	   the	   value	   of	   the	  
Company's	   quoted	  
the	  
Company's	   operating	   performance.	   Share	   market	  
conditions	  are	  affected	  by	  many	  factors	  such	  as,	  general	  
economic	   outlook,	   interest	   rates	   and	   inflation	   rates,	  
currency	   fluctuations,	   changes	   in	   investor	   sentiment	  
toward	   particular	   market	   sectors,	   the	   demand	   for,	   and	  
supply	  of,	  capital	  and	  terrorism	  or	  other	  hostilities.
Reliance	  on	   Key	   Personnel
responsibility	   of	   overseeing
The	  
the	   day-­‐to-­‐day	  
operations	   and	   the	   strategic	   management	   of	   the	  
Company	   depends	  
senior	  
management	   and	   its	   key	   personnel.	   There	   can	   be	   no	  
assurance	  given	  that	  there	  will	  be	  no	  detrimental	  impact	  
on	   the	   Company	   if	   one	   or	   more	   of	   these	   employees	  
cease	  their	  employment.
substantially	   on
its
Share	  Liquidity	  risk
The	   Company	   currently	   has	   3,693,857,804	   Shares	   on	  
issue	  (on	  a	  pre-­‐Consolidation	  basis),	  if	  the	  Resolutions	  
are	  approved	  at	  the	  General	  Meeting,	  the	  Company’s	  
Shares	   will	   be	   consolidated	   on	   a	   one	   for	   fifty	   basis	  
into	   approximately	   73,877,160	   Shares	   (subject	   to	  
rounding	  of	  fractional	  entitlements).	  	  On	  Completion,	  
the	  Company	  will	  issue	  a	  further	  951,647,010	  Shares	  
(Minimum	  Subscription)	  or	  up	  to	  981,647,010	  Shares	  
(Maximum	   Subscription)	   (on	   a	   post-­‐Consolidation	  
basis).
45
5. Financial	  Information
5.1  Background
This	  Section	  contains	  historical	  and	  pro	  forma	  financial	  information	  for	  MUI	  Corporation	  Limited.	  	   All	  information	  present	  
in	   this	   Section	   should	   be	   read	   in	   conjunction	   with	   this	   Prospectus,	   including	   the	   Investigating	   Accountant's	   Report	   in	  
Section	  6	  and	  the	  risk	  factors	  outlined	  in	  Section	  4.
5.2  Historical	  Consolidated	  Statement	  of	  Comprehensive	  Income	  of	  MUI	  and	  SPG	  as	  at	  dates	  indicated
MUI	  
Audited	  
Year	  ended	  
	   30	  June	  2015	  
$	  
137	  
-­‐
MUI	  
Audited	  
Year	  ended	  
30	  June	  2014	  
$
1,288	  
-­‐
MUI	  
Audited	  
Year	  ended	  
30	  June	  2013	  
$	  
10,621
-­‐
SPG	  
Audited	  
19	  Feb	  2015	  to	  
30	  Sept	  2015	  *	  
$	  
6	  	  
1,341,659
(375,751)
(477,968)
(534,545)
(1,719,802)
-­‐	  
(3,487,171)
(45,543)
-­‐	  
-­‐
-­‐	  
-­‐
(42,178)
(28,664)
(2,377,341)
-­‐
-­‐
Revenue	  	  
Other	  income	  **
Corporate	  administrative	  
expenses	  	  
Exploration	  and	  evaluation	  
expenditure	  
Impairment	  of	  financial	  asset
Finance	  costs
(3,908,328)
Loss	  before	  income	  tax	  
expense	  	  
Other	  Comprehensive	  
income,	  net	  of	  income	  tax	  
Total	  comprehensive	  loss	  for	  
the	  year	  attributable	  to	  the	  
company	  
*The	   Consolidated	   Statement	   of	   Comprehensive	   Income	   for	   SPG	   is	   from	   the	   period	   of	   SPG’s	   inception,	   commencing
19	  February	  2015	  to	  30	  September	  2015.	  	  In	  addition	  it	  includes	  the	  loss	  associated	  with	  those	  SPG	  subsidiaries	  incorporated	  
prior	  to	  acquisition	  by	  SPG	  from	  the	  date	  of	  their	  inception.
(3,908,328)
(552,588)
(2,755,478)
(518,858)
(518,858)
(552,588)
(2,755,478)
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
**Other	  income	  is	  satisfaction	  of	  loan	  payable	  to	  an	  entity	  controlled	  by	  Dr.	  David	  Robson.
46
5.3  Historical	  Consolidated	  Statement	  of	  Financial	  Position	  of	  MUI	  as	  at	  dates	  indicated
CURRENT	  ASSETS
Cash	  and	  cash	  equivalents
Trade	  and	  other	  receivables
Financial	  assets
Other	  current	  assets
TOTAL	  CURRENT	  ASSETS
NON	  CURRENT	  ASSETS
Financial	  assets
TOTAL	  NON	  CURRENT	  ASSETS
TOTAL	  ASSETS
CURRENT	  LIABILITIES
Trade	  and	  other	  payables
Convertible	  Note
TOTAL	  CURRENT	  LIABILITIES
TOTAL	  LIABILITIES
Audited	  
30	  June	  2015	  
$
Audited	  
30	  June	  2014	  
$
Audited	  
30	  June	  2013	  
$
45,584
26,833
-­‐
20,000
92,417
-­‐
-­‐
92,417
278,538
616,384
894,922
894,922
242,810
22,445
1,040,000
20,000
1,325,255
2,435,062
2,435,062
3,760,317
83,652
570,842
654,494
654,494
135,379
37,798
3,524,089
35,111
3,732,377
-­‐
-­‐
3,732,377
49,032
528,664
577,696
577,696
NET	  ASSETS	  /	  (LIABILITIES)
(802,505)
3,105,823
3,154,681
EQUITY
Issued	  capital
Option	  reserve
Accumulated	  losses
TOTAL	  EQUITY
35,764,430
35,764,430
31,784
52,751
35,307,863
39,318
(36,598,719)
(32,711,358)
(32,192,500)
(802,505)
3,105,823
3,154,681
47
5.4  Historical	  Consolidated	  Statement	  of	  Financial	  Position	  of	  both	  MUI	  and	  SPG	  as	  at	  30
September	  2015	  adjusted	  to	  reflect	  the	  Acquisition,	  the	  Public	  Offer	  and	  other	  material	  
transactions
CURRENT	  ASSETS
Cash	  and	  cash	  equivalents
Trade	  and	  other	  receivables
Financial	  assets
Other	  current	  assets
TOTAL	  CURRENT	  ASSETS
NON	  CURRENT	  ASSETS
Motor	  Vehicles
TOTAL	  NON	  CURRENT	  ASSETS
TOTAL	  ASSETS
CURRENT	  LIABILITIES
Trade	  and	  other	  payables
Convertible	  Note
TOTAL	  CURRENT	  LIABILITIES
TOTAL	  LIABILITIES
NET	  ASSETS	  /	  (LIABILITIES)
EQUITY
Issued	  capital
Option	  reserve
Foreign	  currency	  translation	  reserve
Accumulated	  losses
TOTAL	  EQUITY
Note
1
2
3
4
5
6
MUI
SPG
Actual	  
Audited	  
As	  at	  
30	  September	  
2015	  
$
Actual	  
Audited	  
As	  at	  
30	  September	  
2015	  
$
MUI	  post	  Acquisition	  and	  Offers	  
Pro-­‐forma
Pro-­‐forma
Consolidated	  on
Consolidated	  on
Minimum
Subscription	  Basis	  
30	  September	  
2015	  
$
Maximum
Subscription	  Basis	  
30	  September	  
2015	  
$
25,710
37,235
-­‐
20,000
82,945
-­‐
-­‐
82,945
125,593
13,995,826
16,875,826
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
37,235
-­‐
20,000
37,235
-­‐
20,000
125,593
14,053,061
16,933,061
32,899
32,899
158,492
32,899
32,899
32,899
32,899
14,085,960
16,965,960
374,592
628,425
1,003,017
1,003,017
3,011,486
1,942,427
1,942,427
-­‐
3,011,486
3,011,486
-­‐
1,942,427
1,942,427
-­‐
1,942,427
1,942,427
(920,072)
(2,852,994)
12,143,533
15,023,533
35,764,430
31,784
-­‐
(36,716,286)
(920,072)
143
-­‐
(97,659)
(2,755,478)
(2,852,994)
24,430,573
27,310,573
31,784
(97,659)
(12,221,165)
12,143,533
31,784
(97,659)
(12,221,165)
15,023,533
48
Notes	  to	  the	  Financial	  Information
Note	  1:	  Cash	  and	  Cash	  Equivalents
Cash	  and	  cash	  equivalents
Cash	  paid	  for	  capital	  in	  SPG	  post	  30	  
September	  2015
Issue	  of	  Shares	  under	  Share	  Placement
Share	  Placement	  costs
Note	  2:	  Financial	  Assets	  (current)
Related	  Party	  Loan	  –	  AusAsia	  Energy	  Pty	  
Limited
Provision	  for	  Loan
Note	  3:	  Trade	  and	  Other	  Payables	  
(current)
Trade	  and	  sundry	  payables
Conversion	  of	  SPG	  trade	  creditors	  to	  SPG	  
capital	  *
Related	  Party	  loans
Conversion	  of	  Related	  Party	  loan	  to	  SPG	  
capital	  *
Loan	  from	  third	  party
MUI
Actual	  
Audited
SPG
Actual	  
Audited
As	  at	  
30	  September	  
2015	  
$
As	  at	  
30	  September	  
2015	  
$
MUI	  post	  Acquisition	  and	  Offers	  
Pro-­‐forma	  
Pro-­‐forma
Consolidated	  on
Consolidated	  on
Minimum
Subscription	  Basis	  
30	  September	  
2015
Maximum
Subscription	  Basis	  
30	  September	  
2015
$
$
25,710
-­‐
125,593
151,303
151,303
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
(3,487,780)
(3,487,780)
-­‐
-­‐
*A	  portion	  of	  SPG	  payables	  and	  related	  party	  loans	  has	  converted	  to	  SPG	  capital	  post	  30	  September	  2015	  and	  prior	  to	  the
Acquisition.
Note	  4:	  Convertible	  Note
Convertible	  Note
Accrued	  interest
Conversion	  of	  Convertible	  Note
500,000
128,425
-­‐
628,425
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
500,000
150,000
(650,000)
-­‐
500,000
150,000
(650,000)
-­‐
49
Note	  5:	  Issued	  Capital	  
Shares	  
(post	  
73,877,160	   MUI	   ordinary	  
consolidation)	   on	   issue	   as	   at	   30	   September	  
2015
shares
SPG	  	  	  ordinary	  	  	  shares	  	  	  on	  	  	  issue	  	  	  as	  	  	  at	  	  	  30	  
September	   2015	   /	   Pro	   forma	   **	   (1,353,639	  
shares	  at	  an	  average	  of	  $2.01	  each)
Proposed	  acquisition	  (post-­‐consolidation):	  
798,647,010	  	  	  	  ordinary	  	  	  	  shares	  	  	  	  issued	  	  	  	  to	  
Vendors	  	  	  	  at	  	  	  	  $0.10	  	  	  	  cents	  	  	  	  pursuant	  	  	  	  to	  
Acquisition	  *
13,000,000	   ordinary	   shares	   at	   $0.10	   issued
MUI
Actual	  
Audited
SPG
Actual	  
Audited
As	  at	  
30	  September	  
2015	  
$
As	  at	  
30	  September	  
2015	  
$
35,764,430
-­‐
MUI	  post	  Acquisition	  and	  Offers	  
Pro-­‐forma	  
Pro-­‐forma
Consolidated	  on
Minimum
Subscription	  Basis	  
30	  September	  
2015
Consolidated	  on
Maximum
Subscription	  Basis	  
30	  September	  
2015
$
-­‐
$
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
143
2,732,857
2,732,857
-­‐
7,387,716
7,387,716
-­‐
*The	  acquisition	  has	  been	  accounted	  for	  using	  the	  principles	  of	  reverse	  acquisition	  accounting	  under	  AASB	  3	  –	  Business	  Combinations
since	  the	  substance	  of	  the	  transaction	  is	  that	  the	  existing	  shareholders	  of	  SPG	  effectively	  gain	  control	  of	  MUI.	  Essentially	  the	  price	  paid	  
for	  the	  acquisition	  of	  MUI	  by	  SPG	  is	  the	  shares	  currently	  held	  by	  MUI	  shareholders	  (73,877,160)	  by	  the	  re-­‐listing	  price	  of	  $0.10,	  being	  
$7,387,716.	  For	  explanation	  of	  the	  accounting	  treatment	  refer	  to	  the	  Summary	  of	  Significant	  Accounting	  Policies	  (Section	  5.5).
**The	  Issue	  of	  shares	  by	  SPG	  post	  30	  September	  2015	  and	  prior	  to	  the	  Acquisition	  has	  been	  included	  in	  the	  pro-­‐forma.
50
MUI
Actual	  
Audited
SPG
Actual	  
Audited
As	  at	  
30	  September	  
2015	  
$
As	  at	  
30	  September	  2015
$
MUI	  post	  Acquisition	  and	  Offers	  
Pro-­‐forma	  
Pro-­‐forma
Consolidated	  on
Minimum
Subscription	  Basis	  
30	  September	  
2015	  
$
Consolidated	  on
Maximum
Subscription	  Basis
30	  September	  2015
$
Note	  6:	  Accumulated	  losses
Accumulated	  losses	  as	  at	  30	  September	  2015
36,716,286
2,755,478
2,755,478
2,755,478
Transaction	  costs	  relating	  to	  SPG	  capital	  
raising
Conversion	  of	  Convertible	  Note	  (fair	  value	  
differential)
Acquisition	  of	  MUI	  –	  issue	  of	  share	  capital
Acquisition	  of	  MUI	  –	  acquisition	  of	  net	  
liabilities
Acquisition	  of	  MUI	  –	  acquisition	  of	  option	  
reserve
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
-­‐
454,540
671,575
454,540
671,575
7,387,716
7,387,716
920,072
31,784
920,072
31,784
36,716,286
2,755,478
12,221,165
12,221,165
5.5  Assumptions	   Applied	   in	   Preparing	   the	   Pro-­‐forma	   Financial	   Information	  
The	  pro-­‐forma	  financial	  information	  has	  been	  included	  for	  information	  purposes	  to	  reflect	  the	  position	  of	  the	  Company	  on	  
the	  assumption	  that	  the	  following	  transactions	  had	  occurred	  as	  at	  30	  September	  2015:
Significant	  transactions	  that	  have	  taken	  place	  between	  30	  September	  2015	  and	  the	  date	  of	  this	  
Prospectus	  
SPG	  has	  issued	  the	  following	  shares	  post	  30	  September	  2015:
Reason
No.	  of	  SPG	  shares
Average	  price	  per
Total	  Value
Issued
SPG	  share
Settlement	  of	  related	  party	  loan
Settlement	  of	  trade	  payables
Share	  based	  payment	  in	  lieu	  of	  salary	  expenses
Equity	  investment	  of	  USD585,000
Founder	  shares
115,523
325,753
212,253
159,900
540,210
$3.24
$3.28
$3.61
$5.21
Nil
$374,091
$1,069,560
$766,595
$834,523
Nil
Total	  number	  of	  SPG	  shares	  issued	  since	  30	  September	  2015
1,353,639
Transactions	  that	  form	  a	  part	  of	  this	  Prospectus
•
•
•
•
In	  accordance	  with	  the	  Minimum	  Subscription	  and	  Maximum	  Subscription,	  as	  detailed	  in	  this	  Prospectus,	  the
Company	  will	  allot	  and	  issue	  a	  minimum	  of	  140,000,000	  or	  up	  to	  a	  maximum	  of	  170,000,000	  Shares	  to	  raise	   a
minimum	  of	  $14,000,000	  and	  a	  maximum	  of	  $17,000,000	  respectively	  at	  $0.10	  per	  Share;
Capital	  raising	  and	  Admission	  costs	  of	  $990,000	  or	  up	  to	  $1,110,000	  in	  raising	  the	  minimum	  or	  maximum
amounts	  under	  the	  Prospectus,	  respectively;
Issue	  of	  13,000,000	  Shares	  to	  the	  Noteholder	  in	  satisfaction	  of	  the	  Convertible	  Note;	  and
Issue	  of	  798,647,010	  Shares	  in	  MUI	  to	  the	  Vendors	  in	  accordance	  with	  the	  Acquisition.
51
5.6  Summary	   of	   Significant	   Accounting
Policies
The	   following	   significant	   accounting	   policies,	   which	   are	  
consistent	   with	   the	   recognition	   and	   measurement	  
requirements	   of	   Australian	   Accounting	   Standards	   and	  
Interpretations,	   have	   been	   applied	   in	   the	   preparation	  
and	  presentation	  of	  the	  financial	  information	  presented	  
in	  Section	  5	  to	  this	  Prospectus.
Basis	   of	   Preparation	  
This	   financial	   information	   has	   been	   prepared	   on	   an	  
accruals	   basis	   and	   is	   based	   on	   historical	   costs,	   applying	  
the	   going	   concern	   basis	   of	   accounting.	   All	   amounts	   are	  
presented	  in	  Australian	  dollars,	  unless	  otherwise	  noted.
Going	   Concern	  
The	  financial	  information	  has	  been	  prepared	  on	  a	  going	  
concern	   basis,	   notwithstanding	   the	   fact	   that	   for	   the	  
period	  ended	  30	  September	  2015:
• MUI	  generated	  a	  loss	  after	  tax	  of	  $117,567.	   As
at	  30	  September	  2015	  MUI	  had	  available	  cash
reserves	   of	   $25,710	   and	   negative	   working
capital	  of	  $920,072;	  and
•
As	   at	   30	   September	   2015	   SPG	   had	   available
cash	   reserves	   of	   $125,593	   and	   its	   current
liabilities	  	  	  	   exceeded	  	  	  	   its	  	  	  	   total	  	  	  	   assets	  	  	  	   by	  
$2,852,994.
For	   the	   12	   months	   from	  the	   date	  	  of	   this	   report,	   the	  
Directors	   have	   determined	   that	   MUI	   is	   a	   going	   concern	  
based	   upon	   a	   cash	  
flow	   budget	   prepared	   by	  
management.	   The	   cash	   flow	   budget	   incorporates	   a	  
control	  of	  costs,	  as	  and	  where	  appropriate,	  including	  the	  
potential	  to	   place	   payments	   on	   hold	   as	   well	  as	   no	   long	  
term	   leases,	   commitments	   or	   employee	   contracts.	   The	  
Company	  has,	  at	  its	  discretion,	  the	  ability	  to	  convert	  its	  
convertible	  note	  to	  equity	  and	  the	  ability	  to	  exercise	  its	  
security	  relating	  to	  its	  AusAsia	  loan	  (with	  a	  cost	  value	  of	  
$3,487,780)	   and	   liquidate	   the	   asset,	   thereby	   creating	   a	  
cash	   flow.	   The	   Company	   also	   has	   the	   ability	   of	   a	   listed	  
entity	  to	  raise	  capital	  in	  the	  public	  market.
The	   Company	   also	   has	   the	   support	   of	   a	   director	   and	  
shareholder	   that	   will	   ensure	   it	   has	   adequate	   working	  
capital	   for	   at	   least	   12	   months	   from	   the	   date	   of	   this	  
report.	  In	  addition	  to	  this,	  the	  Company	  has	  received	  an	  
undertaking	   in	   relation	   to	   trade	   and	   other	   payables	  
totalling	   $343,092	   as	   at	   30	   September	   2015	   owing	   to	  
Directors	   and	   director	   related	   parties	   confirming	   that	  
repayment	   of	   these	   amounts	   will	   not	   be	   required	   for	   a	  
period	  of	  12	  months	  from	  the	  date	  of	  this	  report	  unless	  
the	  Company	  has	  sufficient	  cash	  flows	  available.
For	   the	   12	   months	   from	  the	   date	  of	   this	   report,	   the	  
Directors	   of	   SPG	   have	   determined	   that	   SPG	   is	   a	   going	  
concern	  based	  upon	  the	  following:	  a)	  SPG	  has	  received
written	   letters	   of	   support	   from	   its	   shareholders	   and	  
investors	  that	  they	  will	  continue	  to	  ensure	  that	  SPG	  will	  
have	   adequate	   levels	   of	   working	   capital	   for	   a	   period	   of	  
at	   least	   12	   months	   from	   the	   date	   of	   this	   report,	  
irrespective	  of	  whether	  or	  not	  the	  proposed	  transaction	  
with	   MUI	   Corporation	   Limited	   proceeds.	   The	   proposed	  
transaction	   with	   MUI	   Corporation	   Limited,	   which	   is	  
currently	  in	  a	  due	  diligence	  phase,	  will	  enable	  the	  raising	  
of	  $14	  million	  on	  a	  Minimum	  Subscription	  basis	  or	  up	  to	  
$17	   million	   on	   a	   Maximum	   Subscription	   basis	   through	  
this	  Prospectus	  on	  the	  Australian	  Securities	  Exchange.
financial	  
in
statements	   do	   not	  
relation
include	   any	  
These	  
adjustments	  
recoverability	   or	  
classification	   of	   recorded	   assets	   or	   liabilities	   that	   might	  
be	   necessary	   should	   the	   Company	   not	   be	   able	   to	  
continue	  as	  a	  going	  concern.
the
to
the
involves
transaction
Principles	   of	   Consolidation,	   including	   Reverse	  
Acquisitions	  of	  Entities	  that	  do	  not	  meet	  the	  
Accounting	   Definition	   of	  a	   Business    
When	   a	  
transfer	   of	  
consideration	   through	   the	   issue	   of	   share	   capital,	   the	  
directors	  make	  an	  assessment	  of	  who	  is	  the	  accounting	  
acquirer	   in	   the	   transaction	   by	   examining	   the	   following	  
indicators	   of	   control,	   post-­‐transaction,	   including	   a)	   the	  
proportion	   of	   shareholder	   representation	   in	   the	   newly	  
merged	   group	   from	   each	   transacting	   entity;	   and	   b)	   the	  
ability	   of	   that	   shareholder	   group	   to	   influence	   control	  
through	   its	   power	   over	   the	   governance	   and	   operations	  
of	  the	  newly	  merged	  entity.
When	   the	   accounting	   acquiree	   does	   not	   satisfy	   the	  
definition	   of	   a	   business,	   as	   set	   out	   in	   AASB	   3,	   the	  
acquisition	  by	  the	  acquirer	  of	  the	  non-­‐business	  entity	  is	  
treated	   as	   a	   share-­‐based	   payment	   and	   any	   dilution	   in	  
the	  value	  of	  equity	  of	  the	  accounting	  acquirer,	  plus	  any	  
further	   consideration	   paid	   for	   the	   acquisition	   including	  
related	   transaction	   costs,	   less	   the	   written-­‐down	   book	  
values	   of	   its	   assets	   and	   liabilities	   consolidated	   into	   the	  
merged	   entity	   is	   charged	   to	   the	   profit	   and	   loss	   as	   a	  
transaction	   cost.	   The	   value	   of	   the	   dilution	   of	   equity	   is	  
calculated	   at	   its	   fair	   value	   as	   at	   the	   date	   of	   the	  
transaction	  
is	   contractually	  
completed	  –	  its	  grant	  date),	  being	  the	  quoted	  its	  quoted	  
market	  value.
(when	   the	   transaction
Upon	  consolidation	  in	  the	  newly	  merged	  entity,	  all	  inter-­‐	  
group	  balances	  and	  transactions	  between	  entities	  in	  the	  
pro-­‐forma	   consolidated	   group,	   including	   any	   unrealised	  
profits	  or	  losses,	  are	  eliminated.
Cash	   and	   Cash	   Equivalents	  
Cash	   and	   cash	   equivalents	  
include	   cash	   on	   hand,	  
deposits	   held	   at	   call	   with	   banks,	   other	   and	   short-­‐term	  
highly	   liquid	   investments	   with	   original	   maturities	   of	  
three	  months	  or	  less.
52
Loans	   and	   Receivables	  
Loans	   and	   other	   receivables	   that	   have	  
fixed	   or	  
determinable	  payments	  that	  are	  not	  quoted	  in	  an	  active	  
market	   are	   classified	   as	   “loans	   and	   receivables”.	   Loans	  
and	   receivables	   are	   measured	   at	   amortised	   cost	   using	  
the	   effective	   interest	   method,	   less	   any	   impairment.	  
Interest	   income	   is	   recognised	   by	   applying	   the	   effective	  
interest	   rate,	   except	   for	   short-­‐term	   receivables	   	   when	  
the	  recognition	  of	  interest	  would	  be	  immaterial.
Oil	  and	  Gas	  Exploration	  and	  Evaluation	  
Exploration	   and	   evaluation	   expenditures	   are	   accounted	  
for	   under	   the	   successful	   efforts	   method.	   All	   other	  
exploration	   and	   evaluation	   expenditures	  
including	  
directly	   attributable	   general	   administration	   costs,	  
geological	   and	   geophysical	   costs,	   exploration,	   seismic	  
and	   new	   venture	   activity	   expenditures	   are	   expensed	   in	  
the	   statement	   of	   comprehensive	   income	   as	   incurred,	  
except	  where	  the	  expenditure	  relates	  to	  an	  exploration	  
discovery	  that	  a)	  at	  balance	  date,	  an	  assessment	  of	  the	  
existence	   or	   otherwise	   of	   economically	   recoverable	  
reserves	  is	  not	  yet	  complete;	  or	  where:	  b)	  a	  decision	  on	  
additional	   major	   capital	   expenditure	   is	   pending;	   or	   c)	  
additional	   exploration	   wells	   or	   appraisal	   work	  
is	  
underway	  or	  planned;	  or	  d)	  the	  expenditure	  is	  expected	  
to	  be	  recouped	  by	  future	  exploitation	  or	  sale.
licence	   acquisition	   costs	   are
Exploration	  
initially	  
capitalised.	   For	   exploration	   and	   appraisal	   wells	   costs	  
directly	   associated	   with	   drilling	   the	   wells	   are	   initially	  
capitalised	   pending	   evaluation	   of	   whether	   potentially	  
economic	  
reserves	   of	   hydrocarbons	   have	   been	  
discovered.
When	   an	   oil	   or	   gas	   field	   has	   been	   approved	   for	  
development,	  
and	  
evaluation	  costs	  are	  transferred	  to	  Oil	  and	  Gas	  Assets	  —	  
Assets	  in	  Development.
accumulated
exploration
the
Trade	  and	   Other	  Payables	  
Trade	   payables	   and	   other	   payables	   are	   carried	   at	  
amortised	   cost	   and	   represent	   liabilities	   for	   goods	   and	  
services	  provided	  prior	  to	  the	  end	  of	  the	  period	  that	  are	  
unpaid	   and	   arise	   when	   there	   is	   an	   obligation	   to	   make	  
future	   payments	   in	   respect	   of	   the	   purchase	   of	   these	  
goods	  and	  services.
Convertible	  	  Notes	  
Convertible	   notes	   are	   recognised	   when	   the	   Company	   is	  
contractually	  bound	  to	  the	  instrument.
Convertible	  notes	  where	  the	  option	  to	  convert	  to	  equity	  
is	   in	   the	   hands	   of	   the	   note	   holder	   are	   classified	   as	   a	  
liability	  
in	   the	   statement	   of	   financial	   position	   and	  
following	   initial	   recognition	   at	   fair	   value	   are	   accounted	  
for	  at	  amortised	  cost.
Convertible	  notes	  where	  the	  option	  to	  convert	  to	  equity	  
is	   at	   the	   discretion	   of	   the	   Company	   are	   classified	   into	  
their	   debt	   fair	   value,	   with	   the	   residual	   fair	   value	   in	  
equity.	  Where	  there	  is	  no	  reliable	  fair	  value	  for	  the	  debt
component,	   due	   to	   a	   lack	   of	   a	   deep	   and	   liquid	   market	  
for	   similar	   debt	   instruments	   in	   the	   market,	   all	   of	   the	  
convertible	   note	   is	  recorded	   as	   a	  liability	   at	   transaction	  
date	   value	   and	  
then	   subsequently	   measured	   at	  
amortised	  cost.
Foreign	   Currency	   Translation	   and	   Balances
Functional	   and	   Presentation	  
Currency	  
The	   functional	   currency	   of	   each	   entity	   is	  
measured	   using	   the	   currency	   of	   the	   primary	  
economic	   environment	   in	   which	   that	   entity	  
operates.	  
financial	  
statements	  are	  presented	  in	  Australian	  dollars	  
which	  
functional	   and	  
presentation	  currency.
the	   Company’s
consolidated
The
is
currency	   monetary
Transaction	   and	   Balances	  
Foreign	   currency	   transactions	   are	   translated	  
into	   functional	   currency	   using	   the	   exchange	  
rates	  prevailing	  at	  the	  date	  of	  the	  transaction.	  
Foreign	  
are	  
translated	   at	   the	   year-­‐end	   exchange	   rate.	  
Non-­‐monetary	   items	   measured	   at	   historical	  
cost	   continue	   to	   be	   carried	   at	   the	   exchange	  
rate	   at	   the	   date	   of	   the	   transaction.	   Non-­‐	  
monetary	   items	   measured	   at	   fair	   value	   are	  
reported	   at	   the	   exchange	   rate	   at	   the	   date	  
when	  the	  fair	  values	  were	  determined.
items
Exchange	  differences	  arising	  on	  the	  translation	  
of	   monetary	  
items	   are	   recognised	   in	   the	  
statement	   of	   comprehensive	   income,	   except	  
where	   deferred	   in	   equity	   as	   a	   qualifying	   cash	  
flow	  or	  net	  investment	  hedge.
Exchange	  differences	  arising	  on	  the	  translation	  
of	  non-­‐monetary	  items	  are	  recognised	  directly	  
in	  equity	  to	  the	  extent	  that	  the	  gain	  or	  loss	  is	  
directly	   recognised	   in	   equity,	   otherwise	   the	  
exchange	   difference	  
in	   the	  
is	   recognised	  
statement	  of	  comprehensive	  income.
Group	  Companies	  
The	   financial	   results	   and	   position	   of	   foreign	   operations	  
whose	  
the	  
Company’s	   presentation	   currency	   are	   translated	   as	  
follows:
functional	   currency
is	   different
from
•
•
•
Assets	   and	   liabilities	   are	  	  translated	  	  at
year-­‐end	   exchange	   rates	   prevailing	   at
the	  reporting	  date;
Income	   and	   expenses	   are	   translated	   at
average	   exchange	   rates	   for	   the	   period;
and
Exchange	   rate	   differences	   arising	   on
translation	   of	   foreign	   operations	   are
transferred	   directly	  
foreign
currency	  	  	  translation	  	  	  reserve	  	  	  in	  	  	  the
the
to
53
statement	   of	   financial	   position.	   These	  
differences	   are	  
the	  
statement	   of	   comprehensive	   income	   in	  
the	   period	   in	   which	   the	   operation	   is	  
disposed
recognised
in
Tax	   Losses
Deferred	  tax	  assets	  relating	  to	  carry-­‐forward	  losses	  are	  
only	   recognised	   to	   the	   extent	   that	   the	   Company	   has	  
satisfied	   all	   legal	   and	   jurisdictional	   requirements	   that	  
qualify	   for	   their	   recognition	   and	   that	   the	   Company	   can	  
prove	   that	   the	   earning	   of	   assessable	   income	   to	   recoup	  
those	  losses	  is	  probable.
Share-­‐Based	  Payments
Equity-­‐settled	   share-­‐based	   compensation	   benefits	   may	  
be	   provided	   to	   contractors	   or	   employees	   in-­‐exchange	  
for	  the	   rendering	   of	   services.	  The	   cost	  of	   equity-­‐settled	  
transactions	   is	  	  measured	  at	   fair	   value	  on	  grant	  	  date.	  
Grant	  date	  is	  the	  date	  that	  both	  contracting	  parties	  have	  
a	   clear	   understanding	   of	   the	   terms	   and	   conditions	  
attached	  to	  the	  share-­‐based	  payment	  arrangement.
Fair	   value	   is	   independently	   determined	   using	   quoted	  
market	   prices,	   or	   in	   the	   case	   of	   unlisted	   options,	   using	  
the	   Black-­‐Scholes	   option	   pricing	   model	   that	   takes	   into	  
account	   the	   exercise	   price,	   the	   term	   of	   the	   option,	   the	  
impact	   of	   dilution,	   the	   share	   price	   at	   grant	   date	   and	  
expected	   price	   volatility	   of	   the	   underlying	   share,	   the	  
expected	   dividend	   yield	   and	   the	   risk	   free	   interest	   rate	  
for	  the	  term	  of	  the	  option.
The	  cost	  of	  the	  payment	  is	  charged	  to	  the	  profit	  or	  loss	  
over	   its	   vesting	   period,	   being	   the	   period	   in	   which	   the	  
service	   (for	   which	   consideration	   is	   given)	   is	   rendered.	  
Where	   non-­‐market	   based	   vesting	   conditions	   are	   not	  
satisfied	  and	  the	  underlying	  equity	  instrument	  lapses,	  is	  
cancelled	   or	   is	   forfeited,	   the	   value	   of	   the	   amount	  
previously	  charged	  to	  the	  profit	  or	  loss	  is	  credited	  back.
No	  	  	   Material	  	  	   Changes	  	  	   to	  	  	   the	  	  	   Company’s	  
Financial	  Position
To	  the	  best	  of	  the	  Directors’	  knowledge	  and	  belief,	  there	  
have	  been	  no	  material	  items,	  transactions	  or	  events	  
subsequent	  to	  30	  September	  2015	  and	  not	  otherwise	  
disclosed	  in	  this	  Prospectus.
54
6.
Investigating	  Accountant’s	  Report
18 February 2016
The Directors 
MUI Corporation Limited 
Level 5, 56 Pitt Street 
Sydney NSW 2000
Dear Sirs
INVESTIGATING ACCOUNTANT’S REPORT FOR MUI CORPORATION LIMITED
Introduction
This Investigating Accountant’s Report (‘the Report”) has been prepared at your request 
for inclusion in the Prospectus (“Prospectus”) to be dated on or about 18 February 2016 to 
be lodged with the Australian Securities and Investment Commission in respect of MUI 
Corporation Limited’s (“MUI”) acquisition of Skyland Petroleum Limited (“SPG”).  As part of 
the transaction the following events are expected to occur:-
1. a 50 -1 share consolidation in MUI reducing the share capital of MUI to
approximately 73,877,160 Shares;
2. an issue 798,647,010 Shares in MUI to acquire SPG at an issue price of $0.10 per
3.
4.
share;
the issue of 140,000,000 Shares at $0.10 in MUI to raise a total of $14,000,000
(with an additional 30,000,000 Shares offered for up to $3,000,000 in
oversubscriptions); and
the issue of 13,000,000 Shares at an issue price of $0.10 per Share for
conversion of a convertible note previously issued by the company.
The issue is not underwritten. Expressions and other terminology defined in the 
Prospectus have the same meaning in this Report.
Basis of Preparation
The Report has been prepared to provide investors with information on the historical 
results and the financial position of MUI and its controlled entities (the “Group” or the 
“Company”) and to provide investors with a pro-forma statement of financial position of the 
Group, as at 30 September 2015 adjusted to include funds raised by this Prospectus and 
related transactions, as referred to in Section 5.4 of the Prospectus.
This Report does not address the rights attaching to the shares to be issued in accordance 
with the Prospectus, the risks associated with the investment, nor form the basis of an 
expert’s opinion with respect to a valuation of the Group or a valuation of the share issue 
price at $0.10.
William Buck Audit (VIC) Pty Ltd (“William Buck”) has not been requested to consider the 
prospects for MUI Corporation Limited nor the merits and risks associated with becoming 
a shareholder, and accordingly, has not done so, nor purports to do so. William Buck
55
accordingly takes no responsibility for those matters or for any matter or omission in the Prospectus, other 
than responsibility for this Report. Risk factors, including those that specifically discuss the risks that may 
arise should the transaction not succeed in meeting the minimum fundraising objectives and regulatory 
approvals thereon accommodating those fundraising objectives, are set out in detail in Section 4 of the 
Prospectus.
Scope of report
William Buck has been requested to:
a)
b)
report whether anything has come to our attention which would cause us to believe that the historical
financial information disclosed in Section 5.4 of the Prospectus is not fairly presented in accordance
with the recognition and measurement requirements (but not the disclosure requirements) of Australian
Accounting Standards and other mandatory professional reporting requirements in Australia, and the
accounting policies adopted by MUI Corporation Limited and Skyland Petroleum Group Limited, and
report whether anything has come to our attention which would cause us to believe that the pro forma
financial information disclosed in Section 5.4 of the Prospectus is not presented fairly in accordance
with the basis of preparation and assumptions applied in preparing the financial information as set out
in the note 1a Annexure to this Report  and with the recognition and measurement requirements (but
not the disclosure requirements) of Australian Accounting Standards and other mandatory professional
reporting requirements in Australia, and the accounting policies adopted by the Group.
The directors of MUI Corporation Limited and Skyland Petroleum Group Limited have prepared, and are 
responsible for, the historical and pro-forma financial information included in Section 5.4 of the Prospectus.
This Report does not express an audit opinion on the pro forma financial information included in Section 5.4 
of the Prospectus.
Conclusions
Historical Financial Information
Based on our audit, nothing has come to our attention which causes us to believe that the historical 
financial information, as set out in Section 5.4 of the Prospectus is not presented fairly in accordance with 
the recognition and measurement requirements of Australian Accounting Standards and other mandatory 
professional reporting requirements in Australia, and the accounting policies adopted by MUI Corporation 
Limited and Skyland Petroleum Group Limited.
Pro Forma Financial Information
Based on our review, nothing has come to our attention which causes us to believe the pro forma financial 
information, as set out Section 5.4 of the Prospectus is not presented fairly in accordance with the basis of 
preparation in the note 1a Annexure to this report and applied in preparing the financial information as set 
out in the note 1a Annexure to this report with the recognition and measurement requirements (but not the 
disclosure requirements) of Australian Accounting Standards and other mandatory professional reporting 
requirements in Australia, and the accounting policies adopted by the Group.
56
Independence
William Buck does not have any interest in the outcome of the listing of the Shares, other than in 
connection with the preparation of this Report for which normal professional fees will be received. With the 
exception of this Investigating Accountant’s Report, William Buck was not involved in the preparation of any 
part of the Prospectus, and accordingly, makes no representations or warranties as to the completeness 
and accuracy of any information contained in any other part of the Prospectus.
Responsibility
Consent to the inclusion of this Investigating Accountant’s Report in the Prospectus in the form and context 
in which it appears has been given, but should not be taken as an endorsement of the Group or a 
recommendation by William Buck of any participation in the share issue by any intending investors. At the 
date of this report our consent has not been withdrawn.
General Advice Limitation
This Report has been prepared and included in the Prospectus to provide investors with general 
information only and does not take into account the objectives, financial situation or needs of any specific 
investor. It is not intended to take the place of professional advice and investors should not make specific 
investment decisions in reliance on this information contained in this Report. Before acting or relying on 
information, an investor should consider whether it is appropriate for their circumstances having regard to 
their objectives, financial situation or needs.
Yours faithfully
William Buck Audit (VIC) Pty Ltd 
ABN 59 116 151 136
N. S. Benbow 
Director
Dated in Melbourne, Australia this 18th day of February, 2016
57
Annexure
Notes to the Financial Information
1a. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
The  following  significant  accounting  policies,  which  are  consistent  with  the  recognition  and 
measurement requirements of Australian Accounting Standards and Interpretations, have been applied 
in  the  preparation  and  presentation  of  the  financial  information  presented  in  Section  9  to  this 
Prospectus.
Basis of Preparation
This financial  information  has been prepared on an  accruals basis and  is  based on historical costs, 
applying the going concern basis of accounting. All amounts are presented in Australian dollars, unless 
otherwise noted.
Going Concern
The financial information has been prepared on a going concern basis, notwithstanding the fact that for 
the period ended 30 September 2015:
• MUI generated a loss after tax of $117,567.  As at 30 September 2015 MUI had available cash
•
reserves of $25,710 and negative working capital of $920,072; and
As  at  30  September  2015  SPG  had  available  cash  reserves  of  $125,593  and  its  current
liabilities exceeded its total assets by $2,852,994.
The Directors have determined that MUI is a going concern based upon a cash flow budget prepared 
by  management.    The  cash  flow  budget  incorporates  a  control  of  costs,  as  and  where  appropriate, 
including  the  potential  to  place  payments  on  hold  as  well  as  no  long  term  leases,  commitments  or 
employee contracts.  The Company has, at its discretion, the ability to convert its convertible note to 
equity and the ability to exercise its security relating to its AusAsia loan (with a cost value of $3,487,780) 
and liquidate the asset, thereby creating a cash flow.  The Company also has the ability of a listed entity 
to raise capital in the public market.
The  Company  also  has  the  support  of  a  director  and  shareholder  that  will  ensure  it  has  adequate 
working capital for at least 12 months from the date of this report.  In addition to this, the Company has 
received an undertaking in relation to trade and other payables totalling $343,092 as at 30 September 
2015 owing to Directors and director related parties confirming that repayment of these amounts will 
not be required for a period of 12 months from the date of this report unless the Company has sufficient 
cash flows available.
For the 12 months from the date of this report, the Directors of SPG have determined that SPG is a 
going  concern  based  upon  the  following:  a)  SPG  has  received  written  letters  of  support  from  its 
shareholders  and  investors  that  they  will  continue  to  ensure  that  SPG  will  have  adequate  levels  of 
working capital for a period of at least 12 months, irrespective of whether or not the proposed transaction 
with MUI Corporation Limited proceeds. The proposed transaction with MUI Corporation Limited, which 
is currently in a due diligence phase, will enable the raising of $14 million on a Minimum Subscription 
basis or up to $17 million on a Maximum Subscription basis through this Prospectus on the Australian 
Securities Exchange.
These  financial  statements  do  not  include  any  adjustments  in  relation  to  the  recoverability  or 
classification of recorded assets or liabilities that might be necessary should the Company not be able 
to continue as a going concern.
58
Annexure
Notes to the Financial Information
1a. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (Continued)
Principles  of  Consolidation,  including  Reverse  Acquisitions  of  Entities  that  do  not  meet  the 
Accounting Definition of a Business
When  a  transaction  involves  the  transfer  of  consideration  through  the  issue  of  share  capital,  the 
directors make an assessment of who is the accounting acquirer in the transaction by examining the 
following 
the  proportion  of  shareholder 
representation  in  the  newly  merged  group  from  each  transacting  entity;  and  b)  the  ability  of  that 
shareholder group to influence control through its power over the governance  and operations of the 
newly merged entity.
indicators  of  control,  post-transaction,
including  a)
When the accounting acquiree does not satisfy the definition of a business, as set out in AASB 3, the 
acquisition by  the acquirer of the  non-business entity is treated  as a share-based payment and  any 
dilution  in  the  value  of  equity  of  the  accounting  acquirer,  plus  any  further  consideration  paid  for  the 
acquisition  including  related  transaction  costs,  less  the  written-down  book  values  of  its  assets  and 
liabilities consolidated into the merged entity is charged to the profit and loss as a transaction cost. The 
value of the dilution of equity is calculated at its fair value as at the date of the transaction (when the 
transaction is contractually completed – its grant date), being the quoted its quoted market value.
Upon  consolidation  in  the  newly  merged  entity,  all  inter-group  balances  and  transactions  between 
entities in the pro-forma consolidated group, including any unrealised profits or losses, are eliminated.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents include cash on hand, deposits held at call with banks, other and short-term 
highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less.
Loans and Receivables
Loans and other receivables that have fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active 
market are classified as “loans and receivables”. Loans and receivables are measured at amortised 
cost using the effective interest method, less any impairment. Interest income is recognised by applying 
the effective interest rate, except for short-term receivables when the recognition of interest would be 
immaterial.
Oil and Gas Exploration and Evaluation
Exploration  and  evaluation  expenditures  are  accounted  for  under  the  successful  efforts  method.  All 
other  exploration  and  evaluation  expenditures  including  directly  attributable  general  administration 
costs, geological and geophysical costs, exploration, seismic and new venture activity expenditures are 
expensed in the statement of comprehensive income as incurred, except where the expenditure relates 
to an exploration discovery that a)  at balance  date, an assessment of the existence or  otherwise  of 
economically  recoverable  reserves  is  not  yet  complete;  or  where:  b)  a  decision  on  additional  major 
capital  expenditure  is  pending;  or  c)  additional  exploration  wells  or  appraisal  work  is  underway  or 
planned; or d) the expenditure is expected to be recouped by future exploitation or sale.
Exploration licence acquisition costs are initially capitalised. For exploration and appraisal wells costs 
directly  associated  with  drilling  the  wells  are  initially  capitalised  pending  evaluation  of  whether 
potentially economic reserves of hydrocarbons have been discovered.
When  an  oil  or  gas  field  has  been  approved  for  development,  the  accumulated  exploration  and 
evaluation costs are transferred to Oil and Gas Assets — Assets in Development.
59
Annexure
Notes to the Financial Information
1a. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (Continued)
Trade and Other Payables
Trade payables and other payables are carried at amortised cost and represent liabilities for goods and 
services provided prior to the end of the period that are unpaid and arise when there is an obligation to 
make future payments in respect of the purchase of these goods and services.
Convertible Notes
Convertible  notes  are  recognised  when  the  Company  is  contractually  bound  to  the  instrument. 
Convertible notes where the option to convert to equity is in the hands of the note holder are classified 
as  a  liability  in  the  statement  of  financial  position  and  following  initial  recognition  at  fair  value  are 
accounted for at amortised cost.
Convertible notes where the option to convert to equity is at the discretion of the Company are classified 
into their debt fair value, with the residual fair value in equity. Where there is no reliable fair value for 
the debt component, due to a lack of a deep and liquid market for similar debt instruments in the market, 
all  of  the  convertible  note  is  recorded  as  a  liability  at  transaction  date  value  and  then  subsequently 
measured at amortised cost.
Foreign Currency Translation and Balances
Functional and Presentation Currency
The  functional  currency  of  each  entity  is  measured  using  the  currency  of  the  primary  economic 
environment  in  which  that  entity  operates.    The  consolidated  financial  statements  are  presented  in 
Australian dollars which is the Company’s functional and presentation currency.
Transaction and Balances
Foreign  currency  transactions  are  translated  into  functional  currency  using  the  exchange  rates 
prevailing at the date of the transaction.  Foreign currency monetary items are translated at the year-
end  exchange  rate.    Non-monetary  items  measured  at  historical  cost  continue  to  be  carried  at  the 
exchange rate at the date of the transaction.  Non-monetary items measured at fair value are reported 
at the exchange rate at the date when the fair values were determined.
Exchange differences arising on the translation of monetary items are recognised in the statement of 
comprehensive income, except where deferred in equity as a qualifying cash flow or net investment 
hedge.
Exchange differences arising on the translation of non-monetary items are recognised directly in equity 
to the extent that the gain or loss is directly recognised in equity, otherwise the exchange difference is 
recognised in the statement of comprehensive income.
60
Annexure
Notes to the Financial Information
1a. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (Continued)
Group Companies
The financial results and position of foreign operations whose functional currency is different from the 
Company’s presentation currency are translated as follows:
•
•
•
Assets and liabilities are translated at year-end exchange rates prevailing at the reporting
date;
Income and expenses are translated at average exchange rates for the period; and
Exchange  rate  differences  arising  on  translation  of  foreign  operations  are  transferred
directly to the foreign currency translation reserve in the statement of financial position.
These differences are recognised in the statement of comprehensive income in the period
in which the operation is disposed
Tax Losses
Deferred tax assets relating to carry-forward losses are only recognised to the extent that the Company 
has  satisfied  all  legal  and  jurisdictional  requirements  that  qualify  for  their  recognition  and  that  the 
Company can prove that the earning of assessable income to recoup those losses is probable.
Share-Based Payments
Equity-settled  share-based  compensation  benefits  may  be  provided  to  contractors  or  employees  in-
exchange for the rendering of services. The cost of equity-settled transactions is measured at fair value 
on grant date. Grant date is the date that both contracting parties have a clear understanding of the 
terms and conditions attached to the share-based payment arrangement.
Fair value is independently determined using quoted market prices, or in the case of unlisted options, 
using the Black-Scholes option pricing model that takes into account the exercise price, the term of the 
option, the impact of dilution, the share price at grant date and expected price volatility of the underlying 
share, the expected dividend yield and the risk free interest rate for the term of the option.
The cost of the payment is charged to the profit or loss over its vesting period, being the period in which 
the service (for which consideration is given) is rendered. Where non-market based vesting conditions 
are not satisfied and the underlying equity instrument lapses, is cancelled or is forfeited, the value of 
the amount previously charged to the profit or loss is credited back.
No Material Changes to the Company’s Financial Position
To the best of the Directors’ knowledge and belief, there have been no material items, transactions or 
events subsequent to 30 September 2015 and not otherwise disclosed in this Prospectus
61
7. Company	  Overview
7.1  Background
The	  historical	  business	  operations	  of	  the	  Company	  have	  been	  investment	  activities	  in	  the	  film	  industry.
7.2  Corporate	   Strategy	   and	   Objectives
The	  Company's	  primary	  business	  objectives	  following	  the	  completion	  of	  the	  Acquisition	  and	  the	  Offers	  is	  to	  pursue	  oil	  and	  
gas	  projects	  in	  Tajikistan	  and	  Georgia,	  as	  well	  as	  to	  undertake	  further	  acquisitions	  in	  the	  upstream	  hydrocarbon	  sector	  in	  
East	  Siberia	  and	  other	  jurisdictions.
The	  Directors	  consider	  that	  the	  funds	  to	  be	  raised	  pursuant	  to	  the	  Offers,	  together	  with	  available	  cash	  and	  receivables,	  will	  
provide	  sufficient	  capital	  to	  achieve	  the	  Company's	  primary	  business	  objectives	  as	  set	  out	  in	  this	  Prospectus.
Please	  refer	  to	  Section	  2.7	  of	  this	  Prospectus	  for	  a	  summary	  of	  the	  Company's	  currently	  proposed	  funding	  and	  expenditure	  
over	  the	  15	  months’	  post	  Completion	  of	  the	  Acquisition.
It	   is	   noted	   that	   the	   Company	   may	   use	   and	   expend	   its	   cash	   reserves	   more	   quickly	   than	   contemplated.	  It	   is	   noted	   that	  
programmes	  and	  budgets	  are	  dependent	  on	  results.	  These	  programmes	  can	  therefore	  change	  depending	  on	  the	  results	  of	  
the	  work.
The	  Company's	  actual	  allocation	  of	  funds	  may	  change	  depending	  on	  the	  circumstances	  in	  which	  its	  business	  develops	  and	  
operates.	  The	  exact	  timing	  of	  the	  implementation	  of	  the	  programme	  is	  also	  dependent	  on	  weather,	  conditions	  for	  drilling,	  
governmental	  permits	  and	  the	  timely	  availability	  of	  drilling	  and	  ancillary	  equipment.
7.3  Current	  Directors	  and	   Secretary	  of	  the	  Company
Mr.	  John	  Bell	  (to	  retire	  following	  the	  Completion)	  
Chairman,	   Non-­‐Executive	   Director
Mr.	   Bell	   is	   a	   graduate	   of	   the	   University	   of	   Aston	   Birmingham	   (United	   Kingdom)	   with	   a	   B.Sc.	   (Hons)	   in	   Administrative	  
Science.	   He	   is	   a	   Fellow	   of	   the	   Chartered	   Institute	   of	   Management	   Accountants	   (UK),	   a	   Chartered	   Global	   Management	  
Accountant,	  and	  a	  Fellow	  of	  CPA	  Australia.
During	  the	  past	  three	  years	  Mr.	  Bell	  held	  no	  other	  directorships	  in	  ASX	  listed	  companies.
Mr.	  Philip	  Silva	  (to	  retire	  following	  the	  Completion)	  
Non-­‐Executive	  	  Director
Mr.	  Silva	  is	  a	  partner	  of	  Creative	  Resources	  &	  Distribution	  and	  an	  associate	  with	  the	  Institute	  of	  Independent	  Business	  (IIB)	  
specialising	  in	  management	  consulting	  across	  a	  range	  of	  companies	  and	  sectors	  locally	  and	  internationally.
During	   the	   past	   three	   years	   Mr.	   Silva	   held	   a	   position	   of	   director	   on	   the	   Board	   of	   Directors	   of	   Synergy	   Plus	   Limited	  
(appointed	  January	  2016	  –	  Current).
Mr.	   Domenic	   Martino	  
Non-­‐Executive	  	  Director
Mr.	   Martino	   is	   a	   Chartered	   Accountant	   and	   an	   experienced	   director	   of	   ASX	   listed	   companies.	   Previously	   CEO	   of	   Deloitte	  
Touche	  Tohmatsu	  in	  Australia,	  he	  has	  significant	  experience	  in	  the	  development	  of	  "micro-­‐cap"	  companies.
Mr.	   Martino	   is	   a	   key	   player	   in	   the	   re-­‐birth	   of	   a	   broad	   grouping	   of	   ASX	   companies	   including	   Cokal	   Limited,	   Pan	   Asia	  
Corporation	  Limited,	  Clean	  Global	  Energy	  Limited	  (renamed	  Citation	  Resources	  Limited)	  and	  NuEnergy	  Capital	  Limited.
He	  has	  a	  strong	  reputation	  in	  China,	  with	  a	  lengthy	  track	  record	  of	  operating	  in	  Papua	  New	  Guinea	  and	  Indonesia,	  where	  
he	  has	  successfully	  closed	  key	  energy	  and	  resources	  deals	  with	  local	  players.	  He	  has	  a	  proven	  track	  record	  in	  capital	  raisings	  
across	  a	  range	  of	  markets.
62
Mr.	  Martino	  was	  a	  recipient	   of	  the	  Centenary	  Medal	  2003	   for	   his	  service	   to	  Australian	   society	   through	  business	  and	   the	  
arts.
During	  the	  past	  three	  years	  Mr.	  Martino	  held	  the	  following	  directorships	  in	  other	  ASX	  listed	  companies:	  
Australasian	  Resources	  Limited	  (27	  November	  2003	  –	  Current);	  Cokal	  Limited	  (24	  December	  2010	  –	  Current);	  South	  Pacific	  
Resources	  Limited	  (3	  August	  2012	  	  –	  	  Current);	  	  ORH	  	  Limited	  	  (6	  	  May	  	  2009	  	  –	  	  Current);	  	  Pan	  	  Asia	  	  Corporation	  	  Limited	  
(24	  December	  2010	  –	  Current)	  and	  Synergy	  Plus	  Limited	  (7	  July	  2006	  –	  Current).
Ms.	   Louisa	   Martino	  
Company	  Secretary
Ms.	  Martino	  provides	  company	  secretarial	  and	  accounting	  services	  through	  Transaction	  Services	  Pty	  Limited.	  	  Prior	  to	  this	  
she	  was	  the	  Chief	  Financial	  Officer	  of	  a	  private	  company	  while	  it	  was	  seeking	  investor	  financing.
She	  has	  a	  Bachelor	  of	  Commerce	  from	  the	  University	  of	  Western	  Australia,	  is	  a	  member	  of	  Chartered	  Accountants	  Australia	  
and	  New	  Zealand	  and	  a	  member	  of	  the	  Financial	  Services	  Institute	  of	  Australasia	  (“FINSIA”).
7.4  Proposed	   Executive	   Directors
Upon	  implementation	  of	  the	  Acquisition	  and	  as	  at	  the	  completion	  of	  the	  Offers,	  Dr.	  Robson,	  Mr.	  Sarssam,	  Ms.	  Landles,	  Mr.	  
Johnson,	  Dr.	  Sukhyar,	  Mr.	  Zok	  and	  Mr.	  Hargreaves	  will	  join	  the	  Board	  of	  the	  Company.	  Mr.	  Bell	  and	  Mr.	  Silva	  will	  resign	  and	  
Mr.	  Martino	  will	  remain	  on	  the	  Board.
Brief	  profiles	  of	  the	  Proposed	  Directors	  are	  set	  out	  below:
Dr.	  David	   Robson	  
Executive	   Chairman,	   Managing	   Director	   and	   President
Dr.	  Robson	  is	  trained	  as	  a	  geologist	  having	  obtaining	  a	  First	  Class	  B.Sc.	  (Hons.)	  degree	  
in	   Geology	   and	   a	   Ph.D.	   in	   Geochemistry.	   He	   holds	   an	   MBA	   from	   the	   University	   of	  
Strathclyde	  Business	  School.
He	   has	   spent	   over	   30	   years	   working	   in	   the	   oil	   and	   gas	   industry	   for	   major	   companies	  
such	   as	   Mobil	   and	   Britoil	   and	   for	   independents	   such	   as	   Hamilton	   Brothers	   Oil	   &	   Gas	  
(BHP	   Petroleum).	   Since	   1990	   he	   has	   worked	   in	   the	   USSR	   and	   fSU,	   in	   Russia,	  
Kazakhstan,	  Uzbekistan,	  Georgia,	  Tajikistan	  and	  Ukraine.
He	  is	  the	  founder	  of	  SPG	  and	  as	  Executive	  Chairman	  and	  Managing	  Director	  Dr.	  Robson	  
will	  be	  responsible	  for	  overall	  strategy	  and	  management	  of	  the	  company.
Dr.	   Robson’s	   career	   has	   focused	   primarily	   in	   operating	   oil	   and	   gas	   companies	   with	  
operations	   in	   Eastern	   Europe	   and	   the	   Commonwealth	   of	   Independent	   States	   since	  
1990	   –	   including	   Russia,	   Ukraine,	   Central	   Asia	   and	   the	   Caucasus.	   Previously,	   he	   was	  
employed	   in	   technical	   (exploration,	   operations,	   petroleum	   engineering),	   commercial	  
and	   managerial	   positions	   within	   Britoil	   plc.	   Hamilton	   Oil	   (now	   BHP	   Petroleum)	   and	  
Mobil.	  Later,	  he	  was	  Managing	  Director,	  CEO	  and	  one	  of	  the	  founders	  of	  London	  listed	  
JKX	   Oil	   &	   Gas	   plc.	   which	   was	   one	   of	   the	   first	   oil	   and	   gas	   companies	   to	   operate	   in	  
Ukraine,	   Dagestan	   and	   Georgia.	   He	   was	   also	   one	   of	   the	   founders	   of	   CanArgo	   Energy	  
Corporation;	  an	  AMEX	  listed	  exploration	  and	  production	  company	  working	  in	  Georgia	  
and	   Ukraine.	   More	   recently,	   he	   was	  
founder	   and	   Executive	   Chairman	   of	  
Toronto/London	   listed	   (TSX/LSE)	   listed	   Tethys	   Petroleum	   Limited,	   an	   exploration	   and	  
production	  company	  working	  in	  Kazakhstan,	  Tajikistan	  and	  Georgia.
He	   is	   a	   Fellow	   of	   several	   societies	   and	   associations,	   including	   the	   Geological	   Society	  
and	  a	  member	  of	  the	  European	  Association	  of	  Geoscientists	  &	  Engineers,	  the	  Society	  of	  
Petroleum	   Engineers,	   the	   American	   Association	   of	   Petroleum	   Geologists	   and	   the	  
Association	  of	  International	  Petroleum	  Negotiators.
He	   was	   formerly	   the	   energy	   sector	   representative	   on	   the	   UK	   government’s	   East	  
European	   Trade	   Council,	   is	   currently	   a	   Board	   Director	   of	   the	   Pacific	   Basin	   Economic	  
Council	  (PBEC)	  and	  is	  also	  a	  member	  of	  the	  Supervisory	  Board	  of	  OJSC	  Orienbank	  (the
63
oldest	  bank	  in	  Tajikistan).	  He	  was	  one	  of	  the	  founding	  members	  of	  the	  Tajik	  President’s	  
Investment	  Council	  and	  was	  awarded	  the	  Presidential	  Order	  for	  Honour	  for	  services	  to	  
the	  Georgian	  hydrocarbon	  industry.
Dr.	   Robson	   has	   spoken	   at	   many	   international	   forums	   including	   the	   “Paris	   Club”	   of	  
donor	  nations	  and	  he	  was	  awarded	  the	  “Best	  Executive	  Chairman	  of	  the	  Year	  –	  Asia	  –	  
2014”	  by	  World	  Finance	  Magazine.
Mr.	  Mark	  Sarssam	  
Technical	   Director	   and	   Chief	   Operating	   Officer
for	   managing	   and	   coordinating
Mr.	   Sarssam	   is	   an	   Executive	   Director	   and	   the	   Chief	   Operating	   Officer	   for	   SPG,	  
responsible	  
the	   exploration,	   appraisal	   and	  
development	  of	  SPG’s	  oil	  and	  gas	  assets.	  He	  oversees	  the	  development	  of	  the	  relevant	  
work	   plans	   and	   budgets	   for	   asset	   development	   and	   ensures	   	   the	   programmes	   are	  
implemented	   effectively	   and	   safely	   under	   the	   overall	   direction	   of	   the	   Managing	  
Director.	   As	   Chief	   Operating	   Officer	   he	   is	   also	   responsible	   for	   identifying,	   evaluating	  
and	  executing	  new	  business	  opportunities.
Prior	   to	   working	   with	   SPG,	   Mr.	   Sarssam	   was	   responsible	   for	   Petroleum	   Development	  
and	   New	   Business	   Development	   for	   Tethys	   Petroleum	   Limited	   (“Tethys”)	   where	  
(among	   other	   matters)	   Mr.	   Sarssam’s	   efforts	   resulted	   in	   two	   deals	   (the	   farm-­‐out	   of	  
Tajikistan	  exploration	   assets	   to	   CNPC/Total	  and	   the	  negotiation	   for	   the	   sale	   of	  a	   50%	  
share	  in	  Tethys’	  Kazakh	  assets).
Prior	   to	   his	   work	   at	   Tethys,	   Mr.	   Sarssam	   held	   the	   position	   of	   Head	   of	   Reservoir	  
Development	   and	   New	   Ventures	   Advisor	   for	   Dragon	   Oil	   plc.	   with	   a	   focus	   on	  
development	  of	  the	  Cheleken	  Block	  offshore	  in	  Turkmenistan	  in	  the	  Caspian	  Sea	  (with	  
reserves	  of	  c.650mmbbls).	  Prior	  to	  this,	  Mr.	  Sarssam	  held	  various	  senior	  roles	  at	  Shell:	  
leading	  field	  development	  projects	  in	  locations	  such	  as	  Oman	  and	  Brunei.	  He	  has	  spent	  
more	   than	   ten	   years	   working	   on	   projects	   offshore	   in	   the	   North	   Sea	   and	   the	   West	   of	  
Shetland	  with	  Amerada	  Hess	  and	  Fina	  oil	  and	  gas	  companies.
In	  total,	  Mr.	  Sarssam	  has	  25	  years	  of	  continuous	  experience	  in	  the	  oil	  and	  gas	  industry	  
and	  has	  worked	  on	  a	  variety	  of	  both	  offshore	  and	  onshore	  projects	  in	  the	  North	  Sea,	  
Middle	  East,	  Africa,	  Central	  Asia	  (fSU)	  and	  the	  Far	  East.	  He	  has	  extensive	  knowledge	  of	  
reservoir	   management,	   integrated	   field	   development,	   evaluation	   of	   reserves	   and	  
optimisation	  of	  oil	  and	  gas	  production.
In	  addition	  to	  his	  technical	  skills	  and	  experience,	  Mr.	  Sarssam	  has	  a	  strong	  background	  
in	   commercial	   evaluation	   and	   international	   new	   business	   development.	   Mr.	   Sarssam	  
graduated	   from	   Imperial	   College	   London	   with	   a	   Master’s	   Degree	   in	   Petroleum	  
Engineering.
Ms.	   Elizabeth	   Landles	  
Executive	   Director,	   Corporate	   Secretary	   and	  
Chief	   Administrative	   Officer
Ms.	   Landles	   is	   an	   Executive	   Director,	   Chief	   Administrative	   Officer	   and	   Corporate	  
Secretary	  of	  SPG.	  She	  is	  also	  one	  of	  the	  founders	  of	  SPG.	  In	  this	  role	  Ms.	  Landles	  has	  
overall	  responsibility	  for	  external	  affairs	  (government	  relations,	  partner	  relations	  and	  
investor	   relations),	   human	   resources	   and	   personnel	   management	   (identification	   of	  
job	  requirements,	  interview	  and	  selection	  of	  candidates,	  staff	  handbook,	  etc.)	  as	  well	  
as	   organisation	   of	   SPG’s	   logistics	   and	   support	   (office	   management,	   developing	   and	  
sourcing	   new	   office	   locations,	   etc.).	   Ms.	   Landles	   is	   also	   the	   Compliance	   Officer	   and	  
responsible	  for	  the	  corporate	  secretarial	  function	  of	  SPG.
Before	   joining	   SPG,	   Ms.	   Landles	   was	   Executive	   Director,	   Executive	   Vice	   President,	  
Chief	   Administrative	   Officer	   and	   Corporate	   Secretary	   of	   Tethys	   Petroleum	   Limited	  
(2003	   to	   2014).	   During	   this	   time,	   she	   was	   Director	   and	   Corporate	   Secretary	   of	   the	  
majority	  of	  Tethys’	  subsidiaries	  and	  was	  also	  responsible	  for	  Human	  Resources	  and
64
External	  Affairs.	  Prior	  to	  her	  work	  with	  Tethys,	  Ms.	  Landles	  occupied	  the	  position	  of	  Executive	  Vice	  President	  and	  Corporate	  
Secretary	  of	  CanArgo	  Energy	  Corporation.
Ms.	   Landles	   holds	   an	   Advanced	   Diploma	   in	   Business	   Administration	   from	   the	   Institute	   of	   Business	   Administration	   and	  
Management	  (an	  operating	  division	  of	  the	  Institute	  of	  Chartered	  Secretaries	  and	  Administrators	  in	  the	  UK)	  and	  is	  a	  Fellow	  of	  
the	   Institute	   of	   Business	   Administration.	   She	   is	   also	   a	   member	   of	   the	   Institute	   of	   Directors	   and	   holds	   their	   Certificate	   of	  
Company	   Direction.	   In	   addition,	   Ms.	   Landles	   is	   a	   member	   of	   the	   AIPN	   and	   has	   over	   18	   years	   experience	   of	   working	   on	  
corporate	  and	  administrative	  issues	  in	  fSU	  oil	  and	  gas	  related	  companies.
Going	   forward,	   Ms.	   Landles	   will	   have	   overall	   responsibility	   for	   the	   administration	   of	   the	   Company	   including	   human	  
resources,	  investor	  relations,	  external	  affairs	  management	  as	  well	  as	  logistics	  and	  support.
7.5  Proposed	  Non-­‐Executive	  Directors
Mr.	  Piers	  Johnson
Mr.	  Johnson	  is	  an	  experienced	  petroleum	  engineer	  with	  30	  years’	  experience.	  He	  holds	  a	  B.Sc.	  (Hons)	  degree	  in	  Mechanical	  
Engineering	  from	   Nottingham	  University,	  and	   is	  a	  Chartered	   Engineer	  with	  the	  Institution	  of	  Mechanical	  Engineers.	  He	  is	  
past	   Chairman	   of	   the	   London	   Section	   of	   the	   Society	   of	   Petroleum	   Engineers,	   a	   Member	   of	   the	   Petroleum	   Exploration	  
Society	  of	  Great	  Britain	  and	  a	  member	  of	  the	  Institute	  of	  Energy.
Mr.	   Johnson	   is	   the	   founder	   of	   Oilfield	   Production	   Consultants	   (OPC)	   Limited,	   a	   reservoir	   and	   production	   evaluation	   and	  
management	   firm,	   having	   previously	   worked	   for	   Flopetrol	   Johnston	   Schlumberger	   as	   Well	   Test	   Supervisor,	   Location	  
Manager	  and	  District	  Sales	  Engineer	  (Asia).
He	  has	  experience	  of	  oil	  and	  gas	  operations,	  field	  evaluations	  and	  well	  test	  interpretation	  worldwide	  and	  is	  also	  a	  visiting	  
lecturer	  in	  Petroleum	  Engineering	  at	  the	  Institute	  Français	  du	  Pétrole	  in	  Paris.
Dr.	  Raden	   Sukhyar
Dr.	  Sukhyar	  was	  appointed	  President	  Commissioner	  PT	  Ant	  Am	  (Indonesia)	  on	  May	  31,	  2012.	  Dr.	  Sukhyar	  graduated	  from	  
Monash	   University	   in	   Melbourne,	   Australia	   in	   1990	   with	   a	   Doctor	   of	   Philosophy	   degree	   (Ph.D.)	   in	   Earth	   Science	   and	   the	  
National	  Resilience	  Institute	  (LEMHANAS)	  in	  2003.
Dr.	   Sukhyar	   currently	   holds	   the	   post	   of	   General	   Director	   of	   Mineral	   and	   Coal	   of	   the	   Ministry	   of	   Energy	   and	   Mineral	  
Resources	   of	   the	   Republic	   of	   Indonesia	   (MEMR)	   and	   previously	   held	   the	   post	   of	   the	   Head	   of	   the	   Geological	   Agency	   of	  
MEMR	  (2008-­‐2013).
Mr.	  Ghassan	  Zok
Mr.	   Zok	   brings	   over	   31	   years	   of	   extensive	   management	   experience	   in	   the	   pharmaceutical	   industry	   at	   world	   class	  
companies;	  Sandoz	  and	  Novartis	  (merger	  of	  Sandoz	  and	  Ciba-­‐Geigy)	  where	  he	  served	  as	  Chief	  Executive	  Officer	  for	  Sandoz	  
Pharmaceuticals	  in	  South	  Africa,	  followed	  by	  Managing	  Director	  for	  Sandoz	  Pharmaceuticals	  in	  Greece,	  followed	  by	  Chief	  
Executive	  Officer	  for	  Sandoz	  Pharmaceuticals	  in	  Belgium	  and	  finally	  Country	  President	  for	  Novartis	  in	  Belgium.
Mr.	   Zok	   received	   his	   Bachelor	   of	   Science	   degree	   in	   Civil	   Engineering	   in	   1966	   from	   the	   American	   University	   of	   Beirut	   in	  
Lebanon.	   In	  	  1972,	   he	  	  graduated	   with	  	  an	   MBA	   from	  the	   European	   Institute	   of	   Business	  	  Administration	   (INSEAD)	  	  in	  
Fontainebleau,	  France.	  	  In	  1992,	  he	  attended	  the	  Columbia	  University	  Executive	  Programme	  in	  International	  Management	  
in	  New	  York,	  and	  in	  1999	  the	  Harvard	  University	  –	  Novartis	  Forum	  in	  Boston	  (MA),	  Luzern	  (CH)	  and	  Mumbai	  (IND).
Mr.	   Timothy	   Hargreaves
Mr.	   Hargreaves	   has	   40	   years’	   experience	   in	   international	   resource	   businesses	   in	   Asia,	   Australia,	   Europe	   and	   the	   Middle	  
East.	   His	   early	   career	   was	   in	   petroleum	   exploration,	   appraisal	   and	   business	   development	   with	   major	   companies	   such	   as	  
BHP,	  Union	  Texas,	  Fletcher	  Challenge	  and	  British	  Gas	  up	  to	  vice	  president	  and	  country	  manager	  levels.	  He	  then	  worked	  in	  
smaller	  entrepreneurial	  independents	  such	  as	  ROC	  Oil,	  Scimitar	  Hydrocarbons,	  Tethyan	  Copper	  Company	  and	  Orient	  &	  Gulf	  
Investments	   at	   levels	   up	   to	   CEO	   /	   Board.	   He	   has	   played	   significant	   roles	   in	   over	   25	   oil	   and	   gas	   discoveries	   that	   were	  
subsequently	  developed	  into	  producing	  fields.
65
Currently,	  Mr.	  Hargreaves	  is	  Director	  of	  Research	  for	  Resources	  for	  Republic	  Investment	  Management,	  a	  Singapore	  based	  
fund	  manager	  and	  is	  a	  non-­‐executive	  director	  of	  Elk	  Petroleum	  Limited	  (ASX:ELK)	  and	  formerly	  a	  non-­‐executive	  director	  of	  
the	  Environmental	  Group	  Limited	  (ASX:EGL).
Mr.	   Hargreaves	   trained	   as	   a	   geologist	   and	   reservoir	   engineer	   with	   an	   honours	   degree	   and	   post	   graduate	   diploma	   from	  
Sydney	   University.	   He	   is	   a	   member	   of	   the	   Australian	   Institute	   of	   Company	   Directors,	   American	   Association	   of	   Petroleum	  
Geologists,	  Geological	  Society	  of	  America,	  Society	  of	  Petroleum	  Engineers,	  Southeast	  Asian	  Petroleum	  Exploration	  Society,	  
and	  Petroleum	  Exploration	  Society	  of	  Australia.
7.6  Proposed	   Management	   and	   Employees	  
Following	   the	   Acquisition	   and	   as	   at	   Completion,	   the	   following	   management	   and	   employees	   will	   be	   	   involved	   	   in	   	   the	  
Company	  going	  forward.
Mr.	  Fergus	   Robson	  
Chief	   Commercial	   Officer
Mr.	  Robson	  is	   currently	   the	   Chief	  Commercial	   Officer	  of	  SPG,	  bringing	   experience	  in	   oil	  field	  operations,	  sales,	   financing,	  
regulation,	  contract	  negotiations	  and	  successful	  execution	  of	  corporate	  business	  plans.
As	   Chief	   Commercial	   Officer,	   Mr.	   Robson	   is	   responsible	   for	   SPG’s	   commercial	   strategy,	   economic	   evaluation	   of	   new	   and	  
existing	   projects,	   maximising	   revenue	   from	   product	   sales,	   ensuring	   that	   costs	   are	   controlled	   on	   operations	   as	   well	   as	  
working	  in	  conjunction	  with	  other	  senior	  members	  of	  staff	  on	  key	  corporate	  negotiations	  and	  activities.
Prior	  to	  his	  role	  as	  Chief	  Commercial	  Officer,	  Mr.	  Robson	  was	  employed	  with	  Tethys,	  initially	  as	  a	  Commercial	  Analyst	  in	  
which	  he	  conducted	  market	  research	  and	  analysis	  on	  oil	  and	  gas	  markets	  and	  transport	  in	  Central	  Asia,	  followed	  by	  taking	  
the	   Group	   Commercial	   Manager	   Position	   where	   he	   was	   responsible	   for	   the	   coordination	   of	   the	   commercial	   activities	   of	  
Tethys	   in	   Kazakhstan,	   Tethys	   Uzbekistan	   and	   Tethys	   Tajikistan.	   During	   this	   time	   Mr.	   Robson	   also	   held	   the	   title	   of	   Chief	  
Commercial	  Officer	  of	  Tethys	  Kazakhstan	  and	  Chief	  Commercial	  Officer	  Tethys	  Uzbekistan.	  In	  August	  2014,	  Mr.	  Robson	  was	  
promoted	  to	  the	  position	  of	  Vice	  President	  Commercial	  of	  Tethys.
Throughout	  his	  tenure	  at	  Tethys,	  Mr.	  Robson	  lead	  negotiations	  for	  the	  Chegara	  PEC	  in	  Uzbekistan,	  worked	  on	  the	  listing	  of	  
Tethys	  on	  the	  London	  Stock	  Exchange,	  the	  Afghanistan	  bidding	  round,	  negotiated	  the	  Georgian	  project	  farm-­‐in	  in	  2013	  and	  
worked	  on	  various	  debt	  and	  equity	  financing	  facilities,	  as	  well	  as	  sales	  contracts.
Mr.	   Robson	   holds	   a	   Joint	   Honours	   Master’s	   Degree	   in	   Politics	   and	   Central	   and	   Eastern	   European	   Studies	   from	   the	  
University	  of	  Glasgow	  and	  is	  a	  member	  of	  the	  Society	  of	  Petroleum	  Engineers.
Mr.	  Steve	  Elliott	  
Vice	   President	   Project	   Development
As	   Vice	   President	   Project	   Development	   of	   SPG,	   Mr.	   Elliott	   is	   responsible	   for	   the	   compilation	   of	   work	   programmes	   and	  
budgets	  for	  all	  drilling,	  workover,	  production	  and	  construction/fabrication	  activities.	  He	  is	  responsible	  for	  the	  supervision	  
and	   control	   of	   all	   work	   programmes	   and	   technical	   operations	   and	   for	   the	   procurement	   of	   all	   equipment	   and	   services	   in	  
relation	  to	  the	  work	  programmes.
Prior	  to	  joining	  SPG,	  Mr.	  Elliott	  had	  been	  with	  Tethys	  since	  April	  2009	  in	  various	  capacities,	  including	  General	  Director	  of	  
both	   Tethys	   Services	   Georgia	   Limited	   and	   Tethys	   Aral	   Gas	   Kazakhstan,	   and	   most	   recently	   as	   Vice	   President	   Project	  
Development	  for	  Tethys.	  Mr.	  Elliott	  was	  responsible	  for	  Tethys'	  activities	  at	  the	  project	  stage	  in	  all	  countries	  of	  operation	  
and	  has	  lived	  and	  worked	  in	  Kazakhstan,	  Tajikistan,	  Uzbekistan	  and	  Georgia.
Prior	  to	  Tethys,	  Mr.	  Elliott	  was	  employed	  with	  Baker	  Hughes,	  working	  in	  Uzbekistan,	  Eritrea	  and	  the	  North	  Sea.	  Mr.	  Elliott	  
was	  originally	  trained	  as	  a	  geologist	  but	  has	  spent	  most	  of	  his	  recent	  career	  working	  in	  project	  management,	  drilling	  and	  
production	   operations,	   and	   in	   the	   execution	   and	   coordination	   of	   integrated	   services	   contracts.	   Mr.	   Elliott	   holds	   a	   B.Sc.	  
(Hons)	  degree	  in	  Geography.
Mr.	   Rudolf	   Kriechbaum	  
Vice	   President	   Subsurface
Mr.	  Kriechbaum	  is	  the	  Vice	  President	  Sub-­‐Surface	  of	  SPG	  bringing	  28	  years	  of	  experience	  in	  the	  international	  oil	  and	  gas	  
service	   industry.	   He	   is	   responsible	   for	   the	   supervision	   of	   the	   sub-­‐surface	   team	   consisting	   of	   geoscience	   and	   reservoir	  
capabilities.
66
Mr.	  Kriechbaum	  delivers	  field	  development	  plans	  as	  well	  as	  production	  optimisation	  and	  enhancement	  programmes.	   He	  is	  
responsible	  for	  providing	  production	  forecasts	  and	  reserves	  for	  assets.
From	   2011	   to	   2015,	   Mr.	   Kriechbaum	   was	   a	   consultant	   for	   Tethys	   as	   a	   petrophysicist	   and	   was	   responsible	   for	   planning	  
formation	   evaluation,	   perforating,	   testing	   and	   completions,	   log	   interpretation,	   quality	   control	   at	   wellsite	   for	   critical	   jobs,	  
involvement	  in	  approval	  process	  of	  drilling/workover	  operations	  and	  various	  tendering	  exercises.
Prior	  to	  working	  for	  Tethys,	  Mr.	  Kriechbaum	  spent	  the	  bulk	  of	  his	  professional	  career	  with	  Schlumberger	  in	  various	  roles	  
worldwide	   including	   but	   not	   limited	   to:	   OFS	   Business	   Development/General	   Manager	   Eastern	   Europe,	   General	   Manager	  
Oilfield	   Services	   in	   Germany	   and	   Austria,	   Wireline	   Business	   Development	   Manager	   for	   Central	   &	   Eastern	   Europe	   and	  
Wireline	   Marketing	   Manager	   for	   Middle	   East	   &	   Asia.	   During	   his	   assignment	   in	   Eastern	   Europe	   he	   was	   involved	   in	   Field	  
Rejuvenation	  projects	  in	  Romania,	  applying	  new	  technologies	  to	  increase	  production	  of	  mature	  oil	  and	  gas	  fields.
Before	   Mr.	   Kriechbaum	   entered	   various	   management	   positions	   he	   worked	   as	   field	   engineer	   for	   Schlumberger	   in	   various	  
countries.	   Before	   joining	   Schlumberger,	   Mr.	   Kriechbaum	   held	   training	   positions	   with	   Shell	   and	   Texaco.	   Mr.	   Kriechbaum	  
holds	  a	  Masters	  Degree	  in	  Petroleum	  Engineering	  from	  the	  Mining	  University	  Leoben	  in	  Austria.
Mr.	   Mamuka	   Murjikneli	  
Vice	   President	   External	   Affairs
Mr.	  Murjikneli	  is	  Vice	  President	  External	  Affairs	  for	  SPG.	  He	  is	  responsible	  for	  the	  protection	  of	  SPG’s	  personnel,	  assets	  and	  
overall	   risk	   assessment	   and	   ensures	   that	   SPG’s	   operations	   are	   in	   compliance	   with	   the	   laws	   of	   the	   host	   country	   and	  
corporate	  policies	  as	  well	  as	  monitoring	  potential	  political	  and	  economic	  situations.
Previously,	   he	   held	   the	   role	   of	   Vice	   President	   External	   Affairs	   for	   Tethys	   for	   five	   years.	   Mr.	   Murjikneli	   served	   as	   Vice	  
President	  of	   Tethys	  Petroleum	   Incorporated	   and	   Head	   of	  the	   Tajikistan,	   Afghanistan	   and	   Turkmenistan	   Business	  Units	  as	  
well	  as	  the	  President	  of	  Tethys’	  subsidiary	  in	  Afghanistan.
Prior	  to	  working	  for	  Tethys,	  Mr.	  Murjikneli	  was	  the	  Manager	  External	  Affairs	  for	  CanArgo	  Energy	  Corporation.	  He	  also	  held	  
the	  position	  of	  Attaché	  and	  Senior	  Economic	  Counselor	  for	  the	  Georgian	  Embassy	  in	  the	  US,	  Mexico	  and	  Canada	  and	  was	  a	  
former	  Research	  Specialist	  for	  Ministry	  of	  Foreign	  Affairs	  of	  Georgia.
Mr.	   Murjikneli	   graduated	   with	   Honors	   from	   the	   Tbilisi	   Technical	   University,	   Georgia	   with	   a	   Master’s	   Degree	   in	  
International	  Economics.
Ms.	  Denise	  Lay	  
Chief	   Financial	   Officer
Ms.	   Lay	   is	   a	   Fellow	   of	   the	   Association	   of	   Chartered	   Certified	   Accountants	   (“FCCA”)	   and	   is	   a	   finance	   professional	   with	  
extensive	   experience	   heading	   up	   many	   international	   finance	   functions	   including	   companies	   operating	   in	   Russia	   and	  
Kazakhstan	  with	  experience	  which	  spans	  a	  number	  of	  different	  industries	  including	  oil	  and	  gas.	  She	  is	  responsible	  for	  the	  
overall	  management	  and	  control	  of	  SPG’s	  finance	  activities.
Ms.	   Lay	   qualified	   with	   a	   degree	   in	   Russian	   from	   the	   University	   of	   London	   School	   of	   Slavonic	   and	   East	   European	   Studies,	  
thereafter	  going	  on	  to	  qualify	  as	  an	  ACCA	  accountant	  with	  KPMG.	  She	  has	  held	  positions	  including	  that	  of	  Finance	  Director	  
for	  a	  number	  of	  companies	  including	  Gallaher	  Group	  PLC,	  NRG	  International	  Limited	  (Ricoh	  Group)	  and	  Tethys	  Petroleum	  
Limited.	  Her	  career	  has	  encompassed	  the	  preparation	  and	  presentation	  of	  ACCA	  courses	  to	  students	  across	  the	  fSU,	  when	  
working	  for	  ATC	  International.	  She	  has	  managed	  and	  developed	  local	  finance	  teams	  and	  worked	  with	  local	  tax	  authorities	  
and	  other	  local	  government	  bodies	  across	  diverse	  geographical	  areas	  including	  Kazakhstan	  and	  Russia.
Ms.	  Lay	  has	  both	  internal	  and	  external	  audit	  experience	  having	  worked	  for	  Chevron	  Corporation	  (internal	  audit)	  and	  with	  
KPMG	  (external	  audit).	  In	  her	  most	  recent	  role	  as	  Finance	  Director	  and	  Chief	  Financial	  Officer	  of	  Tethys,	  she	  was	  heavily	  
involved	   in	   the	   development	   of	   the	   Group’s	   finance	   function	   and	   internal	   control	   environment	   working	   closely	   with	  
auditors	  PwC	  and	  KPMG
Ms.	   Lay	   is	   fluent	   in	   Russian	   and	   fully	   conversant	   with	   Russian	   accounting	   systems	   as	   well	   as	   working	   with	   UK	   GAAP,	  
Canadian	  GAAP	  and	  IFRS.
67
7.7  Dividend	   Policy
The	   Shares	   issued	   pursuant	   to	   this	   Prospectus	   will	   rank	   equally	   for	   dividends	   with	   all	   Existing	   Shares	   from	   the	   date	   of	  
allotment.	  Investors	  should	  be	  aware	  that,	  given	  that	  the	  company	  is	  an	  oil	  and	  gas	  exploration	  and	  production	  venture,	  it	  
is	   unlikely	   that	   dividends	   will	   be	   paid	   in	   the	   short	   to	   medium	   term	   as	   surplus	   capital	   will	   be	   deployed	   in	   developing	   the	  
company’s	  assets	  and	  acquiring	  new	  assets.	  Payment	  of	  any	  dividend	  will	  be	  dependent	  upon	  many	  factors	  including	  the	  
success	  of	  the	  company's	  exploration	  and	  production	  programme	  and	  the	  future	  achievement	  of	  profitable	  operations.
7.8  Environment
SPG	   is	   committed	   to	   achieving	   a	   high	   standard	   of	   environmental	   performance	   and	   compliance	   with	   all	   environmental	  
legislation	   in	   the	   countries	   in	   which	   it	   operates	   as	   well	   as	   international	   oil	   and	   gas	   industry	   good	   practice.	   The	   Board	   is	  
responsible	  for	  the	  regular	  monitoring	  of	  environmental	  exposures	  and	  compliance	  with	  environmental	  regulations.
68
8. Oil and Gas Ii‘im ust ‘ Sector
vervi"
MM j“ q.
.. ) {it
1* 'F
1* "W3
»  ‘ w 7 '-~ 5 .4 ‘
I , r w  ‘-.’§-n:i
:qvjﬁi‘lﬂ -   ‘ ‘ 1 
w r a  ,


8. Oil	  and	  Gas	  Industry	  Sector	  Overview
The	   international	   oil	   and	   gas	   market	   is	   a	   highly	   competitive	   sphere	   with	   a	   large	   number	   of	   companies	   involved	   in	   the	  
exploration,	   production,	   transportation	   and	   sale	   of	   oil	   and	   gas.	   Oil	   and	   gas	   products	   are	   used	   in	   a	   wide	   range	   of	  
applications	  including:	  vehicle	  fuel,	  electricity,	  fertilizer,	  lubricants,	  plastics,	  synthetic	  fibers,	  dyes,	  biocides,	  perfumes	  and	  
many	  others.	  In	  2014	  the	  USA,	  Russia	  and	  Saudi	  Arabia	  were	  the	  world’s	  largest	  oil	  producers	  and	  the	  USA,	  Russia	  and	  Iran	  
were	  the	  largest	  gas	  producers.1
Demand	  for	  both	  oil	  and	  gas	  has	  increased	  significantly	  over	  the	  past	  20	  years;	  with	  global	  oil	  demand	  increasing	  between	  
1994	  and	  2014	  from	  68.2	  MMbbl/d	  to	  92.1	  MMbbl/d	  (25%),	  and	  global	  gas	  demand	  increasing	  from	  2,085	  BCM/y	  to	  3,393	  
BCM/y	  (39%).2	  	  	  In	  terms	  of	  oil	  production,	  between	  1994	  and	  2014,	  this	  increased	  from	  67.1	  MMbbl/d	  to	  88.7	  MMbbl/d	  
(24%)	  and	  in	  terms	  of	  gas	  production,	  this	  increased	  from	  2,085	  BCM/y	  to	  3,393	  BCM/y	  (39%)	  over	  the	  same	  period.3
Significant	   changes	   have	   occurred	   in	   the	   oil	   and	   gas	   markets	   over	   the	   past	   20	   years,	   for	   example	   changes	   in	   technology	  
(production,	  refining	  and	  consumption),	  changes	  in	  trade	  flows	  and	  changes	  in	  regional	  demand	  patterns.	  Increasingly,	  the	  
Asia	  Pacific	  region	  is	  becoming	  the	  key	  market	  for	  oil	  and	  gas	  –	  both	  in	  terms	  of	  absolute	  volumes	  and	  rate	  of	  growth.	  In	  
1994,	   the	   Organisation	   for	   Economic	   Cooperation	   and	   Development	   (the	   “OECD”)	   (minus	   Japan	   and	   South	   Korea)	  
represented	  53%	  of	  the	  total	  global	  consumption	  of	  oil,	  with	  Asia	  Pacific	  consuming	  only	  25%.
By	  2014,	  the	  OECD	  (minus	  Japan	  and	  South	  Korea)	  share	  of	  global	  oil	  consumption	  had	  fallen	  to	  41%	  whilst	  the	  Asia	  Pacific	  
region	  had	  increased	  to	  33%.	  In	  1994,	  the	  OECD	  represented	  51%	  of	  the	  total	  global	  consumption	  of	  gas,	  with	  Asia	  Pacific	  
consuming	  only	  10%.	  By	  2014,	  the	  OECD	  share	  of	  global	  gas	  consumption	  fell	  to	  41%,	  with	  Asia	  Pacific	  increasing	  to	  20%4.
In	  terms	  of	  absolute	  volumes	  consumed	  1994	  –	  2014,	  very	  significant	  growth	  has	  been	  seen	  in	  Asia	  Pacific	  markets	  both	  in	  
terms	   of	   oil,	   but	   more	   notably	   in	   terms	   of	   gas.	   South	   Korea’s	   gas	   demand	   increased	   by	   560%	   from	   8.5	   BCM/y	   to	   47.8	  
BCM/y,	  China’s	  gas	  demand	  increased	  by	  1,100%	  from	  16.6	  BCM/y	  to	  185.5	  BCM/y	  and	  Japan’s	  demand	  increased	  by	  185%	  
from	  60.3	  BCM/y	  to	  112.5	  BCM/y5.
As	  well	  as	  changing	  regional	  production	  and	  consumption	  patterns,	  the	  global	  oil	  and	  gas	  market	  has	  been	  subject	  to	  rapid	  
technological	  change,	  with	  the	  full	  commercialization	  of	  technologies	  such	  as	  Liquefied	  Natural	  Gas	  (“LNG”),	  Gas	  to	  Liquids	  
(“GTL”),	  	  hydraulic	  	  fracturing,	  	  horizontal	  	  drilling	  	  and	  	  ultra–deep	  	  offshore	  	  developments	  	  amongst	  	  others.6	  	   These	  new	  
technologies	   have	   allowed	   supply	   to	   continue	   growing	   despite	   the	   depletion	   of	   more	   conventional	  fields	   and	   productive	  
provinces.	  The	  US	  shale	  oil	  developments,	  occurring	  in	  the	  early	  part	  of	  the	  21st	   Century,	  have	  allowed	  the	  US	  to	  increase	  
both	  	   oil	  	   and	  	   gas	  	   production	  	   very	  	   significantly,	  	   decades	  	   after	  	   the	  	   country	  	   previously	  	   reached	  	   peak	  	   production.7
	  
Developments	  in	  LNG	  and	  GTL	  technologies	  have	  allowed	  previously	  stranded	  gas	  deposits,	  such	  as	  those	  located	  offshore	  
Australia	  to	  be	  developed	  and	  delivered	  to	  the	  market.
Technological	  and	  commercial	  advances	  in	  the	  LNG	  industry	  have	  significantly	  changed	  the	  global	  gas	  market	  over	  the	  past	  
20	  years	  and	  the	  market	  is	  becoming	  increasingly	  global,	  whereas	  it	  tended	  to	  be	  more	  regional	  previously8.	  The	  transport	  
of	  gas	  by	  ships	  has	  allowed	  gas	  to	  be	  transported	  long	  distances	  in	  contrast	  with	  traditional	  supply	  routes.
Gas	  from	  Qatar	  now	  supplies	  both	  the	  EU	  and	  China,9	   and	  a	  significant	  spot	  market	  has	  developed	  in	  the	  trading	  of	  LNG,	  
with	  benchmarks	  such	  as	  the	  Japan	  Korea	  Market	  (“JKM”)	  growing	  in	  usage.
The	  development	  of	  LNG	  however	  has	  not	  precluded	  the	  importance	  of	  pipeline	  gas	  supply,	  which	  tends	  to	  form	  the	  “base	  
load”	  for	  regions.	  Russian	  pipeline	  gas	  from	  western	  Siberia	  is	  of	  very	  high	  importance	  to	  the	  European	  market,	  supplying	  
c. 30%	  of	  the	  total	  market.10	  Gas	  from	  Central	  Asia	  and	  Burma	  (and,	  in	  the	  near	  future,	  Russia)	  will	  perform	  a	  similar	  role
for	  China11.	  Overall,	  the	  global	  pipeline	  gas	  export/import	  market	  is	  double	  the	  size	  of	  the	  LNG	  import/export	  market.12
1	  BP	  Statistical	  Review	  of	  World	  Energy	  2015	  
2	  BP	  Statistical	  Review	  of	  World	  Energy	  2005	  &	  2015	  
3	  BP	  Statistical	  Review	  of	  World	  Energy	  2005	  &	  2015	  
4	  BP	  Statistical	  Review	  of	  World	  Energy	  2005	  &	  2015	  
5	  BP	  Statistical	  Review	  of	  World	  Energy	  2005	  &	  2015	  
6	  Realizing	  the	  Potential	  of	  North	  America’s	  Abundant	  Natural	  Gas	  and	  Oil	  Resources,	  National	  Petroleum	  Council,	  2011	  
7	  BP	  Statistical	  Review	  of	  World	  Energy	  2005	  &	  2015	  
8	  Global	  Natural	  Gas	  Markets	  Overview,	  US	  Energy	  Information	  Administration	  (“EIA”),	  2014	  
9	  World	  LNG	  Report,	  International	  Gas	  Union,	  2014	  
10	  Russian	  Gas	  Imports	  to	  Europe	  and	  Security	  of	  Supply,	  Clingendael	  International	  Energy	  Programme,	  2013	  
11	  Sino	  Russian	  Oil	  &	  Gas	  Cooperation,	  Dr.	  Keun	  Wook	  Paik,	  2014	  
12	  BP	  Statistical	  Review	  of	  World	  Energy	  2015
70
In	  terms	  of	  oil	  pricing	  the	  international	  benchmark	  Brent	  crude	  oil	  has	  remained	  volatile	  since	  its	  inception	  in	  1986.	  Annual	  
percentage	  change	  in	  the	  price	  of	  Brent	  crude	  has	  averaged	  7.29%13,	  with	  falls	  of	  over	  40%	  and	  rises	  of	  over	  60%	  seen	  in	  
some	  years.14
The	  average	  annual	  inflation	  rate	  (1968	  –	  2014)	  for	  West	  Texas	  Intermediate	  (“WTI”),	  the	  US	  benchmark	  crude,	  was	  5.7%	  
per	  annum15.	  In	  2H	  2014,	  the	  Brent	  crude	  oil	  price	  fell	  significantly	  (from	  an	  average	  of	  USD99	  in	  2014	  to	  an	  average	   of	  
USD56.45	  1H	  201516)	  and	  in	  2H	  2015,	  the	  Brent	  crude	  price	  averaged	  USD46.90,	  for	  an	  average	  2015	  price	  of	  USD52.3217.	  
This	  fall,	  whilst	  severe,	  is	  not	  unprecedented	  in	  the	  history	  of	  oil	  pricing	  (both	  in	  real	  terms	  and	  nominal	  values)	  and	  the	  
Company	  believes	  the	  long-­‐term	  prospects	  for	  oil	  and	  gas	  demand	  remain	  strong,	  but	  the	  price	  will	  however	  continue	  to	  
be	  volatile.
In	  terms	  of	  gas	  pricing,	  with	  the	  exception	  of	  spot	  markets	  (mainly	  in	  the	  UK,	  EU	  and	  USA),	  and	  for	  a	  small	  percentage	  of	  
LNG	  contracts,	  the	  gas	  price	  remains	  tied	  to	  the	  oil	  price	  (as	  well	  as	  in	  some	  cases	  the	  heavy	  fuel	  oil,	  electricity	  and	  coal	  
prices)	  under	  long-­‐term	  index	  linked	  contracts	  (the	  majority	  of	  LNG	  is	  sold	  on	  long-­‐term	  index	  linked	  contracts18).	  Despite	  
the	   increasing	   usage	   of	   benchmarks	   such	   as	   the	   JKM	   in	   LNG	   pricing,	   gas	   pricing	   in	   the	   European,	   Asian	   Pacific	   and	   Latin	  
American	  markets	  remains	  very	  much	  a	  function	  of	  global	  oil	  prices.	  The	  exception	  to	  this	  being	  in	  the	  USA,	  where	  strong	  
domestic	  production	  as	  a	  result	  of	  technological	  advancement,	  and	  an	  extensive	  network	  of	  national	  gas	  pipelines,	  means	  
that	  the	  gas	  market	  is	  almost	  entirely	  delinked	  from	  the	  oil	  price.
The	   Company	   does	   not,	   at	   this	   time,	   plan	   to	   work	   in	   either	   the	   LNG	   or	   USA	   market	   and	   therefore	   expects	   that	   for	   the	  
foreseeable	  future,	  gas	  prices	  relevant	  to	  its	  projects	  will	  continue	  to	  be	  linked	  strongly	  to	  the	  oil	  price.
8.1	  	  	  	  	  Chinese	  Energy	  Market	  Background
SPG’s	   primary	   focus	   at	   the	   time	   of	   this	   Prospectus	   is	   to	   acquire	   and	   develop	   hydrocarbon	   assets	   in	   the	   fSU,	   with	   a	  
particular	  focus	  on	  those	  assets	  which	  have	  the	  long-­‐term	  potential	  to	  supply	  energy	  to	  the	  Chinese	  market.
China’s	  energy	  demand	  has	  been	  growing	  strongly	  since	  the	  early	  1990s,	  and	  the	  country	  has	  become	  the	  world’s	  largest	  
importer	  of	  oil.19	   Total	  primary	  energy	  demand	  has	  increased	  by	  366%	  from	  1994	  –	  2014	  with	  the	  majority	  of	  this	  overall	  
increase	  being	  in	  coal	  demand.20	  As	  of	  2015,	  China	  consumed	  23%	  of	  global	  energy.21	   Gas	  demand	  is	  increasing	  strongly	  in	  
China,	   and	   although	   it	   is	   still	   a	   minority	   portion	   of	   the	   energy	   mix	   at	   around	   5%,22	  China’s	   absolute	   demand	   for	   gas	   is	  
sizable,	  at	  185.5	  BCM/y	  in	  2014.23
Chinese	  (and	  Asia	  Pacific,	  in	  general)	  energy	  demand	  is	  forecast	  to	  increase	  significantly	  during	  2015	  –	  2040.	  OPEC	  estimate	  
that	   71%	   of	   the	   growth	   in	   world	   oil	   demand	   from	   2015	   –	   2040	   will	   come	   from	   Asia	   Pacific,	   with	   China	   representing	   the	  
majority	  of	  this	  growth.24
In	  terms	  of	  gas,	  mainstream	  forecasters25	   predict	  that	  the	  Chinese	  gas	  market	  will	  be	  larger	  by	  volume	  than	  that	  of	  the	  EU	  
by	  2020.	  BP	  predict	  that	  by	  2020,	  the	  Asia	  Pacific	  region’s	  gas	  imports	  will	  exceed	  those	  of	  Europe26,	  with	  net	  imports	  of	  
gas	  to	  China	  expected	  to	  be	  in	  the	  region	  of	  288	  BCM/y	  by	  2020.27	  Demand	  for	  gas	  in	  China	  rose	  21%	  per	  annum	  from	  2005	  
– 201328	  and	   the	   Academy	   of	   Chinese	   Energy	   Strategy	   predicts	   that	   overall	   Chinese	   gas	   demand	   will	   be	   550	   BCM/y	   by
2030.29
In	  terms	  of	  demand	  policy,	  the	  Chinese	  government	  has	  strongly	  emphasised	  the	  increase	  of	  gas	  in	  the	  overall	  energy	  mix.	  
The	  12th	  and	  13th	  ‘Five	  Year	  Plans’	  have	  set	  aggressive	  targets	  for	  gas	  utilisation,	  with	  an	  ambition	  to	  increase	  a	  gas	  share	  of
13	  EIA	  www.eia.gov	  
14	  EIA	  www.eia.gov	  
15	  EIA	  www.eia.gov	  
16	  EIA	  www.eia.gov	  
17	  EIA	  www.eia.gov	  
18	  Platts,	  published	  15	  September	  2014	  by	  McGraw	  Hill	  Financial	  
19	  BP	  Statistical	  Review	  of	  World	  Energy	  2015	  
20	  BP	  Statistical	  Review	  of	  World	  Energy	  1995	  &	  2015	  
21	  BP	  Statistical	  Review	  of	  World	  Energy	  2015:	  China	  Insights	  
22	  EIA	  www.eia.gov	  
23	  BP	  Statistical	  Review	  of	  World	  Energy	  2015	  
24	  World	  Oil	  Outlook,	  OPEC,	  2014	  
25	  BP,	  EIA,	  OPEC,	  CNPC,	  Wood	  Mackenzie.	  
26	  BP	  Energy	  Outlook	  2035,	  BP,	  2015	  
27	  CNPC	  Research	  Institute	  of	  Economics	  and	  Technology	  published	  8	  December	  2015	  
28	  CNPC	  Research	  Institute	  of	  Economics	  and	  Technology	  published	  8	  December	  2015	  
29	  Academy	  of	  Chinese	  Energy	  Strategy
71
the	  energy	  market	  from	  the	  current	  5%	  to	  20%.30	   Under	  the	  13th	   ‘Five	  Year	  Plan’,	  an	  additional	  68	  BCM/y	  will	  be	  required	  
just	  for	  electricity	  generation	  and	  even	  if	  the	  target	  for	  the	  residential	  usage	  of	  gas	  is	  met,	  only	  20%	  of	  the	  population	  will	  
be	  using	  natural	  gas	  in	  the	  residential	  environment.31
Chinese	  government	  policy	  is	  strongly	  focused	  upon	  increasing	  gas	  (and	  renewable	  energy)	  utilisation	  across	  the	  economy	  
and	  replacing	  the	  usage	  of	  coal.	  BP	  predicts	  that	  by	  2035,	  coal’s	  share	  of	  the	  market	  will	  have	  fallen	  from	  77%	  in	  2013	  to	  
51%	   by	   2035.32	  	  Away	   from	   government	   policy,	   residential	   consumers	   have	   a	   strong	   preference	   to	   utilise	   electricity	   or	  
natural	  gas	  as	  opposed	  to	  coal.33	   In	  terms	  of	  supply	  policy,	  the	  Chinese	  government	  has	  been	  very	  active	  in	  developing	  the	  
infrastructure	  required	  to	  import	  substantial	  volumes	  of	  natural	  gas.
30	  People’s	  Repbulic	  of	  China	  13th	   Five	  Year	  Plan	  
31	  People’s	  Republic	  of	  China	  13th	   Five	  Year	  Plan	  
32	  BP	  Energy	  Outlook	  to	  2035,	  BP,	  2015	  
33	  Internal	  SPG	  research
72
Fig	  1:	  Development	  of	  China’s	  Gas	  Pipeline	  Infrastructure:	  2000	  –	  2020
73
China’s	  internal	  gas	  pipeline	  network	  has	  grown	  rapidly	  over	  the	  past	  15	  years	  and	  is	  now	  estimated	  to	  consist	  of	  around	  
40,000	  km	  of	  internal	  gas	  pipelines.34	   As	  well	  as	  pipeline	  gas,	  there	  are	  several	  large	  LNG	  terminals	  located	  primarily	  in	  the	  
southern	  coastal	  regions	  of	  the	  country.
As	  natural	  gas	  supply	  is	  a	  critical	  part	  of	  China’s	  long-­‐term	  energy	  policy,	  the	  Chinese	  government	  (and,	  to	  a	  lesser	  extent,	  
private	   Chinese	   capital)	   has	   made	   significant	   investments	   in	   international	   pipeline	   infrastructure.	   The	   three	   Central	   Asian	  
pipelines	  (Line	  A,	  B	  and	  C;	  Turkmenistan,	  Uzbekistan,	  Kazakhstan)	  delivering	  gas	  to	  north-­‐western	  China	  were	  constructed	  	  
from	  2007	  –	  2012	  and	  are	  importing	  significant	  quantities	  of	  gas	  to	  China	  (around	  40	  BCM/y35).	  “Line	  D”	  (Turkmenistan,	  	  
Uzbekistan	  and	  Tajikistan)	  is	  under	  construction	  with	  a	  planned	  capacity	  of	  25	  BCM/y.
In	  addition,	  a	  pipeline	  from	  Burma	  opened	  in	  2013	  with	  a	  capacity	  of	  12	  BCM/y.	  In	  2014,	  China	  and	  Russia	  agreed	  on	  the	  
construction	  of	  the	  “Power	  of	  Siberia”	  gas	  pipeline	  from	  eastern	  Siberia	  to	  north	  east	  China,	  with	  an	  initial	  delivery	  capacity	  
of	  38	  BCM/y,	  to	  be	  expanded	  to	  up	   to	  68	  BCM/y.	  The	  Power	  of	  Siberia	  gas	  pipeline	  is	  scheduled	  for	  completion	  in	  2018.	  
The	  overall	  strategy	  is	  to	  secure	  pipeline	  gas	  import	  capacity	  to	  China	  to	  act	  as	  a	  “base	  load”	  for	  the	  economy’s	  energy	  	  
needs.36	  	  Pipeline	   gas	   sold	   on	   long-­‐term	   oil	   indexed	   contracts	   provides	   a	   stable	   and	   secure	   source	   of	   energy	   with	   a	  	  
competitive	  cost	  structure	  as	  opposed	  to	  LNG.
In	  terms	  of	  pipeline	  oil	  imports,	  China	  is	  supplied	  by	  the	  Kazakhstan-­‐China	  oil	  pipeline	  (capacity	  c.	  350,000	  bopd37)	  and	  the	  
East	  Siberia	  Pacific	  Ocean	  pipeline	  from	  Russia	  (capacity	  to	  China	  c.	  300,000	  bopd).	  Both	  pipelines	  have	  planned	  capacity	  
upgrades.
Regarding	  the	  regulation	  of	  the	  energy	  market,	  China	  is	  moving	  very	  quickly	  to	  liberalise	  the	  oil	  and	  gas	  sectors	  (as	  well	  as	  
the	  electricity	  sector)	  and	  to	  encourage	  a	  more	  competitive	  environment	  than	  had	  been	  seen	  previously.
The	   National	   Development	   and	   Reform	   Commission	   has	   a	   stated	   policy	   of	   reducing	   the	   influence	   of	   state	   monopolies	   in	  
the	  sector38	   and	  in	  2015,	  the	  oil	  import	  market	  was	  liberalized	  to	  allow	  private	  companies	  to	  import	  crude	  oil	  via	  pipeline.	  
It	  is	  expected	  that	  a	  similar	  move	  will	  be	  undertaken	  with	  respect	  to	  gas	  imports.
The	  SPG	  team	  strongly	  believes	  that	  the	  Chinese	  energy	  market	  continues	  to	  display	  attractive	  growth	  prospects	  as	  well	  as	  
offering	  competitive	  commercial	  conditions.	  It	  is	  the	  SPG	  team’s	  opinion	  that	  the	  growing	  Chinese	  gas	  market	  in	  particular	  
represents	  an	  excellent	  opportunity	  for	  the	  marketing	  and	  monetization	  of	  the	  company’s	  production.
9. Overview	  of	  Projects	  and	  Countries	  where	  Projects	  are	  Located
9.1  Tajikistan	  Background
The	   Republic	   of	   Tajikistan	   is	   located	   in	   Central	   Asia	   –	   bordering	   Uzbekistan	   to	   the	   west,	   Kyrgyzstan	   to	   the	   north,	  
Afghanistan	  to	  the	  south	  and	  China	  to	  the	  east.	  The	  capital	  of	  the	  country	  is	  Dushanbe.	  Tajikistan	  covers	  an	  area	  of	  143,100	  
km2	  and	  has	  a	  population	  of	  approximately	  8	  million.
The	  country	  is	  mountainous,	  with	  the	  Pamir	  Mountains	  prevalent	  across	  the	  entire	  east	  of	  the	  territory.	  In	  the	  west,	  deep	  
valleys	  run	  north	   to	  south	  providing	  high	   quality	  agricultural	  land	  and	   the	  fertile	  Fergana	  valley	   is	  located	  in	  the	  north	  of	  
the	  country.
The	   climate	   is	   moderate	   in	   the	   south	   and	   west	   of	   the	   country,	   ranging	   from	   0°C	   to	   40°C	   annually,	   and	   cooler	   in	   the	  
mountainous	  east,	  where	  snow	  is	  common	  in	  winter	  months.
Politically,	  the	  country	  is	  a	  bicameral	  presidential	  Republic	  with	  one	  Autonomous	  region	  (Gorno	  –	  Badakhshan)	  and	  having	  
existed	  since	  1991.	  The	  government	  is	  a	  multi-­‐party	  representative	  democracy.
Whilst	  oil	  has	  been	  produced	  from	  the	  Fergana	  basin	  since	  the	  early	  20th	   Century,	  the	  oil	  and	  gas	  industry	  in	  Tajikistan	  has	  
suffered	  from	  a	  severe	  lack	  of	  investment	  since	  the	  fall	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  in	  1991	  and	  a	  subsequent	  civil	  war	  which	  was	  
waged	  between	  1992	  and	  1997.	  As	  such,	  in	  the	  opinion	  of	  SPG,	  significant	  exploration	  upside	  still	  exists	  within	  Tajikistan.
34	  CNPC	  Research	  Institute	  of	  Economics	  and	  Technology	  published	  8	  December	  2015	  
35	  National	  Bureau	  of	  Statistics	  of	  China	  	  
36	  Sino	  Russian	  Oil	  &	  Gas	  Cooperation,	  Dr.	  Keun	  Wook	  Paik,	  2014	  	  
37	  CNPC	  Research	  Institute	  of	  Economics	  and	  Technology	  published	  8	  December	  2015	  
38	  Energy	  Regulation	  and	  Legislation	  in	  China,	  Qui	  &	  Li,	  2012
74
There	   is	   significant	   industry	   interest	   in	   the	   area,	   with	   state-­‐owned	   and	   independent	   majors,	   such	   as	   CNPC,	   TOTAL,	  
Gazprom	  and	  others	  either	  currently	  working	  there	  or	  showing	  an	  interest.
Traditionally,	   Tajikistan’s	   economy	   has	   relied	   on	   the	   production	   of	   aluminum	   and	   agricultural	   products,	   such	   as	   cotton.	  
However,	   with	   a	   more	   favourable	   investment	   environment	   for	   international	   oil	   and	   gas	   companies	   and	   the	   continued	  
improvement	   of	   the	   relevant	   legislation,	   there	   is	   great	   potential	   for	   the	   development	   of	   its	   energy	   industry,	   which	   has	  
been	  gaining	  momentum.	  This	  is	  likely	  to	  have	  a	  significant	  positive	  impact	  on	  the	  country’s	  economy	  and	  its	  people.
In	   terms	   of	   fiscal	   regime	   for	   subsoil	   projects,	   the	   Republic	   of	   Tajikistan	   operates	   two	   separate	   systems.	   The	   first	   is	   a	  
Production	  Sharing	   Contract	   or	  Investment	  Agreement	  system,	  with	   cost	  recovery	   oil	  and	   profit	  oil.	  Percentages	   and	   the	  
inclusion	  of	  other	  taxes	  such	  as	  royalties	  are	  negotiable.	  The	  second	  is	  a	  standard	  (i.e.	  non	  oil	  and	  gas	  specific)	  corporate	  
tax	  system,	  with	  profits	  from	  operations	  taxed	  at	  in	  line	  with	  standard	  Tajikistan	  corporate	  and	  taxation	  law,	  currently	  at	  a	  
rate	  of	  15%.
9.2  Tajikistan	   Projects	   Background
SPG’s	  team	  has	  spent	  many	  years	  working	  in	  Tajikistan,	  being	  some	  of	  the	  first	  international	  experts	  to	  do	  so.	  During	  Soviet	  
times	  there	  was	  little	  focus	  on	  oil	  and	  gas	  production	  in	  the	  country,	  with	  the	  economy	  being	  dominated	  by	  agriculture	  and	  
by	  aluminum	  production	  using	  hydropower.	  After	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  the	  country	  went	  through	  a	  period	  of	  
turmoil	   and	   a	   civil	   war,	   but	   over	   the	   past	   eight	   years	   or	   so	   there	   has	   been	   a	   renewed	   focus	   on	   the	   exploration	   for	   and	  
development	  of	  oil	  and	  gas,	  both	  for	  the	  internal	  market	  (where	  prices	  are	  relatively	  high)	  but	  also	  for	  possible	  export	  to	  
China.
Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk
SPG	  has	  entered	  into	  an	  Investment	  Operating	  Agreement	  ("IOA")	  for	  the	  Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	  (also	  known	  as	  the	  Surkhsimo)	  oil	  
and	  gas	  field	  in	  the	  Vaksh	  valley	  of	  south-­‐east	  Tajikistan	  in	  the	  western	  part	  of	  the	  Vakhsh	  megasyncline	  near	  the	  town	  of	  
Kurgan-­‐Tube.	   This	   is	   a	   producing	   oil	   and	   gas	   field	   which	   SPG	   believes	   has	   remaining	   potential	   for	   increasing	   oil	   and	   gas	  
production.
Under	  the	  terms	  of	   the	  IOA,	  SPG	   shall	  be	  responsible	   for	  all	  operations	   and	   operating	  expenses	   on	   the	  field	   and	   shall	  in	  
return	  receive	  a	  percentage	  of	  the	  oil	  and	  gas	  produced	  as	  a	  result	  of	  SPG’s	  activities	  (70%	  of	  production	  whilst	  recovering	  
costs	  and	  50%	  of	  production	  thereafter).	  A	  6%	  taxation	  royalty	  is	  applicable	  but	  this	  is	  a	  permitted	  cost	  for	  cost	  recovery	  
purposes.
SPG	  will	  be	  liable	  for	  corporate	  profit	  tax	  at	  15%	  and	  other	  minor	  taxes.	  SPG	  completed	  the	  Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	  Investment	  and	  
Operating	  Agreement	  in	  October	  2015	  and	  must	  commence	  works	  within	  12	  months.	  A	  first	  year	  initial	  work	  programme	  
has	  been	  developed	  and	  costed	  and	  works	  are	  expected	  to	  commence	  on	  the	  field	  in	  Q1	  2016	  (subject	  to	  the	  Offers	  being	  
completed).	   Initial	   works	   will	   include	   workovers	   and	   recompletions	   followed	   by	   drilling	   to	   target	   both	   oil	   and	   gas	  
production.
The	   other	   party	   to	   the	   IOA	   is	   the	   State	   oil	   and	   gas	   company,	   Naftugaz,	   overseen	   by	   the	   Ministry	   of	   Energy	   and	   Water	  
Resources.
The	  field,	  which	  is	  shallow	  at	  approximately	  650	  m,	  is	  connected	  by	  pipeline	  to	  the	  capital	  city	  Dushanbe	  which	  provides	  a	  
market	  for	  the	  gas	  at	  regionally	  high	  prices.	  Nearby	  oil	  refineries	  are	  available	  as	  off-­‐takers	  for	  the	  crude	  oil	  production.
To	  date,	  no	  revenue	  has	  been	  generated	  from	  the	  Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	  field	  for	  SPG.	  The	  field	  in	  Tajikistan	  (Kyzyl	  Tumshuk)	  is	  
already	  a	  commercially	  producing	  field	  (with	  3	  producing	  wells)	  and	  existing	  oil	  and	  gas	  export	  facilities	  to	  local	  markets,	  
however	  SPG	  shall	  only	  see	  the	  benefit	  of	  incremental	  production	  (refer	  Section	  10.1.3)	  following	  the	  implantation	  of	  more	  
advanced	  technologies	  and	  techniques	  following	  the	  Public	  Offer.	  The	  reserves	  are	  based	  on	  evaluation	  of	  the	  available	  data	  
and	   planned	   work	   programme.	   There	   is	   no	   requirement	   for	   specialised	   processing	   equipment	   and	   the	   wells	   will	   be	  
commercially	  produced	  using	  standard	  oilfield	  practices,	  in	  this	  case	  by	  the	  use	  of	  artificial	  lift	  (sucker	  rod	  pumps),	  these	  
pumps	  to	  be	  upgraded	  as	  part	  of	  SPG’s	  development	  programme.
In	   SPG’s	   opinion,	   the	   Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	   gas	   condensate	   field	   offers	   considerable	   additional	   potential:	   both	   in	   terms	   of	  
increasing	  gas	  production	  and	  via	  the	  efficient	  development	  of	  the	  oil	  rim.
75
Fig	  2:	  Location	  of	  the	  Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	  gas	  condensate	  field39
39	   IHS	  (2006)
76
East	   Supetau
In	  May	  2015,	  SPG	  signed	  an	  MOU	  with	  the	  Ministry	  of	  Energy	  and	  Water	  Resources	  of	  the	  Republic	  of	  Tajikistan	  for	  a	  highly	  
prospective	  exploration	  area	  in	  the	  north	  of	  the	  country,	  in	  the	  Ferghana	  valley.
This	   MOU	   grants	   SPG	   access	   to	   all	   available	   geological	   and	   geophysical	   data	   relating	   to	   this	   area,	   together	   with	   the	  
exclusive	  right	  to	  negotiate	  an	  Investment	  Agreement	  (a	  form	  of	  Production	  Sharing	  Contract)	  for	  all	  currently	  unlicensed	  
areas	  in	  the	  north	  of	  Tajikistan.
The	  Fergana	   basin	   is	   one	  of	  the	  longest-­‐established	   oil	  provinces	  of	   Central	  Asia.	  Almost	  every	   reservoir	   in	  the	   basin	   has	  
been	  proven	  to	  be	  hydrocarbon-­‐bearing,	  and	  by	  the	  end	  of	  1982	  had	  yielded	  some	  450	  million	  barrels	  of	  oil	  equivalent.40	  	  
However,	   to	   date,	   the	   region	   remains	   poorly	   explored	   and	   as	   such	   considerable	   exploration	   upside	   still	   exists.	   The	   USGS	  
estimates	  that	  over	  4	  billion	  barrels	  of	  oil	  and	  136	  BCM	  of	  gas	  remain	  to	  be	  produced	  from	  this	  basin.
After	  completing	  a	  detailed	   technical	   and	   economic	  review,	  SPG	  has	  decided	   to	  proceed	  with	  negotiations	  for	  a	   specific	  
area	  covered	  by	  this	  MOU,	  known	  as	  “East	  Supetau”.	  The	  intention	  is	  therefore	  to	  conclude	  an	  Investment	  Agreement	  for	  
this	  area	  within	  the	  12-­‐month	  exclusivity	  period.
9.3  Georgia	  Background
Georgia	   is	   an	   independent	   republic	   with	   a	   population	   of	   approximately	   5	   million.	   It	   is	   located	   in	   the	   Caucasus	   region	   of	  
Eurasia	  and	  borders	  Russia	  to	  the	  north,	  Turkey	  and	  Armenia	  to	  the	  south,	  Azerbaijan	  to	  the	  south/east	  and	  is	  bounded	  to	  
the	  west	  by	  the	  Black	  Sea.	  The	  country	  covers	  an	  area	  of	  69,700km2.
Georgia	   is	   mountainous,	   with	   the	   Greater	   and	   Lesser	   Caucasus	   Mountains	   in	   the	   north	   and	   south	   of	   the	   country	  
respectively.	  To	  the	  west,	  near	  the	  Black	  Sea,	  the	  country	  is	  primarily	  low-­‐lying	  marsh	  and	  swamps.	  The	  climate	  is	  primarily	  
of	  Mediterranean	  type,	  with	  a	  cooler,	  wetter,	  climate	  in	  the	  mountainous	  regions.
Politically,	  the	  country	  is	  a	  unitary	  semi–Presidential	  Republic	  and	  has	  existed	  since	  1991.	  Two	  break-­‐away	  regions	  exist	  in	  
Abkhazia	  and	  South	  Ossetia.	  The	  government	  is	  a	  multi–party	  representative	  democracy,	  with	  the	  President	  acting	  as	  the	  
head	  of	  state	  and	  a	  Prime	  Minister	  as	  head	  of	  government.
In	  terms	  of	  oil	  and	  gas	  development,	  Georgia	  has	  a	  long	  history	  and	  significant	  potential	  for	  future	  development.	  Surface	  
oil	  seeps	  in	  Georgia	  have	  been	  exploited	  since	  ancient	  times.41
Oil	  drilling	  in	  Georgia	  commenced	  in	  1869	  and	  has	  continued	  ever	  since	  with	  only	  brief	  respites	  during	  the	  First	  and	  Second	  
World	   Wars.	   The	   most	   significant	   oil	   discovery	   in	   Georgia	   was	   undoubtedly	   the	   Samgori-­‐Patardzeuli	   Field,	   where	  
exploration	   drilling	   commenced	   in	   1967.	   The	   first	   commercial	   well,	   No.7	   flowed	   7,000	   bopd	   and	   to	   date	   over	   200	   wells	  
have	  been	  drilled	  on	  the	  structure	  and	  172	  MMbbl	  of	  oil	  have	  been	  recovered,	  with	  peak	  production	  reaching	  some	  70,000	  
bopd.42	  	  The	   development	   of	   the	   Samgori-­‐Patardzeuli	   field	   and	   others	   facilitated	   the	   creation	   of	   a	   knowledgeable	   and	  	  
experienced	  technical	  oilfield	  workforce	  in	  Georgia,	  which	  persists	  to	  this	  day.
Georgia’s	   economy	   is	   diverse	   with	   its	   main	   industries	   including	   agricultural	   products,	   manufacturing,	   mining,	   and	   metals.	  
However,	  the	  presence	  of	  significant	  potential	  conventional	  and	  shale	  oil	  has	  remained	  underexploited.	  With	  this	  in	  mind,	  
the	  government	  of	  Georgia	  has	  taken	  a	  proactive	  business	  stance	  in	  actively	  welcoming	  foreign	  investment	  into	  the	  oil	  and	  
gas	  sector.	  Production	  Sharing	  Contracts	  with	  good	  fiscal	  terms	  are	  the	  norm	  for	  petroleum	  exploration	  companies	  and	  are	  
regarded	  as	  positive	  for	  the	  investor.
Overall,	  Georgia	  is	  considered	  stable	  with	  a	  transparent	  business	  environment	  and	   is	  ranked	  15th	   (out	  of	  189	   economies)	  
and	  1st	  in	  Eastern	  Europe	  and	  Central	  Asia	  on	  the	  ease	  of	  doing	  business	  by	  the	  World	  Bank’s	  “Doing	  Business”	  index.
Georgia	  recently	  signed	  an	  Association	  Agreement	  regarding	  the	  Deep	  and	  Comprehensive	  Free	  Trade	  Area	  (“DCFTA”)	  with	  
the	  EU.	  This	  preferential	  trade	  regime	  will	  closely	  integrate	  the	  Georgian	  economy	  with	  the	  EU	  and	  provide	  more	  economic	  
opportunities	  by	  opening	  the	  EU	  market	  further	  to	  Georgian	  goods	  and	  services.	  It	  is	  also	  likely	  to	  attract	  additional	  foreign	  
investment	  to	  Georgia.43
40	  Oil	  and	  Gas	  Reserves	  of	  the	  Fergana	  Basin,	  EIA	  January	  1995	  
41	  History	  of	  Petroleum	  Geology	  in	  Georgia,	  Nibladzi	  &	  Janiashvili	  2014	  
42	  History	  of	  Petroleum	  Geology	  in	  Georgia,	  Nibladzi	  &	  Janiashvili	  2014	  	  
43	  European	  Commission	  Directorate-­‐General	  for	  Trade	  (Georgia)
77
9.4  Georgia	   Projects	   Background
In	  November	  2015,	  SPG	  signed	  an	  agreement	  (subject	  to	  completion	  of	  the	  Offers)	  with	  Georgia	  Oil	  and	  Gas	  (“GOG”)	  to	  
acquire	  a	  20%	  interest	  in	  Block	  XIG	  in	  the	  Republic	  of	  Georgia.
This	  agreement	  grants	  SPG	  a	  20%	  equity	  interest	  in	  the	  XIG	  PSC	  alongside	  GOG	  (who	  is	  the	  Operator	  and	  holds	  a	  60%	  equity	  
interest)	   and	   a	   Georgian	   Government	   funder	   (who	   holds	   a	   20%	   interest).	   The	   consideration	   for	   this	   transaction	   is	   USD2	  
million,	  including	  a	  contribution	  for	  previous	  geological	  exploration	  works	  and	  the	  drilling	  of	  the	  Kumisi	  #2	  exploration	  well.
The	  Georgian	  project	  comprises	  the	  further	  development	  of	  Exploration	  Block	  XIG.	   Block	  XIG	   is	  located	  on	  the	  outskirts	  of	  
Tbilisi,	  close	  to	  the	  producing	  oil	  fields	  of	  Samgori,	  Teleti	  and	  West	  Rustavi	  and	  on	  trend	  with	  the	  largest	  oil	  discovery	  in	  
Georgia	  (Samgori-­‐Patardzeuli).
Fiscal	  terms	  are	  good	  and	  the	  PSC	  is	  in	  existence	  until	  2036.	  The	  cost	  recovery	  ceiling	  is	  50%	  with	  profit	  oil	  and	  gas	  of	  40%.	  
No	  other	  taxes,	  duties	  or	  fees	  are	  applicable.
Oil	   and	   gas	   commercialisation	   options	   are	   plentiful,	   with	   two	   trunk	   oil	   pipelines	   (Baku-­‐Tbilisi-­‐Cheyhan	   and	   Baku-­‐Supsa)	  
located	  in	  proximity	  to	  the	  XIG	  block,	  as	  well	  as	  a	  major	  railway;	  and	  a	  trunk	  gas	  pipeline	  to	  Turkey	  as	  well	  as	  a	  buoyant	  gas	  
market	  in	  the	  nearby	  city	  of	  Tbilisi.
SPG	  personnel	  have	  significant	  experience	  in	  oil	  and	  gas	  operations	  in	  Georgia.
GOG,	  the	  majority	  owner	  and	  the	  operator	  of	  Block	  XIG,	  has	  completed	  a	  significant	  volume	  of	  exploration	  activity	  on	  the	  
block,	  having	  recently	  acquired	  a	  further	  135	  km	  of	  2D	  seismic	  and	  over	  500	  km2	  of	  aeromagnetic	  gravity	  survey	  over	  the	  
area,	  allowing	  the	  preparation	  of	  the	  drilling	  location	  for	  the	  first	  well	  (Kumisi	  #2)	  which	  is	  underway	  at	  this	  time.
In	  SPG’s	  opinion,	  Block	  XIG	  represents	  an	  attractive	  low	  cost	  acquisition	  with	  significant	  levels	  of	  exploration	  upside.
9.5  Russian	   Federation	   Background
The	  Russian	  Federation	  is	  the	  largest	  country	  in	  the	  world,	  covering	  an	  area	  of	  17,075,400	  km2.	  The	  country	  is	  a	  Federal	  
semi-­‐presidential	  Republic	  and	  has	  existed	  since	  1991.	  The	  country	  borders	  Europe	  to	  the	  west,	  Central	  Asia	  to	  the	  south,	  
China	  to	  the	  east	  and	  the	  Arctic	  to	  the	  north.
The	  Russian	  Federation	  spans	  9	  time	  zones	  and	  the	  population	  is	  multi-­‐ethnic.	  A	  wide	  variety	  of	  religions	  are	  practiced.	  The	  
official	  language	  is	  Russian	  with	  an	  additional	  35	  formally	  recognized	  languages.
Administratively,	   the	   country	   is	   organized	   on	   a	   Federal	   basis,	   85	   federal	   regions	   consisting	   of:	   46	   Oblasts	   (regions),	   22	  
Autonomous	   Republics,	   9	   Krais	   (territories),	   4	   Autonomous	   Okrugs	   (districts),	   1	   autonomous	   Oblast	   and	   3	   federal	   cities.	  
The	  federal	  regions	  are	  grouped	  into	  9	  federal	  districts.
Politically,	  the	  country	  is	  a	  bicameral	  semi–presidential	  federation,	  with	  the	  President	  as	  the	  Head	  of	  State	  and	  the	  Prime	  
Minister	  as	  the	  Head	  of	  Government.	  The	  country	  is	  a	  multi-­‐party	  representative	  democracy	  with	  legislative,	  executive	  and	  
judicial	  branches.	  The	  Russian	  Federation	  is	  recognized	  as	  the	  successor	  state	  to	  the	  USSR.	  The	  capital	  city	  is	  Moscow.
Located	  on	  the	  Eurasian	  plain,	  Russia	  is	  richly	  endowed	  with	  oil	  and	  gas	  resources.	  The	  country	  has	  the	  world’s	  6th	   largest	  
oil	  reserves44	   and	  the	  world’s	  2nd	   largest	  natural	  gas	  reserves45.	  In	  terms	  of	  production,	  the	  Russian	  Federation	  is	  the	  3rd	  
largest	  oil	  producer	  in	  the	  world46	  and	  the	  2nd	  largest	  natural	  gas	  producer	  in	  the	  world.47
Russia’s	  abundant	  natural	  resources	  sector,	  specifically	  oil	  and	  natural	  gas,	  plays	  an	  essential	  role	  for	  the	  Russian	  economy	  
and	  to	  the	  global	  hydrocarbon	  supplies.	  Russia	  is	  a	  significant	  player	  in	  the	  export	  of	  crude	  oil,	  natural	  gas	  and	  petroleum	  
products	  and	  the	  country’s	  oil	  and	  gas	  activities	  make	  up	  a	  large	  portion	  of	  the	  federal	  budget.48
44	  BP	  Statistical	  Review	  of	  World	  Energy,	  2015,	  pp.	  6	  
45	  BP	  Statistical	  Review	  of	  World	  Energy,	  2015,	  pp.	  20	  
46	  BP	  Statistical	  Review	  of	  World	  Energy,	  2015,	  pp.	  8	  
47	  BP	  Statistical	  Review	  of	  World	  Energy,	  2015,	  pp.	  22	  
48	  EIA	  -­‐	  Independent	  Statistics	  and	  Analysis
78
Russia	  contains	  many	  major,	  productive	  sedimentary	  basins	  as	  well	  as	  unexplored	  sedimentary	  basins.	  The	  majority	  of	  the	  
current	  productive	  hydrocarbon	  provinces	  in	  the	  country	  were	  discovered	  and	  developed	  during	  the	  Soviet	  period.49
The	   government	   of	   the	   Russian	   Federation	   actively	   promotes	   the	   development	   of	   its	   oil	   and	   gas	   resources,	   with	   a	   well-­‐	  
developed	  fiscal,	  legal	  and	  operational	  framework	  and	  the	  country	  benefits	  from	  the	  presence	  of	  oil	  and	  gas	  transport	  and	  
processing	  infrastructure	  as	  well	  as	  a	  proliferation	  of	  oil	  field	  services	  and	  professional	  specialists.
In	  terms	  of	  fiscal	  regime	  for	  subsoil	  projects,	  the	  Russian	  Federation	  operates	  a	  tax/royalty	  license	  regime	  with	  the	  primary	  
taxes	   being:	   Mineral	   Extraction	   Tax	   (a	   royalty	   on	   production	   payable	   in	   Russian	   Rubles),	   an	   Export	   Duty	   (a	   royalty	   on	  
exported	  oil	  or	  gas	  payable	  in	  USD	  and	  linked	  to	  the	  Urals	  oil	  price	  for	  oil	  and	  a	  flat	  percentage	  rate	  for	  gas),	  Property	  Tax,	  
Corporate	  Income	  Tax	  and	  VAT	  are	  also	  levied	  on	  projects.	  Certain	  projects	  (such	  as	  those	  located	  in	  east	  Siberia	  or	  those	  
that	  are	  technically	  challenging),	  are	  eligible	  for	  tax	  exemptions,	  tax	  holidays	  and	  other	  such	  incentives.
9.6  Sakha	   (Yakutia)	   Republic	   Background
The	  Taas-­‐Yuriakh	  Project	  and	  other	  proposed	  East	  Siberian	  projects	  are	  located	  in	  the	  Sakha	  (Yakutia)	  Republic	  in	  Eastern	  
Siberia.	  The	  Sakha	  (Yakutia)	  Republic	  is	  an	  Autonomous	  Republic	  of	  the	  Russian	  Federation	  covering	  an	  area	  of	  3,083,523	  
km2.
The	  Sakha	  Republic	  is	  the	  largest	  Autonomous	  Republic	  within	  the	  Russian	  Federation	  and	  is	  larger	  in	  area	  than	  Argentina	  
and	  only	  slightly	  smaller	  than	  India.	  The	  population	  of	  the	  Sakha	  (Yakutia)	  Republic	  is	  958,952.
Politically,	   the	   Sakha	   (Yakutia)	   Republic	   operates	   under	   a	   unicameral	   system,	   with	   an	   executive	   lead	   by	   the	   Head	   of	   the	  
Republic	  (currently	  Yegor	  Borisov).
The	   Sakha	   (Yakutia)	   Republic	   is	   a	   large,	   continental	   area,	   primarily	   flat	   (but	   with	   a	   mountain	   range	   running	   through	   the	  
centre	   of	   the	   Republic).	   The	   major	   river	   is	   the	   Lena,	   running	   from	   south	   to	   north	   of	   the	   Republic,	   ending	   in	   the	   Arctic	  
Ocean.	  The	  Republic	  is	  known	  for	  its	  extreme	  climatic	  range,	  with	  summer	  temperatures	  in	  the	  region	  of	  30	  -­‐	  40°C	  and	  
winter	  temperatures	  frequently	  lower	  than	  -­‐50°C50.
Ethnically,	   the	   Sakha	   (Yakutia)	   Republic	   contains	   126	   recognized	   nationalities	   with	   Yakuts	   (45.5%),	   Russians	   (41.2%),	  
Ukrainians	  (3.6%),	  Evenks	  (1.9%)	  and	  the	  Evens	  (1.2%)	  representing	  the	  majority	  of	  such	  nationalities.51
The	   Taas-­‐Yuriakh	   Project	   is	   located	   in	   the	   Lensk	   district	   in	   the	   south	   west	   of	   the	   Republic.	   The	   natural	   vegetation	   is	  
primarily	  Taiga	  (swampy,	  coniferous	  forest),	  with	  high	  temperatures	  in	  the	  summer	  (+35oC)	  and	  very	  low	  temperatures	  (-­‐	  
40o	  C)	  in	  the	  winter.	  The	  other	  proposed	  projects	  are	  located	  in	  the	  same	  overall	  geographical	  region	  as	  the	  Taas-­‐Yuriakh	  
Project.
Economically,	   the	   Sahka	   (Yakutia)	   Republic	   is	   dependent	   on	   industry	   (primarily	   extractive)	   and	   is	   endowed	   with	   oil,	   gas,	  
gold,	  diamond,	  silver,	  tin,	  tungsten	  and	  uranium	  resources.	  Extractive	  industries	  made	  up	  over	  70%	  of	  the	  Republic’s	  GDP	  
in	  2011.52	  The	  Republic	  is	  Russia’s	  main	  source	  of	  diamonds.
In	  terms	  	  of	  	  oil	  	  and	  	  gas	  	  extraction,	  	  the	  	  Sakha	  	  Republic	  	  contains	  	  several	  	  very	  	  large	  	  fields,	  	  including	  	  Chayandinskoye	  
(Gazprom)	  and	  Srednebotuobinskoye	  (Rosneft/BP)	  amongst	  others.	  Oil	  and	  gas	  was	  discovered	  in	  the	  Republic	  in	  the	  1970s	  
but	  commercial	  exploitation	  did	  not	  occur	  until	  the	  21st	  Century.	  Fiscal	  incentives	  are	  available	  for	  subsoil	  license	  holders	  
operating	  in	  the	  Sakha	  (Yakutia)	  Republic.	  The	  Capital	  of	  the	  Sakha	  (Yakutia)	  Republic	  is	  Yakutsk.
49	  Corporate	  Governance	  in	  Russia:	  The	  Russian	  Oil	  Industry,	  pp.	  329	  
50	  Encyclopedia	  Britannica	  
51:	  Investment	  Handbook,	  Government	  of	  Sakha	  (Yakutia)	  Republic	  
52	  Investment	  Handbook,	  Government	  of	  Sakha	  (Yakutia)	  Republic
79
Fig	  3:	  Sakha	  (Yakutia)	  Republic	  -­‐	  Map
9.7  Taas-­‐Yuriakh	   Project	  and	   Other	  Projects	  in	  East	  Siberia	   Background
SPG	   holds	   several	   MOUs,	   cooperation	   agreements	   and	   other	   such	   declarations	   of	   intent	   for	   projects	   in	   Eastern	   Siberia,	  
specifically	  in	  the	  Republic	  of	  Sakha	  (Yakutia).
The	  most	  notable	  of	  these	  is	  the	  Heads	  of	  Agreement	  with	  Rosneft	  for	  SPG	  to	  acquire	  an	  interest	  of	  between	  10%	  and	  29%	  
in	  the	  supergiant	  Srednebotuobinskoye	  field	  (referred	  to	  above	  as	  the	  “Taas-­‐Yuriakh	  Project”).
The	   Taas-­‐Yuriakh	   Project	   relates	   to	   two	   subsoil	   use	   licenses	   (issued	   2002	   and	   2007),	   covering	   the	   majority	   of	   the	  
Srednebotuobinskoye	  oil	  and	  gas	  field.	  Rosneft	  acquired	  100%	  ownership	  of	  these	  licenses	  through	  a	  series	  of	  transactions	  
in	  2013.	  BP	  acquired	  a	  20%	  stake	  in	  the	  project	  in	  2015.
Srednebotuobinskoye	  is	  a	  major	  oil	  and	  gas	  field,	  currently	  the	  4th	   largest	  field	  in	  East	  Siberia,	  and	  plateau	  production	  of	  5	  
million	  tons	  per	  annum	  (c.	  100,000	  bopd)	  is	  planned.	  It	  is	  anticipated	  that	  the	  field	  will	  also	  become	  a	  major	  gas	  producer.	  
Currently,	  the	  field	  is	  producing	  approximately	  20,000	  bopd	  and	  this	  oil	  is	  being	  exported	  to	  international	  markets.
SPG	   aims	   to	   complete	   the	   acquisition	   of	   this	   project	   through	   a	   consortium	   with	   a	   Chinese	   state	   owned	   enterprise,	   with	  
whom	  SPG	  has	  a	  cooperation	  agreement	  relating	  to	  the	  Taas-­‐Yuriakh	  Project.
In	  terms	   of	  fiscal	  regime,	  the	  Taas-­‐Yuriakh	  Project	   is	  subject	   to	  standard	   Russian	   tax/royalty	  terms,	  with	   the	  major	   taxes	  
being	  a	  Mineral	  Extraction	  Tax	  (a	  royalty,	  payable	  in	  Russian	  Roubles)	  and	  an	  Export	  Tax	  (a	  tax	  levied	  on	  the	  export	  of	  oil	  
and	  gas).	  The	  project	  benefits	  from	  several	  tax	  exemptions/reductions	  including	  a	  reduction	  in	  MET	  on	  oil	  until	  2022	  (on	  
gas	  until	  2033)	  and	  a	  reduced	  rate	  of	  corporation	  tax.
The	  Taas-­‐Yuriakh	  Project	  is	  exceptionally	  well	  located	  to	  supply	  energy	  to	  East	  Asia.	  The	  East	  Siberian	  oil	  and	  gas	  basin	  is	  at	  
the	   early	   stage	   of	   development	   and	   it	   is	   SPG’s	   view	   that	   it	   will	   become	   one	   of	   Asia’s	   primary	   energy	   sources.	   In	   2014,	  
Rosneft	   exported	   more	   oil	   to	   China	   than	   did	   Saudi	   Arabia.	   The	   East	   Siberia	   –	   Pacific	   Ocean	   (“ESPO”)	   oil	   pipeline	   is	  
constructed	  and	  operational,	  transporting	  oil	  to	  Vladivostok	  on	  the	  Pacific	  coast,	  as	  well	  as	  via	  a	  spur	  directly	  to	  China.	  The	  
Power	   of	   Siberia	   gas	   pipeline	   is	   under	   construction	   and	   will	   transport	   gas	   directly	   to	   China.	   The	   Taas-­‐Yuryakh	   project	   is	  
located	  c.180	  km	  from	  both	  of	  these	  trunk	  pipelines	  (stage	  1	  tie	  in	  to	  ESPO	  already	  constructed	  and	  operational).
SPG	  and	  Proposed	  Executive	  Directors	  believe	  that	  the	  acquisition	  of	  an	  interest	  in	  the	  Taas-­‐Yuriakh	  Project	  represents	  an	  
extremely	  attractive	  initial	  acquisition	  and	  that	  the	  strategic	  implications	  of	  an	  Eastern	  Siberian	  venture	  have	  not	  yet	  been	  
fully	  grasped	  by	  upstream	  oil	  and	  gas	  participants	  which	  may	  give	  the	  Company	  significant	  first	  mover	  advantages.
80
Fig	   4:	   Srednebotuobinskoye	   Field	   (“Taas-­‐Yuriakh	   Project”)	   Location	   Map
Srednebotuobinskoye
In	  addition	  to	  the	  Taas-­‐Yuriakh	  Project	  acquisition,	  SPG	  has	  several	  MOUs	  to	  negotiate	  in	  order	  to	  acquire	  interests	  in	  other	  
oil	  and	  gas	  condensate	  fields	  in	  Eastern	  Siberia,	  including:
•
•
An	  MOU	  with	  the	  Sakha	  (Yakutia)	  State	  oil	  and	  gas	  company	  OAO	  Sakhatransneftegaz	  was	  signed	  in	  June	  2015.
This	   MOU	   concerns	   the	   Otradninskoye	   Gas	   Condensate	   Field,	   a	   field	   located	   to	   the	   east	   of	   the	   Taas-­‐Yuriakh
Project	  and	  in	  proximity	  to	  both	  the	  ESPO	  pipeline	  and	  the	  Power	  of	  Siberia	  pipeline.	  The	  Otradninskoye	  field	  has
tested	  gas.
SPG	  also	  has	  an	  MOU	  with	  local	  company	  OJSC	  Tuymaada	  Neft	  for	  exploration	  blocks	  located	  near	  to	  existing	  and
planned	  pipeline	  infrastructure	  and	  may	  consider	  other	  projects	  in	  the	  Sakha	  (Yakutia)	  Republic.
81
Fig	  5:	  Sakha	  (Yakutia)	  Projects	  Location	  Map53
53	  SPG	  Map
10. Overview	  of	  Specific	  Projects
10.1  Tajikistan	  Projects
10.1.1 General	   and	   Licensing
The	  Republic	  of	  Tajikistan	  operates	  a	  Production	  Sharing	  Contract	  or	  Investment	  Agreement	  system	  with	  cost	  recovery	  oil	  
and	  profit	  oil.	  Percentages	  and	  the	  inclusion	  of	  other	  taxes	  such	  as	  royalties	  are	  negotiable.	  It	  also	  operates	  a	  corporate	  tax	  
system	   (not	   oil	   and	   gas	   specific),	   with	   profits	   from	   operations	   taxed	   at	   in	   line	   with	   standard	   Tajikistan	   corporate	   and	  
taxation	  law.
10.1.2 Location	  and	  Infrastructure
Infrastructure	   in	   the	   Republic	   of	   Tajikistan	   has	   improved	   significantly	   over	   the	   past	   five	   years,	   with	   a	   major	   (Chinese	  
funded)	   road	   building	   campaign	   and	   the	   (Asia	   Development	   Bank	   funded)	   construction	   of	   electricity	   export	   networks.	   A	  
major	  (25	  BCM/y)	  gas	  pipeline	  running	  from	  Turkmenistan	  through	  Uzbekistan	  and	  Tajikistan	  to	  China	  (“Line	  D”)	  is	  under	  
construction.	   An	   internal	   railway	   network	   with	   links	   to	   Kyrgyzstan	   and	   Uzbekistan	   (and	   China	   via	   	   Kazakhstan)	   	   is	   	   in	  
existence.	  A	  road,	  the	  “Pamir	  Highway”	  links	  Tajikistan	  to	  China	  via	  the	  Pamir	  Mountains	  in	  the	  east	  of	  the	  country.
In	  terms	  of	  oil,	  several	  small	  refineries	  exist	  in	  the	  country	  being	  both	  locally	  owned	  and	  Chinese	  owned.
10.1.3 Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	  Investment	  and	  Operating	  Agreement	  (“IOA”)
SPG’s	   major	   asset	   in	   the	   Republic	   of	   Tajikistan	   is	   the	   Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	   Field	   which	   is	   licensed	   to	   and	   owned	   by	   the	   State	  
company,	   Naftugaz.	   SPG	   currently	   holds	   an	   Investment	   and	   Operating	   Agreement	   for	   this	   field.	   Naftugaz	   remains	   the	  
owner	  of	  the	  license,	  but	  with	  SPG	  operating	  the	  field.
Under	   the	   terms	   of	   the	   IOA,	   SPG	   shall	   be	   responsible	   for	   all	   operations	   and	   operating	   expenses	   on	   the	   field	   and	   shall	  
receive	  a	  percentage	  of	  the	  incremental	  oil	  and	  gas	  produced	  as	  a	  result	  of	  SPG’s	  activities	  (70%	  whilst	  recovering	  costs	  and	  
50%	   thereafter).	   A	   6%	   taxation	   royalty	   is	   applicable,	   but	   this	   is	   permitted	   for	   cost	   recovery	   purposes.	   SPG	   will	   pay	   local	  
corporate	  profit	  taxes	  (15%)	  and	  other	  minimal	  fees.	  SPG	  entered	  into	  the	  Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	  IOA	  in	  October	  2015	  and	  must	  
commence	  works	  within	  12	  months.
Initial	   works	   will	   include	   workovers	   and	   recompletions	   followed	   by	   drilling	   to	   target	   both	   oil	   and	   gas	   production.	   SPG	  
expects	  to	  commence	  operations	  in	  Q1	  2016,	  subject	  to	  the	  Offers	  being	  successful.
The	   Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	   field	   is	   licensed	   to	   and	   owned	   by	   the	   State	   company	   Naftugaz.	   Naftugaz	   remains	   the	   owner	   of	   the	  
license	   but	   with	   SPG	   operating	   the	   field.	   As	   a	   state	   oil	   and	   gas	   company	   –	   being	   effectively	   part	   of	   the	   state	   –	   it	   is	   not	  
considered	  a	  risk	  that	  Naftugaz	  would	  have	  their	  licence	  removed,	  however	  in	  the	  event	  of	  political	  instability,	  change	  of	  
government	  policy,	  change	  of	  government,	  war,	  or	  civil	  disturbance,	  this	  may	  threaten	  the	  licence	  and	  the	  continuation	  of	  
SPG’s	  contract	  with	  Naftugaz.
Naftugaz,	  as	  a	  state	  company,	  has	  all	  rights	  to	  operations	  on	  the	  field	  and	  these	  rights	  also	  can	  be	  enjoyed	  by	  SPG	  under	  the	  
IOA.	  No	  further	  approvals	  are	  necessary	  except	  as	  in	  the	  event	  that	  as	  yet	  unplanned	  extensions	  to	  the	  field	  were	  to	  be	  
agreed	  which	  may	  impinge	  on	  private	  land	  thereby	  requiring	  negotiation	  with	  the	  landowner.	  At	  which	  point,	  an	  established	  
system	  exists	  in	  Tajikistan	  for	  such	  negotiations	  and	  approvals.	  The	  current	  intention	  of	  SPG	  is	  to	  work	  within	  the	  field	  limits	  
and	  as	  such,	  no	  other	  approvals	  are	  deemed	  necessary.
The	  IOA	  may	  be	  terminated	  if	  SPG	  does	  not	  meet	  its	  obligation	  to	  commence	  work	  on	  the	  field	  by	  27	  October	  2016	  (subject	  
to	  a	  three	  month	  grace	  period).	  SPG	  expects	  to	  commence	  operations	  in	  Q1	  2016,	  subject	  to	  the	  Offers	  being	  successful.
83
Under	  the	  terms	  of	  the	  IOA,	  any	  production	  from	  the	  wells	  under	  the	  IOA	  that	  is	  excess	  of	  the	  base	  production	  (being	  such	  
production	  made	  up	  of	  the	  actual	  production	  of	  the	  well	  as	  of	  the	  date	  of	  the	  initial	  work	  programme,	  taking	  into	  account	  an	  
estimate	  decline	  of	  the	  well’s	  production	  and	  the	  estimated	  year	  that	  the	  well	  would	  cease	  commercial	  production	  without	  
any	  further	  works	  being	  carried	  out)	  (i.e.	  “Incremental	  Production”)	  will	  be	  shared	  between	  SPG	  and	  Naftugaz	  as	  follows:
1.
SPG	   shall	   receive	   70%	   of	   the	   Incremental	   Production	   from	   such	   wells	   until	   such	   a	   time	   that	   its	   operating	   costs
associated	  with	  commercial	  production	  are	  recovered;	  and
2. where	  such	  costs	  referred	  to	  in	  point	  1,	  above,	  have	  been	  recovered,	  both	  SPG	  and	  Naftugaz,	  each	  in	  their	  own
right,	  shall	  receive	  50%	  of	  the	  Incremental	  Production.
Any	  production	  that	  is	  established	  by	  SPG	  from	  wells	  that	  were	  not	  producing	  at	  the	  date	  of	  the	  initial	  work	  programme	  
shall	  be	  shared	  between	  SPG	  and	  Naftugaz	  as	  follows:
1.
SPG	  shall	  receive	  70%	  of	  the	  production	  from	  such	  wells	  until	  such	  a	  time	  that	  its	  operating	  costs	  associated	  with
commercial	  production	  are	  recovered;	  and
2. where	  such	  costs	  referred	  to	  in	  the	  sub-­‐point,	  above,	  have	  been	  recovered,	  both	  SPG	  and	  Naftugaz,	  each	  in	  their
own	  right,	  shall	  receive	  50%	  of	  the	  production
Any	  production	  that	  is	  established	  by	  SPG	  from	  newly	  drilled	  wells	  shall	  be	  shared	  between	  SPG	  and	  Naftugaz	  as	  follows:
1.
SPG	  shall	  receive	  70%	  of	  the	  production	  from	  such	  wells	  until	  such	  a	  time	  that	  its	  operating	  costs	  associated	  with
commercial	  production	  are	  recovered;	  and
2. where	  such	  costs	  referred	  to	  in	  the	  sub-­‐point,	  above,	  have	  been	  recovered,	  both	  SPG	  and	  Naftugaz,	  each	  in	  their
own	  right,	  hall	  receive	  50%	  of	  the	  production.
Investors	  should	  be	  made	  aware	  that	  whilst	  the	  term	  of	  the	  IOA	  is	  fifteen	  years	  from	  the	  date	  of	  execution	  (October	  2015),	  
the	   licence	   is	   currently	   due	   for	   expiry	   on	   29	   July	   2017,	   subject	   to	   renewal.	   Given	   Naftugaz’s	   status	   as	   a	   state	   owned	  
resources	  company	  and	  the	  dealings	  of	  SPG	  to	  date	  with	  Naftugaz,	  the	  board	  of	  SPG	  is	  highly	  confident	  that	  the	  licence	  
under	   the	   IOA	   shall	   be	   renewed	   and	   does	   not	   view	   this	   as	   posing	   a	   genuine	   and	   substantial	   threat	   to	   the	   Company’s	  
operations	  in	  Tajikistan	  following	  the	  completion	  of	  the	  Public	  Offer.	  Nevertheless,	  investors	  should	  refer	  to	  Section	  4	  (Risk	  
Factors)	  where	  the	  risks	  posed	  to	  organisations	  operating	  in	  Central	  Asia	  and	  fSU	  are	  outlined,	  such	  as	  political	  instability,	  
war,	   change	   in	   government,	   or	   the	   inability	   to	   gain	   certain	   government	   licences	   or	   permits	   may	   affect	   the	   Company’s	  
operations.
10.1.4 East	  Supetau	  Investment	  Agreement
The	  East	  Supetau	  Investment	  Agreement	  (a	  form	  of	  PSC)	  is	  under	  negotiation	  between	  SPG	  and	  the	  Ministry	  of	  Energy	  and	  
Water	  Resources	  of	  the	  Republic	  of	  Tajikistan.	  SPG	  currently	  holds	  an	  MOU	  with	  the	  Ministry	  granting	  SPG	  exclusive	  rights	  to	  
negotiate	  for	  an	  Investment	  Agreement	  for	  all	  unlicensed	  portions	  of	  the	  Fergana	  valley,	  in	  the	  Soghd	  region	  of	  Northern	  
Tajikistan.	   After	   extensive	   technical	   and	   commercial	   analysis,	   SPG	   has	   decided	   that	   the	   East	   Supetau	   area	   is	   the	   optimal	  
location	  for	  exploration	  capital	  and	  will	  negotiate	  with	  the	  Ministry	  for	  an	  Investment	  Agreement	  for	  this	  area.
10.1.5 Regional	  Geology
Geologically,	  Tajikistan	  is	  mainly	  composed	  of	  high	  mountains	  such	  as	  the	  Pamirs,	  the	  Zarafshan,	  and	  Gissar	  mountains,	  but	  
with	   the	   fertile	   Fergana	   valley	   in	   the	   north	   and	   the	   Khatlon	   valleys	   in	   the	   south-­‐east.	   These	   valleys	   have	   associated	  
sedimentary	  basins	  with	  hydrocarbon	  deposits.
84
10.1.6 South	  Tajikistan	  Geology
The	  Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	  Field	  is	  in	  south-­‐west	  Tajikistan.	  The	  Afghan-­‐Tajik	  depression	  is	  located	  on	  a	  zone	  of	  intense	  negative	  
gravity	  anomalies.	  The	  thickness	  of	  the	  earth’s	  crust	  in	  the	  Afghan-­‐Tajik	  depression	  changes	  from	  45	  kilometres	  over	  most	  of	  
the	  depression	  to	  55	  to	  60	  kilometres	  along	  the	  eastern	  margin.
The	  Afghan-­‐Tajik	  depression	  is	  an	  area	  of	  deep	  down-­‐warping,	  whereby	  the	  basement	  is	  at	  a	  depth	  of	  10	  to	  15	  kilometres	  
or	  more	  as	  determined	  by	  geophysical	  methods.	  The	  basement	  cannot	  be	  mapped	  because	  of	  the	  extreme	  depth.	  Marginal	  
structural	  steppes,	  uplifted	   as	  much	  as	   3	  to	  8	   kilometres,	  surround	  the	  Afghan-­‐Tajik	  depression.	  The	  major	  steps	   include	  
the	  Dushanbe	  and	  Baysun	  steppes,	  and	  the	  North	  Afghan	  High.
Upper	  Cretaceous	  rocks	  are	  dominantly	  marine	  and	  grade	  eastward	  from	  carbonate	  into	  clastic	  rocks	  consisting	  of	  mostly	  
mudstone	  and	  siltstone	  in	  the	  central	  basin	  and	  coarser	  clastic	  rocks	  on	  the	  basin	  margins.	  Limestone	  and	  marl	  beds	  are	  
also	  present.	   Marine	  conditions	  continued	  through	  most	  of	  the	  Paleogene	  in	  the	  then	  combined	  Amu	  Darya	  and	  Afghan-­‐	  
Tajik	   Basin.	   The	   middle	   and	   upper	   Paleocene	   rocks	   (Bukhara	   Formation)	   is	   predominantly	   shallow-­‐water	   carbonates,	  
although	   some	   beds	   of	   clastic	   rocks	   and	   anhydrite	   are	   present.	   The	   proportion	   of	   clastic	   rocks	   increases	   northward	   and	  
northwestward,	  whereas	  anhydrite	  beds	  and	   anhydrite	  inclusions	  in	  other	  rock	  types	  are	  present	  mainly	  in	  the	  southern	  
areas.
The	  Afghan-­‐Tajik	   Basin	   and	   the	  Amu	   Darya	  Basin	   formed	   a	   single	   Mesozoic	  to	   Paleogene	   sedimentary	   basin	   that	   existed	  
until	  Neogene	  time.	  Collision	  of	  the	  Indian	  plate	  with	  the	  Eurasian	  plate	  at	  that	  time	  uplifted	  the	  southern	  portion	  of	  the	  
basin	   and	   divided	   the	   northern	   portion	   into	   the	   Amu	   Darya	   and	   Afghan-­‐Tajik	   Basins.	   Pre-­‐Neogene	   basin	   history	   and	  
stratigraphy	  of	  the	  Amu	  Darya	  and	  Afghan-­‐Tajik	  Basins	  are	  similar,	  consisting	  of	  a	  Paleozoic	  to	  Triassic	  basement	  complex,	  
Jurassic	  to	  Paleogene	  sedimentary	  cover,	  and	  Neogene	  to	  Holocene	  orogenic	  clastics.54
The	  USGS	  estimates	  that	  the	  estimated	  mean	  volumes	  of	  undiscovered,	  technically	  recoverable,	  conventional	  oil	  and	   gas	  
resources	  for	  the	  Afghan-­‐Tajik	  Basin	  Province	  are	  about	  946	  MMbbl	  of	  crude	  oil	  and	  200	  BCM	  of	  natural	  gas.55
10.1.7 Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	  Field	  Overview
The	   Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	   Field	   (alternatively	   known	   as	   the	   “Surkhsimo	   Field”)	   is	   located	   in	   the	   western	   part	   of	   the	   Vakhsh	  
megasyncline	  of	  the	  Afghan-­‐Tajik	  Basin,	  which	  is	  itself	  an	  extension	  of	  the	  prolific	  Amu-­‐Darya	  Basin	  of	  Turkmenistan	  and	  
Uzbekistan.	  The	  field	  was	  initially	  interpreted	  on	  seismic	  in	  the	  1940’s,	  with	  the	  first	  discovery	  well	  drilled	  in	  1959.
Four	  productive	  horizons	   have	  been	   identified	   within	  the	  structure	  –	  two	  in	   the	  Bukhara	  horizons	   of	  the	  Paleogene,	  and	  
two	  in	  the	  Seonian	  of	  the	  Upper	  Cretaceous.	  Potential	  also	  exists	  in	  the	  Lower	  Cretaceous	  Hauterivian	  section.
Between	  1959	  and	  1983	  a	  total	  of	  44	  wells	  have	  been	  drilled	  on	  the	  structure,	  although	  only	  three	  wells	  are	  currently	  on	  
production.	  Development	  of	  the	  Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	  field	  has	  been	  hampered	  initially	  by	  technological	  constraints	  (Soviet-­‐era	  
drilling	   and	   production	   technologies)	   and	   latterly	   by	   financial	   constraints	   following	   the	   break	   up	   of	   the	   former	   Soviet	  
Union.
It	  is	  the	  opinion	  of	  SPG’s	  technical	  team	  and	  the	  Proposed	  Executive	  Directors	  that	  significant	  reserves	  remain	  in	  the	  
previously	  drilled	  shallow	  reservoirs	  of	  the	  Paleogene	  and	  that	  there	  is	  additional	  potential	  in	  other	  reservoirs.
The	  Company	  plans	  a	  programme	  of	  well	  re-­‐entries,	  logging,	  perforation	  and	  new	  drilling	  to	  exploit	  the	  remaining	  reserves.
54	  Assessment	  of	  Undiscovered	  Technically	  Recoverable	  Conventional	  Petroleum	  Resources	  of	  Northern	  Afghanistan,	  USGS,	  (2006)	  
55	  Assessment	  of	  Undiscovered	  Oil	  and	  Gas	  Resources	  of	  the	  Amu-­‐Darya	  Basin	  and	  Afghan-­‐Tajik	  Basin	  Provinces,	  USGS	  Fact	  Sheet	  2011	  2012.
85
Previous	  experience	  by	  SPG’s	  team	  with	  similar	  fields	  elsewhere	  in	  the	  fSU	  drilled	  during	  the	  Soviet	  era	  indicates	  that	  the	  key	  to	  unlocking	  these	  previously	  untapped	  reserves	  may	  well	  be	  as	  
simple	   as	   re-­‐interpreting	   existing	   wireline	   data	   and	   locating	   previously	   unperforated	   productive	   horizons.	   An	   initial	   work	   programme	   has	   been	   developed	   for	   application	   on	   the	   field	   and,	  
subject	  to	  the	  Offers	  being	  successful,	  the	  work	  programme	  will	  commence	  in	  Q1	  2016.
Fig:	  6	  Structural	  Map	  of	  Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk
Fig	  7:	  Geological	  Cross-­‐Section	  of	  Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	  Field
86
Horizons	   I	   and	   II	   are	   Bukhara	   formation	   of	   the	   Paleogene	   and	   are	   the	   main	   producing	   horizons.	   This	   rock	   is	   a	   regional	  
shallow	   marine	   carbonate	   (limestone	   and	   dolomite,	   and	   interbeds	   of	   anhydrite)	   and	   is	   sealed	   by	   the	   overlying	   Suzak	  
marine	  mudstones.
The	  porosity	  of	  the	  Bukhara	  formation	  has	  a	  basin	  average	  value	  of	  ±15%,	  with	  200mD	  permeability	  (range:	  1.6-­‐1200mD).	  
The	   source	   rock	   is	   likely	   to	   be	   Upper	   Jurassic	   marine	   basinal	   shales.	   Horizon	   IV	   and	   V	   are	   Senonian	   layers	   of	   the	   Upper	  
Cretaceous.	   Previous	   drilling	   and	   production	   operations	   have	   proved	   that	   both	   oil	   and	   gas	   are	   present	   and	   it	   	   was	  
established	  that	  Horizons	  Ι	  and	  ΙΙ	  contain	  both	  oil	  and	  gas.	  The	  field	  is	  interpreted	  as	  a	  multi-­‐horizon	  oil	  field	  with	  a	  gas	  cap.
The	  first	  oil	  flow	  was	  tested	  in	  1949	  in	  Well	  #2	  of	  Bukhara	  formation.	  Total	  production	  from	  this	  well	  amounted	  to	  18,800	  
barrels	   of	   oil.	   An	   additional	   19,160	   barrels	   of	   oil	   was	   produced	   from	   Well	   #17	   in	   1953	   –	   1957.	   Pilot	   production	   from	  
Horizon	  Ι	  in	  Well	  #21	  commenced	  in	  1959	  with	  initial	  daily	  rate	  of	  698	  bopd.	  Between	  1957	  and	  1983,	  a	  total	  of	  44	  wells	  
were	  drilled	  on	  the	  field.	  The	  first	  gas	  production	  was	  from	  horizon	  V	  within	  Senonian	  layers	  of	  the	  Upper	  Cretaceous.
No	   modern	   stimulation,	   workover,	   pumping	   or	   similar	   methods	   have	   been	   applied,	   nor	   have	   methods	   to	   ascertain	  
hydrocarbon	  potential	  in	  untested	  or	  partly	  swept	  zones.	  Given	  this,	  SPG	  believes	  that	  utilising	  such	  techniques	  will	  result	  
in	   meaningful	   additional	   production.	   Between	   1964	   and	   2013,	   gas	   production	   continued	   from	   	   the	   	   abovementioned	  
horizons	  and	  the	  gas	  reserves	  of	  horizon	  I	  were	  depleted	  in	  2013	  (no	  modern	  technologies	  were	  applied	  to	  this	  horizon).	  A	  
workover	  was	  carried	  out	  on	   Well	  #38	  in	  2014	   in	  order	  to	  extract	  the	  remaining	  gas	  reserves	  in	  the	  upper	  horizon	  and	  a	  
pump	  jack	  was	  installed	  in	  Well	  #27	  to	  produce	  oil	  from	  Horizon	  I.
Currently,	  the	  producing	  wells	  at	  Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	  are	  Wells	  #28,	  37	  and	  38,	  with	  a	  total	  operating	  stock	  of	  10	  wells:
•
•
•
3	  producing	  wells	  (#28,	  37,	  38);
1	  inactive	  well	  (#39);	  and
6	  suspended	  wells	  (#27,	  29,	  31,	  33,	  34,	  and	  35).
The	  suspended	  and	  inactive	  wells	  represent	  good	  candidates	  for	  initial	  workovers	  to	  establish	  early	  cash	  flow	  and	  to	  gather	  
modern	  petrophysical	  and	  reservoir	  management	  data	  on	  the	  field	  in	  general.
In	  addition	  to	  this,	  taking	  into	  account	  the	  presence	  of	  remaining	  oil	  reserves	  in	  the	  central	  and	  northern	  parts,	  it	  would	  be	  
appropriate	  to	  conduct	  rehabilitation	  and	  workover	  operations	  on	  abandoned	  wells.
It	   is	   also	   the	   opinion	   of	   SPG’s	   technical	   team	   and	   Proposed	   Executive	   Directors	   that	   significant	   exploration	   upside	   may	  
exist	   in	   the	   pre-­‐salt	   horizons	   and	   that	   the	   oil	   rim	   will	   contain	   more	   oil	   than	   thought	   previously;	   particularly	   using	  
modern	  techniques	  and	  technologies.
Following	  is	  a	  table	  summarizing	  results	  of	  the	  SPG	  prepared	  Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	  PRMS	  reserve	  report.	  	  This	  is	  an	  SPG	  internal	  
reserves	  assessment	  and	  is	  not	  an	  Independent	  Expert	  Report.
87
Fig	   8:	   Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	   Reserves
Oil	  (MMbbl)
Gas	  (Bcf)	  [Bcm]
Barrels	  oil	  equivalent	  
(Mmboe)
1P
2P
3P
2.60
4.11	  
[0.12]
3.29
5.07
42.46	  
[1.20]
12.14
17.43
98.93	  
[2.80]
33.92
•
•
Current	  reservoirs	  only	  –	  deeper	  potential.
Current	  economically	  recoverable	  using	  modern	  techniques	  and	  technologies.
The	  economic	  assumptions	  used	  during	  the	  compilation	  of	  the	  SPG	  prepared	  Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	  PRMS	  field	  reserve	  report	  were	  
as	  follows:
•
•
•
•
•
•
an	  assumed	  oil	  price	  of	  USD36/bbl	  in	  2016	  increasing	  to	  USD48/bbl	  by	  2031
an	  assumed	  gas	  price	  of	  USD153/mcm	  (USD	  4.428/BTU)	  in	  2016	  increasing	  to	  USD206/mcm	  (USD	  5.719/BTU)	  by
2031.	  One	  thousand	  cubic	  metres	  (mcm)	  is	  equivalent	  to	  36.021	  Million	  British	  Thermal	  Units	  (BTU).
assumed	  inflation	  rates	  of	  2%	  per	  annum
assumed	  15	  year	  field	  life	  (in	  accordance	  with	  the	  minimum	  term	  of	  the	  IOA)
the	  economically	  recoverable	  reserve	  cut	  off	  was	  based	  on	  a	  10%	  discount	  rate.	  
the	  million	  barrels	  of	  oil	  equivalent	  (Mmboe)	  measure	  used	  is	  a	  unit	  of	  energy	  based	  on	  the	  approximate	  energy
released	  by	  burning	  one	  barrel	  (42	  US	  gallons)	  of	  crude	  oil.	  	  United	  States	  Geological	  Survey	  (USGS)	  figures	  are
generally	  used	  in	  which	  one	  barrel	  of	  oil	  is	  generally	  deemed	  to	  have	  the	  same	  amount	  of	  energy	  content	  as	  6,000
cubic	  feet	  of	  natural	  gas.	  	  This	  is	  the	  conversion	  factor	  used	  in	  order	  to	  derive	  barrels	  of	  oil	  equivalent	  in	  the	  SPG
report.
The	  economic	  analysis	  performed	  to	  assess	  commerciality	  evaluated	  the	  technical	  reserves	  of	  the	  field	  and	  inserted	  them	  
along	   with	   a	   costed	   work	   programme	   for	   drilling	   and	   production	   facilities	   into	   an	   economic	   model	   (discounted	   cashflow	  
model)	  using	  reasonable	  economic	  assumptions	  (shown	  below).	  The	  subsequent	  economically	  productive	  volumes	  for	  the	  
IOA	   were	   then	   classified	   in	   accordance	   with	   PRMS	   as	   reserves	   of	   oil	   and	   gas	   (that	   are	   technically	   and	   economically	  
recoverable)	  on	  an	  after	  tax	  basis	  using	  a	  10%	  discount	  factor.	  The	  economic	  inputs	  used	  were	  as	  follows:
•
•
•
•
•
Oil	  price	  of	  $36/bbl	  in	  2016	  increasing	  to	  $48/bbl	  by	  2031
Gas	  price	  of	  $153/mcm	  (USD	  4.428/BTU)	  in	  2016	  increasing	  to	  USD206/mcm	  (USD	  5.719/BTU)	  by	  2031
Inflation	  rates	  of	  2%	  per	  annum
15	  year	  field	  life	  (same	  as	  IOA	  term)
Present	  economic	  value	  and	  reserves	  cut-­‐off	  calculated	  using	  a	  10%	  discount	  rate.
The	   entity	   has	   operator	   interests	   in	   the	   Tajik	   asset,	   under	   an	   ‘Investment	   Operating	   Agreement’	   signed	   between	   the	  
Company	  and	  the	  licence	  holder,	  Naftugas.	  The	  operator	  is	  entitled	  to	  conduct	  activities	  and	  operational	  work.	  Under	  the	  
terms	  of	  the	  IOA,	  SPG	  as	  the	  operator	  shall	  be	  responsible	  for	  all	  operations	  and	  operating	  expenses	  on	  the	  field	  and	  shall	  
receive	  a	  percentage	  of	  the	  incremental	  oil	  and	  gas	  produced	  as	  a	  result	  of	  SPG’s	  activities	  (70%	  whilst	  recovering	  costs	  and	  
50%	   thereafter).	   A	   6%	   taxation	   royalty	   is	   applicable,	   but	   this	   is	   permitted	   for	   cost	   recovery	   purposes.	   SPG	   will	   pay	   local	  
corporate	  profit	  taxes	  (15%)	  and	  other	  minimal	  fees.
A	   large	   number	   of	   wells	   (44)	   have	   been	   drilled	   on	   the	   field	   since	   it	   was	   discovered	   and	   the	   presence	   of	   producible	  
hydrocarbons	  has	  been	  demonstrated.	  Indeed	  there	  are	  currently	  3	  existing	  wells	  currently	  producing	  oil	  and	  gas	  from	  the	  
Kyzyl	   Tumshuk	   field	   and	   the	   oil	   and	   gas	   is	   exported	   to	   local	   markets.	  Volumetric	   and	   performance	   based	   methods	   were	  
utilised	  to	  calculate	  the	  range	  of	  reserves.	  The	  reserves	  are	  based	  on	  evaluation	  of	  the	  available	  data	  and	  a	  planned	  work	  
programme.	  The	  rock	  and	  fluid	  property	  data	  were	  used	  to	  determine	  the	  volumes	  and	  the	  planned	  base	  work	  programme	  
was	  applied	  along	  with	  economic	  modelling	  to	  determine	  the	  commercially	  recoverable	  volumes.
In	  respect	  of	  extraction	  methods,	  the	  planned	  work	  program	  includes	  the	  workover	  and	  perforation	  of	  the	  wells	  and	  the	  
production	  of	  the	  remaining	  hydrocarbons.	  The	  wells	  will	  be	  produced	  with	  standard	  oilfield	  practices,	  in	  this	  case	  by	  the	  
use	   of	   standard	   artificial	   lift	   technology	   (sucker	   rod	   pumps,	   ‘SRP’s).	   Currently	   there	   are	   3	   wells	   on	   production,	   2	   are	  
equipped	  with	  SRP’s	  and	  1	  well	  is	  flowing	  naturally.	  	  There	  is	  no	  requirement	  for	  specialised	  processing	  equipment	  following	  
extraction	  since	  the	  produced	  hydrocarbons	  do	  not	  contain	  any	  significant	  levels	  of	  H2S	  (hydrogen	  sulphide)	  or	  CO2	  (carbon
88
dioxide).
Since	  additional	  investment	  (such	  sum	  included	  in	  the	  use	  of	  funds	  under	  the	  Public	  Offer)	  is	  required	  in	  order	  to	  recover	  
the	  incremental	  reserves	  SPG	  consider	  them	  to	  be	  ‘undeveloped’	  rather	  than	  ‘developed’.
The	  field	  status	  is	  that	  of	  a	  discovered	  oil	  and	  gas	  field	  with	  existing	  production	  of	  oil	  and	  gas.
Development	  of	  the	  field	  by	  SPG	  is	  anticipated	  to	  commence	  in	  2016	  with	  a	  campaign	  of	  working	  over	  existing	  wells	  which	  
are	  currently	  closed	  in	  and	  require	  work	  to	  bring	  them	  onto	  test	  production.	  Based	  on	  results	  of	  the	  initial	  phase	  of	  work	  
and	  results	  of	  production	  testing	  it	  is	  then	  planned	  to	  drill	  or	  workover	  additional	  wells	  in	  the	  field	  to	  optimally	  produce	  the	  
reserves.	  SPG	  will	  be	  entitled	  to	  a	  share	  of	  the	  incremental	  production	  resulting	  from	  its	  activities,	  under	  the	  terms	  of	  the	  
IOA.
The	  oil	  and	  gas	  will	  be	  marketed	  locally	  within	  Tajikistan	  and	  there	  is	  demand	  for	  both	  oil	  and	  gas.	  Several	  refineries	  are	  
operating	  and	  the	  oil	  would	  be	  trucked	  and	  sold	  to	  the	  domestic	  market.	  The	  gas	  would	  be	  exported	  to	  the	  capital	  city,	  
Dushanbe.	  Infrastructure	  for	  exporting	  the	  products	  is	  already	  present	  in	  the	  country.	  The	  field	  is	  connected	  to	  Dushanbe	  
via	  a	  gas	  pipeline,	  and	  trucks	  are	  available	  for	  exporting	  the	  oil	  to	  local	  refineries.
Additional	  infrastructure	  at	  the	  field	  itself	  such	  as	  extra	  surface	  tanks	  and	  metering	  equipment	  are	  planned	  as	  part	  of	  the	  
work	   programme.	  There	   is	   no	   specific	   approval,	   however	   an	   environmental	   baseline	   study	   must	   be	   completed	   prior	   to	  
starting	  the	  field	  workover	  operations,	  a	  contractor	  has	  been	  identified	  for	  this	  work	  and	  it	  is	  planned	  to	  be	  completed	  in	  
the	  near	  future.
Competent	  Expert’s	  Consent.	  	  The	  information	  in	  this	  section	  is	  based	  on	  an	  the	  internal	  assessment	  of	  the	  reserves	  of	  the	  
Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	   field	   based	   on	   the	   information	   compiled	   by	   and	   under	   the	   supervision	   of	   Mr.	   Rudi	   Kriechbaum	   who	   is	   a	  
professional	  petroleum	  engineer.	  Mr.	  Kriechbaum	  is	  employed	  by	  Skyland	  Petroleum	  Group	  Limited	  and	  therefore	  investors	  
should	   note	   that	   the	   information	   on	   the	   Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	   field	   has	   not	   been	   prepared	   by	   an	   independent	   third	   party.	   Mr.	  
Kriechbaum	   has	   sufficient	   experience	   which	   is	   relevant	   to	   the	   style	   of	   mineralisation	   and	   type	   of	   deposit	   under	  
consideration	  and	  to	  the	  activity	  which	  he	  is	  undertaking	  to	  qualify	  as	  a	  Competent	  Expert	  as	  defined	  in	  the	  2005	  Edition	  of	  
the	  VALMIN	  Code	  (but	  it	  again	  is	  noted	  that	  Mr.	  Kriechbaum	  is	  not	  an	  “independent”	  or	  an	  “Independent	  Expert"	  as	  defined	  
in	   the	   2005	   Edition	   of	   the	   VALMIN	   Code	   and	   therefore	   this	   internal	   reserves	   assessment	   is	   not	   to	   be	   deemed	   as	   an	  
Independent	  Expert	  Report	  (as	  defined	  in	  the	  2005	  Edition	  of	  the	  VALMIN	  Code)).
Mr.	  Kriechbaum	  has	  28	  years	  of	  experience	  in	  the	  oil	  and	  gas	  industry	  and	  is	  currently	  employed	  as	  a	  petrophysicist.	  He	  
holds	  a	  Masters	  Degree	  in	  Petroleum	  Engineering	  from	  the	  Mining	  University	  Leoben	  in	  Austria,	  has	  held	  training	  positions	  
with	   Shell	   and	   Texaco,	   is	   a	   member	   of	   the	   SPE	   (Society	   of	   Petroleum	   Engineers)	   and	   is	   qualified	   to	   provide	   such	   an	  
assessment	  included	  in	  this	  Prospectus.	  A	  detailed	  reserve	  report	  has	  been	  prepared	  in	  accordance	  with	  SPE-­‐PRMS	  (Society	  
of	  Petroleum	  Engineers	  Petroleum	  Resources	  Management	  System)	  and	  the	  information	  in	  section	  10.1.7	  has	  been	  taken	  
from	   that	   report,	   which	   has	   an	   effective	   date	   of	   25	   October	   2015.	   Mr.	   Kriechbaum	   consents	   to	   the	   inclusion	   of	   this	  
information	  in	  this	  Prospectus	  in	  the	  form	  and	  context	  in	  which	  it	  appears.
10.1.8 Northern	  Tajikistan	  Geology
The	   Fergana	   basin	   can	   be	   described	   as	   a	   compressional	   structural	   basin,56	   with	   extensive	   high-­‐angle	   reverse	   faults	  
postulated	  particularly	  for	  its	  northern	  flank.	  Some	  high-­‐angle	  over-­‐thrusts	  also	  occur	  along	  the	  basin’s	  southern	  flank.	  The	  
latest	   large-­‐scale	   tectonic	   movements	   occurred	   during	   Miocene-­‐Pliocene	   (Neogene)	   time,	   with	   high-­‐mountain	   growth	  
along	  the	  basin’s	  margin.	  Debris	  shed	  from	  these	  mountains	  resulted	  in	  a	  molasse	  of	  clastic	  materials	  in	  the	  basin’s	  centre.	  
In	  places	  these	  materials	  approach	  a	  thickness	  of	  roughly	  8	  kilometres.
Most	   oil-­‐gas	   discoveries	   are	   related	   to	   anticlinal	   traps,	   which	   are	   east-­‐west	   trending,	   faulted,	   and	   associated	   with	   basin-­‐	  
margin	  tectonics.	  Fields	  usually	  contain	  multiple	  reservoirs	  with	  oil	  and	  gas	  zones	  from	   Pliocene	  (upper	  Neogene)	  age	   to	  
Permo-­‐Triassic	  age.	  Such	  multi-­‐zone,	  relatively	  shallow	  distributions	  are	  attractive	  to	  explorationists.	  In	  the	  Fergana	  basin,	  
the	  most-­‐shallow	  pay	  zones	  are	  thought	  to	  have	  been	  found	  but	  deeper	  potential	  certainly	  exists.
Whilst	   modern	   available	   data	   for	   the	   Northern	   Tajikistan	   exploration	   area	   is	   minimal,	   trends	   observed	   in	   the	   Fergana	  
Depression	   and	   in	   nearby	   offset	   wells	   indicate	   that	   the	   East	   Supetau	   structure	   has	   excellent	   exploration	   potential.	   The	  
geological	  structure	  of	  East	  Supetau	  is	  analogous	  to	  the	  large	  Mingbulak	  oil	  field	  in	  nearby	  Uzbekistan,	  being	  an	  elongated	  
anticline	  sitting	  at	  the	  very	  edge	  of	  the	  Central	  Graben,	  near	  to	  the	  northern	  flank	  of	  the	  Fergana	  Depression.
10.1.9 East	  Supetau	  Overview
The	  proposed	  East	  Supetau	  Investment	  Agreement	  covers	  an	  area	  of	  the	  Fergana	  basin	  of	  northern	  Tajikistan,	  although	  the	  
ultimate	  area	  awarded	  may	  be	  smaller.
56	  Oil	  and	  Gas	  Resources	  of	  the	  Fergana	  Basin,	  EIA,	  1994
89
Fig	  9:	  Location	  of	  East	  Supetau	  Structure	  in	  Relation	  to	  Mingbulak
The	  principal	  targets	  on	  the	  East	  Supetau	  structure	  are	  envisaged	  to	  be	  the	  Neogene	  and	  the	  Paleogene	  formations.	   It	  is	  
from	   the	   Neogene	   formation	   that	   Mingbulak	   Well	   #5	   blew	   out	   at	   over	   100,000	   bopd,57	   and	   it	   is	   suspected	   that	   this	  
formation	  was	  also	  encountered	  in	  East	  Supetau	  Well	  #5,	  although	  it	  was	  never	  tested	  as	  a	  result	  of	  the	  blowout.
In	  Mingbulak	  Well	  #3,	  the	  Paleogene	  flowed	  494	  bopd	  of	  42°	  API	  oil	  from	  a	  depth	  of	  5,850m58.	  It	  is	  expected	  that	  all	  East	  
Supetau	   wells	   will	   be	   HPHT	   (high	   pressure	   –	   high	   temperature).	   Original	   reservoir	   pressures	   at	   Mingbulak	   are	   cited	   as	  
15,875	  psi	  at	  5,860m,	  and	  in	  East	  Supetau	  Well	  #7	  as	  11,054	  psi	  at	  4,586m.59
Oil	  shows	  were	  encountered	  whilst	  drilling	  at	  a	  depth	  of	  4,320m	  in	  East	  Supetau	  Well	  #7,	  but	  the	  well	  was	  subsequently	  
(like	  all	  wells	  drilled	  to	  date	  on	  the	  East	  Supetau	  structure)	  abandoned	  ‘for	  geological	  reasons’	  (this	  terminology	  tends	  to	  
refer	   to	   technical	   difficulties	   encountered	   whilst	   drilling).	   SPG	   believes	   that	   by	   utilizing	   modern	   drilling	   technology	   and	  
petrophysical	  analytics,	  the	  East	  Supetau	  structure	  represents	  an	  exciting	  exploration	  play.
SPG	  will	  work	  toward	  the	  completion	  and	  award	  of	  the	  East	  Supetau	  IOA	  in	  2016	  (although	  this	  cannot	  be	  guaranteed)	  and	  
anticipates	  commencing	  exploration	  activities	  in	  late	  2016	  or	  early	  2017.
57	  Oil	  and	  Gas	  Reserves	  of	  the	  Fergana	  Basin,	  EIA	  1995	  
58	  Oil	  and	  Gas	  Reserves	  of	  the	  Fergana	  Basin,	  EIA	  1995	  
59	  Oil	  and	  Gas	  Reserves	  of	  the	  Fergana	  Basin,	  EIA	  1995
90
Fig	  10:	  East	  Supetau	  and	  Mingbulak	  Geological	  Structures60*
10.1.10 Oil	  and	  Gas	  Commercialisation
The	   Republic	   of	   Tajikistan	   suffers	   from	   a	   lack	   of	   energy	   of	   all	   types.	   Gas	   supply	   is	   extremely	   limited,	   with	   domestic	  
production	   low	   and	   the	   only	   source	   of	   imported	   gas	   being	   via	   a	   pipeline	   from	   Uzbekistan	   (with	   this	   pipeline	   frequently	  
being	  shut	  in).	  Residential	  users	  rely	  primarily	  on	  wood	  and	  coal	  for	  heating	  and	  power,	  with	  around	  70%	  of	  the	  population	  
suffering	  blackouts	  during	  the	  winter.61
The	  country	  does	  have	  significant	  hydropower	  capacity	   and	   exports	   electricity	  to	  Afghanistan	  and	   Pakistan	  via	  the	  North	  
European	  Pipeline	  System	  (“NEPS”)	  in	  the	  summer,	  but	  in	  the	  winter	  the	  frozen	  rivers	  mean	  that	  there	  is	  no	  hydropower	  
available.
In	  terms	  of	  oil	  commercialization,	  there	  are	  several	  small	  refineries	  in	  the	  country	  that	  actively	  purchase	  oil	  at	  reasonable	  
prices	   (approximately	   60	   –	   70%	   of	   Brent).	   Petroleum	   products	   are	   primarily	   consumed	   domestically,	   with	   small-­‐scale	  
exports	  of	  heavy	  fuel	  oil	  to	  China	  and	  lighter	  products	  to	  Afghanistan.	  The	  road	  network	  is	  well	  developed	  for	  access	  to	  the	  
Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	  field	  and	  a	  railway	  system	  is	  present	  in	  the	  north	  (for	  the	  Supetau	  area)	  and	  south	  of	  the	  country.
In	   terms	   of	   gas,	   the	   major	   trunkline,	   “Line	   D”,	   from	   Turkmenistan	   and	   Uzbekistan	   to	   China	   is	   under	   construction	   and	  
represents	  a	  potential	  commercialization	  route	  when	  it	  is	  completed.	  A	  domestic	  gas	  pipeline	  runs	  from	  the	  Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	  
field	  to	  Dushanbe	  and	   industrial	   consumers	   such	  as	  fertilizer	  plants,	  brick	  factories	  and	   others	  are	  keen	  buyers	  of	  gas	  at	  
high	  (close	  to	  Chinese	  export)	  prices.
As	   commercialisation	   opportunities	   in	   Tajikistan	   are	   plentiful	   and	   high	   domestic	   prices	   are	   in	   existence,	   SPG	   will	   look	   to	  
initially	   commercialise	   oil	   and	   gas	   production	   into	   the	   domestic	   market.	   In	   the	   event	   that	   major	   oil	   or	   gas	   production	   is	  
achieved,	   the	   Company	   will	   consider	   the	   economic	   benefits	   of	   exporting	   production.	   There	   is	   no	   domestic	   supply	  
obligation	  in	  the	  country	  and	  companies	  are	  free	  to	  export	  crude	  oil,	  natural	  gas,	  electricity	  and	  petroleum	  products.
60	  Oil	  &	  Gas	  Resources	  of	  the	  Fergana	  Basin,	  EIA	  1995	  
*	  Modified	  from	  Manas	  Petroleum	  Corporation
61	  Tajikistan’s	  Winter	  Energy	  Crisis:	  Electricity	  Supply	  and	  Demand	  Alternatives,	  World	  Bank,	  2012
91
10.2  Georgia	   Project
10.2.1 General	  and	  Licensing
Following	  the	  collapse	  of	  the	  Soviet	  Union	  in	  1991,	  funding	  for	  the	  oil	  and	  gas	  industry	  in	  Georgia	  ceased.	  This,	  combined	  
with	  a	  civil	  war	  between	  1991	   and	  1993,	  effectively	  destroyed	  the	  Georgian	  oil	  and	  gas	  industry.	   All	  exploration	  ceased,	  
and	  many	  producing	  oil	  fields	  fell	  into	  disrepair	  and	  ultimately	  into	  abandonment.
In	   the	   early	   1990’s	   the	   territory	   of	   Georgia	   was	   divided	   into	   small	   license	   blocks	   and	   today,	   the	   Georgian	   oil	   and	   gas	  
industry	   is	   focused	   upon	   the	   rehabilitation	   of	   existing	   fields	   through	   the	   application	   of	   modern	   technologies,	   and	  
exploration	  for	  new	  fields	  –	  both	  onshore	  and	  offshore	  and	  both	  conventional	  and	  unconventional.
The	   Georgian	   government	   actively	   promotes	   oil	   and	   gas	   exploration	   and	   production	   and	   operates	   a	   PSC	   license	   system,	  
whereby	   investors	   are	   guaranteed	   fiscal	   stability	   for	   the	  	  duration	   of	   the	  	  contract.	   Production	   Sharing	   Contracts	   are	  
awarded	   after	  a	  competitive	  tender	  process.	  Taxes	  are	  not	  applicable	  and	   instead	  oil	  and	   gas	  produced	  from	   the	  license	  
area	  is	  shared	  between	  the	  investor	  and	  the	  state.	  Signature	  bonuses	  and	  commercial	  discovery	  bonuses	  are	  in	  effect	  on	  
most	  licenses.
Fig	  11:	  Georgia	  –	  Location	  Map
10.2.2 Location	  and	  Infrastructure
Licence	  Block	  XIG	   is	  located	  on	  the	  outskirts	  of	  the	  capital	  city	  of	  Tbilisi	  (population	  1.2	  million)	  and	  has	  excellent	  road	  and	  
rail	   links	   nearby.	   Due	   to	   its	   location	   on	   a	   transit	   route	   from	   Azerbaijan,	   Georgia	   is	   well	   served	   with	   oil	   and	   gas	   export	  
pipelines	  as	  well	  as	  rail	  corridors	  and	  deep-­‐water	  ports.
The	   Baku-­‐Tbilisi-­‐Ceyhan	   (“BTC”)	   oil	   pipeline	   runs	   from	   the	   Caspian	   Sea	   to	   the	   Mediterranean,	   and	   has	   a	   capacity	   of	   1	  
MMbopd,	  and	  there	  are	  plans	  to	  extend	  this	  pipeline	  into	  Europe.	  The	  BP	  operated	  Baku-­‐Supsa	  pipeline	  has	  a	  capacity	  of	  
145,000	  bopd	  and	  runs	  from	  Baku	  on	  the	  Caspian	  Sea	  to	  the	  deepwater	  port	  of	  Supsa	  on	  the	  Georgian	  Black	  Sea	  coast.	  The	  
deepwater	  port	  of	  Supsa,	  close	  to	  the	  city	  of	  Batumi,	  is	  in	  itself	  a	  significant	  asset,	  permitting	  both	  the	  export	  of	  oil	  and	  the	  
import	  of	  equipment	  to	  support	  any	  potential	  oil	  and	  gas	  development	  in	  Georgia.
10.2.3 Geology	  of	  the	  Kura	  Basin
92
The	   Georgian	  oil	   fields	   belong	   to	  the	  	  Black	   Sea	  	  and	   Caspian	   Sea	   hydrocarbon	   provinces.	  	  The	   geology	   of	   Georgia	  is	  
dominated	   by	   an	   east	   to	   west	   trending	   intermontane	   depression,	   which	   lies	   between	   the	   Greater	   and	   Lesser	   Caucasus	  
Mountains.	   The	   basin	   is	   a	  late	   Tertiary	   back	   arc,	   formed	  as	   a	   result	   of	  Alpine/Himalayan	   compression.	   The	   basin	   itself	   is	  
divided	   into	   two	   parts	   –	   the	   Rioni	   Basin	   in	   the	   west,	   bordering	   the	   Black	   Sea	   and	   the	   Kura	   Basin	   in	   the	   east.	  These	   two	  
basins	   are	   separated	   by	   the	   intrusive	   and	   metamorphic	   rocks	   of	   the	   Dziruli	   Massif.	   Of	   the	   18	   oil	   and	   gas	   accumulations	  
discovered	  to	  date	  in	  Georgia,	  15	  of	  them	  are	  located	  in	  the	  Kura	  Basin	  –	  including	  the	  prolific	  Samgori-­‐Patarzeuli	  field.	  
Licence	  Block	  XIG	  lies	  in	  the	  Kura	  Basin.
The	  source	  rock	  for	  the	  Kura	  Basin	  is	  the	  prolific	  Oligocene-­‐Miocene	  Maikop	  Shale.	  The	  Maikop	  is	  an	  organic-­‐rich	  marine	  
sediment	  up	  to	  2.5km	  in	  thickness.	  To	  date	  the	  principal	  targets	  in	  the	  Kura	  Basin	  have	  been	  a	  series	  of	  east-­‐west	  trending	  
high	  relief	  features	  where	  younger	  rocks	  have	  been	  overthrust	  over	  Mesozoic	  rocks.
Fig	  12:	  Tectonic	  Map	  of	  Georgia	  showing	  location	  of	  Kura	  Basin62
Block	   XIG	  covers	   an	   area	   of	   approximately	   300	   km2	  and	   lies	   due	   west	   of	   the	   producing	   oil	   fields	   of	   Teleti	   and	   Samgori-­‐	  
Patardzeuli.
62	  Geological	  Society	  of	  London	  Special	  Publication,	  SUP18626,	  2013
93
Fig	  13:	  Location	  of	  Licence	  Block	  XIG	   in	  relation	  to	  existing	  oil	  fields	  in	  the	  Kura	  Basin63
10.2.4 Transaction	  Terms
The	   Block	   XIG	  	  licence	   is	   held	   under	   a	   PSC	   issued	   in	   2011	   and	   acquired	   by	   GOG	   in	   2014.	   The	   licence	   expires	   in	   2036	   and	  
contains	   an	  automatic	  5-­‐year	  extension	   period.	  The	   outstanding	  work	  commitment	   on	   the	  licence	  as	  detailed	   in	  the	  PSC	  
(and	  its	  respective	  amendment)	  is	  the	  drilling	  of	  one	  well	  by	  February	  2016	  (this	  will	  be	  the	  Kumisi	  #2	  exploration	  well)	  
which	  is	  currently	  being	  undertaken.	  The	  license	  covers	  an	  area	  of	  289	  km2.
All	  taxes	  for	  the	  contracting	  parties	  the	  PSC	  are	  paid	  for	  by	  the	  State	  from	  the	  production	  split.	  The	  cost	  recovery	  ceiling	  is	  
50%,	  and	  the	  profit	  oil/gas	  split	  is	  40%	  until	  all	  costs	  are	  recovered	  and	  35%	  thereafter.	  A	  royalty	  of	  USD2	  per	  barrel	  is	  in	  
effect	  and	  this	  royalty	  is	  stabilised	  for	  the	  duration	  of	  the	  contract.
In	   addition,	   a	   commercial	   discovery	   bonus	   of	   USD5.5	   million	   (gross)	   is	   payable	   upon	   the	   commencement	   of	   commercial	  
production.	   No	   VAT	   is	   applicable	   on	   oilfield	   operations	   and	   no	   export	   taxes	   or	   duties	   are	   in	   effect.	   The	   Georgian	  
Government	  has	  an	  optional	  back-­‐in	  right	  (such	  back	  in	  right	  being	  market	  practice	  for	  the	  issuance	  of	  any	  typical	  PSC	  in	  
Georgia,	  and	  further	  more	  never	  before	  used	  under	  any	  PSC	  in	  Georgia	  to	  date)	  of	  up	  to	  25%	  under	  the	  PSC	  with	  payment	  
of	  appropriate	  compensation	  and	  future	  obligations.
The	  Georgian	  project	  will	  be	  operated	  in	  collaboration	  with	  a	  local	  partner,	  Georgia	  Oil	  and	  Gas	  Limited	  (“GOG”,	  as	  defined	  
above).	   GOG	   is	   long-­‐established	   local	   company	   with	   a	   strong	   engineering,	   operating	   and	   technical	   team	   in	   country,	   and	  
with	   extensive	   experience	   in	   Georgia,	   including	   discoveries	   (the	   Manavi	   &	   Norio	   structures),	   field	   rehabilitation	   and	  
exploration	  programmes.	  GOG	  owns	  a	  number	  of	  drilling	  and	  workover	  units	  in	  country,	  more	  than	  adequate	  to	  fulfil	  the	  
Block	  XIG	  work	  programme.
GOG	  has	  a	  net	  acreage	  position	  of	  some	  6,500	  km2	  in	  Georgia,	  with	  working	  interests	  in	  9	  Production	  Sharing	  Contracts.	   Its	  
portfolio	  includes	  production,	  development	  and	  exploration	  contracts.
A	  summary	  of	  the	  key	  Block	  XIG	  terms	  is	  set	  out	  below:
63 Georgia	  Oil	  &	  Gas	  Limited	  Farm-­‐in	  Proposal	  for	  Block	  XIG,	  July	  2015
94
Block	  XIG	  PSC	  Terms
Commercial	  Terms
Land	  Area
289km2
Historical	  Drilling
4	  structural	  wells
Historical	  Production
n/a
Capex	  Recoverable	  
Expenses	  Max
Profit	  Gas
Profit	  Oil
50%
40%
35%
Commercial	  
Bonus
Discovery
USD5,500,000
VAT
No	   VAT	   on	   petroleum	  
operations	   and	   Export	   tax	  
on	  sales	  oil	  are	  applicable
State	  Back-­‐in	  Option
25%
Income	  Tax
Zero	  to	  Contractor
Regulation	  Fee
USD2/bbl
GOG	  Participating	  Interest
100%
SPG	   is	   forecast	   to	   come	   into	   the	   Block	   XIG	   project	   through	   the	   acquisition	   of	   a	   wholly-­‐owned	   GOG	   subsidiary,	   Tbilisi	  
Petroleum	  Limited	  (“TBPL”).
As	   at	   the	   date	   of	   this	   Prospectus,	   TBPL	   holds	   1%	   of	   the	   contract	   rights	   under	   the	   PSC	   and	   will,	   upon	   completion	   of	   the	  
acquisition,	  receive	  a	  re-­‐adjustment	  of	  the	  PSC	  interest	  between	  the	  contractor	  parties	  to	  the	  PSC	  through	  the	  assignment	  
of	  19%	  of	  the	  contract	  interest	  from	  an	  existing	  affiliate	  under	  the	  PSC	  (such	  affiliate	  also	  being	  a	  wholly-­‐owned	  subsidiary	  
of	  GOG).
The	   share	   capital	   of	   TBPL	   (and	   the	   rights	   it	   has	   under	   the	   PSC)	   will	   be	   acquired	   from	   GOG	   for	   consideration	   of	  
USD2,000,000;	  representing	   an	  investment	   into	  the	   work	   programme	  and	   repayment	  of	   back	   costs	   to	   GOG.	   In	   turn,	  this	  
will	  translate	  into	  an	  effective	  carry	  for	  SPG	  of	  USD1,160,000	  to	  gain	  a	  20%	  working	  interest	  in	  the	  PSC,	  with	  USD840,000	  
as	  SPG’s	  equity	  share	  of	  well	  costs.
These	   funds	  will	  be	   used	   to	   partly	   fund	   the	   drilling	   and	   completion	   of	  the	   Kumisi	  #2	   exploration	   well	  (which	   is	   currently	  
operating	  as	  at	  the	  date	  of	  this	  Prospectus).	  The	  well	  is	  estimated	  to	  cost	  USD4,200,000	  and	  has,	  to	  date,	  been	  funded	  by	  
GOG.
SPG	   will	   enter	   into	   a	   deed	   of	   variation	   of	   the	   existing	   Joint	   Operating	   Agreement	   (the	   “JOA”),	   such	   existing	   JOA	   being	  
framed	  in	  the	  majority	  on	  international	  norms	  and	  being	  consistent	  with	  the	  Model	  JOA	  provided	  by	  the	  AIPN.
The	  Share	  Purchase	  Agreement	  (“SPA”)	  to	  finalise	  this	  acquisition	  of	  TBPL	  by	  SPG	  is	  in	  final	  stages	  of	  negotiation,	  with	  both	  
parties	   prepared	   to	   sign	   in	   the	   immediate	   future	   subject	   to	   the	   execution	   of	   some	   ancillary	   documentation	   and	   the	  
completion	  of	  the	  Offers.
One	   such	   ancillary	   document	   being	   the	   Assignment	   Agreement	   –	   which	   will	   re-­‐adjust	   the	   contract	   interest	   held	   by	   TBPL	  
under	  the	  PSC	  from	  1%	  to	  19%.	  This	  Assignment	  Agreement	  shall	  be	  executed	  on	  or	  around	  the	  date	  of	  the	  SPA,	  but	  shall	  
only	  become	  effective	  upon	  completion	  of	  the	  acquisition.
During	   the	   interim	   period	   (the	   timeframe	   between	   execution	   and	   closing),	   SPG	   and	   GOG	   will	   coordinate	   to	   receive	  
acknowledgement	  from	  the	  Georgian	  State	  Agency	  for	  Natural	  Resources	  who	  will	  acknowledge	  this	  Assignment	  of	  rights,	  
such	  acknowledgement	  not	  being	  a	  strict	  legal	  requirement	  but	  demonstrating	  a	  direct	  relationship	  with	  the	  Government	  
of	   Georgia	   and	   providing	   confirmation	   of	   title	   in	   respect	   of	   the	   re-­‐adjustment	   of	   19%	   of	   the	   interests	   under	   the	   PSC	   in	  
favour	  of	  TBPL	  (and,	  ultimately,	  its	  proposed	  owner,	  SPG).
95
Following	  completion,	  the	  Block	  XIG	  project	  will	  be	  owned	  as	  follows:
GOG	  (Operator):
60%	  (minor	  security	  over	  its	  interest	  to	  some	  GOG	  lenders)
SPG:
20%
Georgia	  Oil	  and	  
Gas	  Corporation:
20	  %	  (assuming	  that	  it	  exercises	  its	  conversion	  right	  on	  its	  USD	  2	  million	  of	  debt	  to	  GOG)
Proposed	   investors	   should	   refer	   to	   the	   Gustavson	   Associates	   LLC	   report	   at	   Section	   11	  for	   a	   summary	   of	   the	   geological	  
potential	  of	  the	  site.
Following	  discussions	  with	  the	  Operator	  in	  relation	  to	  this	  Block	  XIG	  the	  Directors	  of	  SPG	  are	  confident	  that	  the	  Kumisi	  #2	  
well	  will	  encounter	  moveable	  hydrocarbons	  in	  the	  near	  future	  following	  the	  acquisition	  of	  TBPL.
The	  completion	  of	  the	  Block	  XIG	  	  transaction	  is	  subject	  to	  the	  completion	  of	  the	  Offers	  which	  will	  provide	  SPG	   with	  the	  
requisite	  funds	  to	  satisfy	  the	  consideration	  requirements	  under	  this	  transaction.
96
Fig	  14:	  Pre	  and	  Post	  Acquisition	  Structure	  Charts	  for	  the	  Block	  XIG	  Transaction
97
10.2.5 Block	  XIG	  Forward	  Plans
The	  first	   well	   in	  the	   Block	   XIG	  Work	   Programme	   is	   Kumisi	   #2	   (currently	   operating),	   primarily	   targeting	  oil	   in	   the	  Middle	  
Eocene	   (1450	   -­‐	   1700m).	   The	   well	   plan	   is	   for	   a	   horizontal	   well,	   targeting	   a	   conventional,	   under-­‐thrust	   play	   alongside	   a	  
sealing	  fault.	  The	  aim	  of	  this	  horizontal	  well	  is	  to	  break	  into	  a	  number	  of	  isolated	  reservoir	  compartments,	  and	  the	  well	  has	  
been	   orientated	  	  so	   as	  	  to	   intersect	  	  the	   greatest	   number	  	  of	   fracture	  	  sets;	   which	   are	  	  understood	   to	  	  be	   running	   in	  	  a	  
predominantly	   North/South	   orientation.	   As	   such,	   the	   well	   plan	   is	   designed	   to	   optimise	   both	   vertical	   and	   lateral	   reservoir	  
connectivity.	  The	  Kumisi	  #2	  well	  will	  also	  investigate	  a	  deeper	  (2000	  –	  2500m)	  Lower	  Eocene	  gas	  play.	  The	  nearby	  West	  	  
Rustavi	  30	  well	  produced	  26,000	  M3/day	  of	  gas	  from	  a	  similar	  Eocene	  play.
In	  addition	  to	  the	  Kumisi	  #2	  prospect,	  new	  gravity	  data	  also	  indicates	  the	  existence	  of	  up	  to	  three	  additional	  prospects	  in	  
Block	  XIG.
Fig	  15:	  Planned	  Trajectory	  of	  Well	  Kumisi	  #264
Fig	  16:	  Residual	  Gravity	  (Anomalies	  Map)	  Indicating	  the	  Presence	  of	  Additional	  Prospects	  in	  Block	  
XIG65)
64	  Georgia	  Oil	  &	  Gas	  Farm-­‐in	  Proposal	  for	  Block	  XIG,	  July	  2015	  
65	  Georgia	  Oil	  &	  Gas	  Farm-­‐in	  Proposal	  for	  Block	  XIG,	  July	  2015
98
10.2.6 Georgia	  Block	  XIG	  	  Resources
An	  Independent	  Geologist’s	  Report	  compiled	  by	  Gustavson	  Associates	  LLC	  is	  included	  in	  Section	  11	  in	  respect	  of	  License	  
Block	  XIG.
10.2.7 Oil	  and	  Gas	  Commercialisation
Georgia	  offers	  significant	  opportunities	  for	  the	  commercialisation	  of	  oil	  and	  gas.	  Oil	  prices	  received	  are	  priced	  based	  upon	  
Brent,	  and	  crude	  oil	  is	  in	  demand	  in	  the	  domestic	  market	  as	  well	  as	  having	  an	  access	  route	  to	  world	  markets	  via	  the	  BTC	  
pipelines	  and	  the	  Supsa	  deepwater	  port.
In	   terms	   of	   gas	   commercialisation,	   gas	   prices	   in	   the	   country	   are	   high,	   as	   well	   as	   having	   a	   gas	   pipeline	   linking	   Georgia	   to	  
Turkey,	  where	  prices	  are	  very	  high.	  Under	  the	  terms	  of	  the	  Block	  XIG	  PSC	  oil	  and	  gas	  can	  be	  freely	  exported	  to	  any	  buyer.
10.2.8 Consent
In	  accordance	  with	  chapter	  5	  of	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules,	  the	  geological	  information	  in	  this	  section	  of	  the	  Prospectus	  is	  based	  
on	  information	  compiled	  by	  Dr.	  David	  Robson,	  Managing	  Director	  of	  Skyland	  Petroleum	  Group	  Limited.	  Dr.	  Robson	  holds	  a	  
First	  Class	  Honours	  degree	  in	   Geology	  from	   the	   University	  of	  Newcastle	   upon	   Tyne,	  England	   and	   a	   Ph.D.	  in	   Geology	  and	  
Geochemistry	   from	   the	   same	   university.	   He	   has	   over	   30	   years	   of	   oil	   and	   gas	   exploration,	   appraisal	   and	   development	  
experience	   and	   has	   carried	   out	   numerous	   oil	   and	   gas	   reservoir	   evaluations	   and	   exploration	   prospect	   evaluations	   and	  
resource	   and	   reserve	   estimates	   on	   projects	   globally	   working	   for	   majors	   and	   independent	   oil	   and	   gas	   companies.	   He	   is	   a	  
Fellow	  of	  the	  Geological	  Society,	  a	  member	  of	  the	  European	  Association	  of	  Geoscientists	  and	  Engineers,	  a	  member	  of	  the	  
Society	   of	   Petroleum	   Engineers	   and	   a	   member	   of	   the	   American	   Association	   of	   Petroleum	   Geologists.	   He	   qualifies	   as	   a	  
Qualified	   Petroleum	   Reserves	   and	   Resources	   Estimator	   (“QPRRE”).	   Dr.	   Robson	   consents	   to	   this	   work	   being	   used	   in	   this	  
document.
Gustavson	  Associates	  LLC	  has	  been	  engaged	  by	  the	  Company	  to	  prepare	  the	  Independent	  Geologist's	  Report	  in	  Section	  11	  of	  
this	  Prospectus.
MUI	  Corporation	  Limited	  Replacement	  Prospectus	  dated	  18	  February	  2016	  replacing	  a	  Prospectus	  dated	  
4	  February	  2016
99
11.
Independent	  Geologist’s	  Report
Evaluation of Prospective Resources 
Technical Assessment Report 
Skyland Petroleum Group Ltd.’s Interest in 
License Block XIG
Republic of Georgia
Prepared on Behalf of 
MUI Corporation
03 December 2015
Submitted By:
Independent Qualified Reserves Evaluators
Evaluation of Prospective Resources 
Technical Assessment Report 
Skyland Petroleum Group Ltd.’s Interest in 
License Block XIG
Republic of Georgia
Prepared on Behalf of 
MUI Corporation
03 December 2015
Letha C. Lencioni 
Registered Petroleum Engineer 
State of Colorado #29506 
State of Wyoming #8493
Independent Qualified Reserves Evaluators
1.  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Gustavson Associates, at the request of MUI Corporation Limited (“MUI”) has been retained to 
provide an estimate of the Prospective Oil and Gas Resources for the South Prospect in License 
Block XIG in the Kura Basin and Achara-Trialet Thrust Belt of the Republic of Georgia. 
 
Georgia  Oil  and  Gas  (GOG)  owned  100  percent  interest  in  a  production  sharing  contract  for 
License  Block  XIG.    On  November  13,  2015,  Skyland  Petroleum  entered  into  a  Heads  of 
Agreement to acquire a 20 percent interest in the Block.  Skyland’s 20 percent interest in License 
Block XIG is evaluated in this report.   
 
The Prospective Oil and Gas Resource estimates provided in this Report are based on a review of 
a  conventional  oil  and  gas  prospect  presented  by  GOG.    The  prospective  reservoirs  are  in 
Eocene-aged  and  Cretaceous-ages  rocks.    The  methodologies  used  for  the  estimate  presented 
herein  were  to  review  the  available  seismic  data  review  well  data  and  available  analogous 
reservoir data, select parameters for likely distributions of reservoir parameters,  and prepare a 
probabilistic resource estimate.   
 
“Prospective  Resources  are  those  quantities  of  petroleum  estimated,  as  of  a  given  date,  to  be 
potentially recoverable from undiscovered accumulations by application of future development 
projects.  Prospective  Resources  have  both  an  associated  chance  of  discovery  and  a  chance  of 
development.”1  
 
Categorization for the range of uncertainty according to the Petroleum Resources Management 
System2 corresponds to the key points in the resource distribution as follows: the 50 percent or 
P50 point (Best Estimate), the 90 percent or P90 point (Low Estimate) and 10 percent or P10 point 
(High  Case).    The  P50  probability  value  for  each  distribution  is  considered  the  most  likely 
estimate of potential resources.
1 Petroleum Resources Management System, Society of Petroleum Engineers (SPE), March 2007, Page 3.  
2 Petroleum Resources Management System, Society of Petroleum Engineers (SPE), March 2007, Page 2.
12/3/2015
1
Gustavson Associates
Table 1-1   Gross Unrisked Prospective Resources, License Block XIG, South Prospect
Reservoir
Middle Eocene
Middle Eocene 
Lower Eocene 
Cretaceous 
Arithmetic 
Total Gas
Parameter 
Prospective Oil Resources, 
MMBbl 
Prospective Solution Gas 
Resources, BCF 
Prospective Gas Resources, BCF 
Prospective Gas Resources, BCF 
Prospective Gas Resources, 
BCF
Low
Estimate
Best
Estimate
High
Estimate
48
19  
146  
112
277
104
42  
319  
674
192
77  
600  
1,979
1,035
2,656
Table 1-2  Unrisked Prospective Resources Net to Skyland (20%), License Block XIG,
South Prospect3
Reservoir
Middle Eocene
Middle Eocene 
Lower Eocene 
Cretaceous 
Arithmetic 
Total Gas
Parameter 
Prospective Oil Resources, 
MMBbl 
Prospective Solution Gas 
Resources, BCF 
Prospective Gas Resources, BCF 
Prospective Gas Resources, BCF 
Prospective Gas Resources, 
BCF
Low
Estimate
Best
Estimate
High
Estimate
9.7
3.9 
29.2 
22.4
55.5
20.7
8.3 
63.9 
134.7
206.9
38.4
15.3 
120.1 
395.7
531.1
3 Does not reflect PSC Terms, Section 4.4 of this Report
12/3/2015
2
Gustavson Associates
2.  TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE 
1.  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ...................................................................................................... 1 
2.  TABLE OF CONTENTS .......................................................................................................... 3 
3.  INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................... 6 
3.1  AUTHORIZATION ......................................................................................................... 6 
3.2 
INTENDED PURPOSE AND USERS OF REPORT ..................................................... 6 
3.3  OWNER CONTACT AND PROPERTY INSPECTION ............................................... 6 
3.4  SCOPE OF WORK AND SOURCES OF MATERIAL INFORMATION .................... 6 
3.5  APPLICABLE STANDARDS ........................................................................................ 7 
3.6  ASSUMPTIONS AND LIMITING CONDITIONS ....................................................... 7 
3.7 
INDEPENDENCE/DISCLAIMER OF INTEREST........................................................ 8 
4.  PROJECT DESCRIPTION ....................................................................................................... 9 
4.1  LOCATION AND BASIN NAME .................................................................................. 9 
4.2  OVERVIEW OF PROSPECT ....................................................................................... 12 
4.2.1  South Prospect Sub-Thrust Prospect ......................................................................... 13 
4.3  SEISMIC INTERPRETATION ..................................................................................... 15 
4.4  GROSS AND NET INTEREST IN THE PROPERTIES .............................................. 17 
4.5  PRODUCT TYPES REASONABLY EXPECTED ...................................................... 18 
4.6  ESTIMATED DRILLING AND TESTING COSTS .................................................... 18 
4.7  EXPECTED TIMING OF DRILLING AND COMPLETION ..................................... 19 
4.8  EXPECTED PRICES..................................................................................................... 19 
4.9  EXPECTED MARKETING AND TRANSPORTATION ARRANGEMENTS .......... 19 
4.10  IDENTITY AND RELEVANT EXPERIENCE OF THE OPERATOR ....................... 20 
5.  GEOLOGY ............................................................................................................................. 21 
5.1  STRUCTURE ................................................................................................................ 21 
5.2  STRATIGRAPHY ......................................................................................................... 23 
5.3  PETROLEUM SYSTEM ............................................................................................... 26 
5.3.1  Source Rocks ............................................................................................................ 26 
5.3.2  Reservoir Rocks ........................................................................................................ 27 
5.3.3  Traps ......................................................................................................................... 28 
6.  EXPLORATION HISTORY .................................................................................................. 29 
7.  RISKS ..................................................................................................................................... 31 
8.  PROBABILISTIC RESOURCE ESTIMATE ........................................................................ 32 
8.1  GENERAL ..................................................................................................................... 32 
8.2 
INPUT PARAMETERS ................................................................................................ 32 
8.3  PROBABILISTIC SIMULATION ................................................................................ 35 
8.4  RESULTS ...................................................................................................................... 36 
9.  COMPETENT EXPERT’S CONSENT FORM ..................................................................... 39 
10. CERTIFICATE OF QUALIFICATION ................................................................................. 42
12/3/2015
3
Gustavson Associates
LIST OF FIGURES
11. REFERENCES ....................................................................................................................... 43 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
RESOURCE DISTRIBUTIONS
FIGURE 
 
Figure 4-1 Location of Georgia and License Block XIG ................................................................ 9 
Figure 4-2  Tectonic Elements in Georgia with the Subject Block in Green ............................... 10 
Figure 4-3  Location of XIG License Block in Georgia ................................................................ 11 
Figure 4-4  License Block XIG Map ............................................................................................. 11 
Figure 4-5  2D Seismic Line Showing Sub-Thrust Prospect, Kumisi #1 Well, W. Rustavi #44 Oil 
Well, and Location of Kumisi #2 Well ................................................................................. 14
PAGE
Figure 4-6  New Gravity Data Residual Anomalies Map Showing Potential Sub-Thrust
Exploration Targets and Seismic Line Locations ................................................................. 14 
Figure 4-7 Seismic and well data location .................................................................................... 15 
Figure 4-8 Middle and Lower Eocene Depth Structure Map with Area Used for Resource
Estimates ............................................................................................................................... 16 
Figure 4-9 Upper Cretaceous Depth Structure Map with Area Used for Resource Estimates ..... 17 
Figure 4-10  Oil and Gas Pipelines in and around Georgia .......................................................... 20 
Figure 5-1 Exploration License Block XIG, Basins, and Mountain Areas ................................... 21 
Figure 5-2 Paleogeographic Reconstructions of the Area ............................................................ 22 
Figure 5-3 Regional Structural Fault Map .................................................................................... 23 
Figure 5-4 Stratigraphic Column of the Kura Basin Region ........................................................ 25 
Figure 6-1 Map of Oil and Gas Occurrences in Georgia .............................................................. 30
12/3/2015
4
Gustavson Associates
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 
 
Table 1-1   Gross Unrisked Prospective Resources, License Block XIG, South Prospect .............. 2 
Table 1-2  Unrisked Prospective Resources Net to Skyland (20%), License Block XIG, South
PAGE
Prospect ................................................................................................................................... 2 
Table 4-1  License Block XIG Coordinates ................................................................................... 12 
Table 5-1  Kura Basin Source Rock Maturity, TOC, and Age ..................................................... 26 
Table 8-1 Summary of Input Parameters for Middle Eocene ....................................................... 34 
Table 8-2 Summary of Input Parameters for Lower Eocene ........................................................ 34 
Table 8-3 Summary of Input Parameters for Cretaceous .............................................................. 35 
Table 8-4   Gross Unrisked Prospective Resources, License Block XIG, South Prospect ............ 36 
Table 8-5  Unrisked Prospective Resources Net to Skyland (20%), License Block XIG, South
Prospect ................................................................................................................................. 37
12/3/2015
5
Gustavson Associates
3.  INTRODUCTION
3.1  AUTHORIZATION 
 
Gustavson Associates LLC (the Consultant) has been retained by MUI Corporation (MUI, the 
Client)  to  prepare  a  Report  regarding  the  interest  held  by  Skyland  Petroleum  Group  Ltd. 
(hereinafter  referred to as Skyland) in  License  Block XIG located in the  Republic of Georgia.  
This Report has been prepared in accordance with the Code for the Technical Assessment and 
Valuation of Mineral and Petroleum Assets and Securities for Independent Expert Reports, the 
2005  edition  of  the  VALMIN  Code  promulgated  by  Australasian  Institute  of  Mining  and 
Metallurgy (AusIMM). 
 
3.2  INTENDED PURPOSE AND USERS OF REPORT 
 
It is our understanding that our report will be used in support of a fairness opinion as a result of 
the acquisition of Skyland by MUI, and for inclusion in a notice of meeting and prospectus to be 
issued by MUI and also filed with the Australian Securities and Investment Commission. 
 
3.3  OWNER CONTACT AND PROPERTY INSPECTION 
 
This Consultant has had frequent contact with the Client and with Skyland.  This Consultant has 
not personally inspected the subject property. 
 
3.4  SCOPE OF WORK AND SOURCES OF MATERIAL INFORMATION 
 
This  Report  is  intended  to  describe  and  quantify  the  gross  prospective  oil  and  gas  resources 
contained within License Block XIG, located in Georgia. 
 
Skyland provided us with the following information that was the basis for this report:
1.  Various PowerPoint Presentations regarding oil and gas potential of License Block XIG
12/3/2015
6
Gustavson Associates
2.  Seismic database  
3.  Well logs 
4.  Well Correlation Diagrams  
5.  Structure Maps 
6.  AFE for Drilling Costs 
7.  West Rustavi Report prepared by CanArgo
In addition, Gustavson acquired technical papers in the public domain on analogous oil and gas 
fields.  
 
3.5 APPLICABLE STANDARDS 
 
This Report is a Technical Assessment Report, prepared in accordance with VALMIN code.  It is 
also compliant with the Petroleum Resources Management System4 issued jointly by the Society 
of Petroleum Engineers (SPE), the World Petroleum Council (WPC), the American Association 
of Petroleum Geologists (AAPG), and the Society of Petroleum Evaluation Engineers (SPEE) as 
required by clause 75 of the VALMIN Code. 
 
3.6  ASSUMPTIONS AND LIMITING CONDITIONS 
 
The  accuracy  of  any  reserve  or  resource  estimate  is  a  function  of  available  time,  data  and  of 
geological, engineering, and commercial interpretation and judgment.  While the interpretation 
and  estimates  presented  herein  are  believed  to  be  reasonable,  they  should  be  viewed  with  the 
understanding  that  additional  analysis  or  new  data  may  justify  their  revision.    Gustavson 
Associates  reserves  the  right  to  revise  its  opinions,  if  new  information  is  deemed  sufficiently 
credible to do so.   
 
As of the writing of this report, the Kumisi #2 exploration well is being drilled on the prospect 
that is evaluated in this report.  On November 24, 2015, the well was reported to be at a depth of 
1,276 meters.  A more recent update was not available as the operator has put the well on tight-
4 http://www.spe.org/spe-site/spe/spe/industry/reserves/Petroleum_Resources_Management_System_2007.pdf
12/3/2015
7
Gustavson Associates
hole status5.  The results of this well will likely have a material impact on the findings of this 
report and will require an update incorporating those results. 
 
3.7  INDEPENDENCE/DISCLAIMER OF INTEREST 
 
Gustavson  Associates  LLC  has  acted  independently  in  the  preparation  of  this  Report.    The 
company and its employees have no direct or indirect ownership in the property appraised or the 
area  of  study  described.  Ms.  Letha  Lencioni  is  signing  off  on  this  Report,  which  has  been 
prepared by her as a Competent Expert, with the assistance of others on Gustavson’s staff. 
 
Our fee for this Report and the other services that may be provided are  not dependent on the 
amount of resources estimated. 
 
To the best of our knowledge, full, accurate and true disclosure of all material information was 
provided to us by Skyland, and all necessary access to Skyland’s records was assured.
5 Email communication with Skyland Petroleum on December 3, 2015.  Tight-hole status means that information 
about well progress and results are held confidential by the operator.
12/3/2015
8
Gustavson Associates
4.  PROJECT DESCRIPTION
4.1 LOCATION AND BASIN NAME 
 
The subject exploration block is located in the Kura Basin (also referred to as the Kartli Basin) 
and  the  Achara-Trialet  Thrust  Belt  in  Georgia  (Figure  4-1).    The  Kura  Basin  extends  over 
approximately 95,000 square kilometers from the middle of Georgia to the Caspian Sea.  The 
Achara-Trialet Thrust Belt is located to the south of the Kura Basin and extends from the Black 
Sea east to the Caspian Sea.  This thrust belt is also known as the Lesser Caucasus.
Figure 4-1 Location of Georgia and License Block XIG
The Kura Basin and the Rioni Basin pass through Georgia from the Black Sea to the Caspian Sea 
(Figure 4-2). The Kura Basin is a narrow, asymmetric, and northwest-southeast elongate basin
12/3/2015
9
Gustavson Associates
with the deeper axis on the north which borders the Greater Caucasus while the shallower axis on 
the south runs along the  Lesser Caucasus, which are also known as the Achara-Trialet Thrust 
Belt.
Figure 4-2  Tectonic Elements in Georgia with the Subject Block in Green
Maps of License Block XIG are shown in Figure 4-3 and Figure 4-4.  The XY map coordinates 
from the PSCs that define the Exploration License Block is shown in Table 4-1, presented using 
the Gauss-Kruger Zone 8, Krassovsky Spheroid.
12/3/2015
10
Gustavson Associates
Figure 4-3  Location of XIG License Block in Georgia
(modified from GOG, 2013)
Figure 4-4  License Block XIG Map
(showing the city of Tbilisi, major roads, rivers and forest areas)
12/3/2015
11
Gustavson Associates
Table 4-1  License Block XIG Coordinates
Block 
No. 
XIG 
XIG 
XIG 
XIG 
XIG 
XIG 
XIG 
XIG 
XIG
No. 
44 
44A 
44B 
44C 
44D 
56
53(K1) 
51(K4)
52
X
Y
4619056  8467885 
4624078  8492376 
4614823  8492366 
4614843  8481400 
4611665  8481392 
4612181  8485074 
4610052  8485069 
4607675  8485504 
4606744  8468248
4.2 OVERVIEW OF PROSPECT 
 
Gustavson Associates has reviewed the interpreted data that describes a prospect area contained 
within the License Block XIG area.  
 
The sub-thrust southern prospect in License Block XIG is based on seismic data and is near the 
Teleti  field,  which  produces  oil  from  Middle  Eocene  reservoir  rocks.    The  Samgori  Field 
produces hydrocarbons from reservoirs in Middle Eocene volcaniclastic rocks, primarily tuffs, 
that  are  the  model  for  reservoirs  in  the  identified  Middle  Eocene  thrust  prospect  on  License 
Block XIG.  Volcaniclastic rocks can be good reservoir rocks when porosity and permeability is 
enhanced by fracturing and diagenetic alteration to laumontite as is the case in the Samgori Field 
area.    Lower  Eocene  age  sandstone,  volcaniclastic,  marl,  and  siltstone  rocks  are  also  target 
reservoirs.  Cretaceous age carbonates are also a target reservoir for the prospect.  Gas shows and 
gas production for these reservoirs is present in the Kura Basin in general and the adjacent W. 
Rustavi oil field. 
 
Compressional  tectonics  dominate  the  region  creating  thrusting  and  anticlines  that  have  been 
explored for hydrocarbons.
12/3/2015
12
Gustavson Associates
4.2.1  South Prospect Sub-Thrust Prospect 
 
The South Prospect identified by  GOG using 2D seismic data,  gravity data, and well control, 
targets Middle and Lower Eocene reservoirs.  This prospect is in the area of the Kumisi #1 well, 
where  gas  shows  were  encountered  in  Lower  Eocene  reservoirs,  and  the  W.  Rustavi  #44  oil 
discovery.  Exploratory  drilling of the Kumisi #2 well on the prospect  is underway  and as of 
November 24, 2015, has penetrated to 1,276 meters.  No additional information was available 
because as of the writing of this report, the well was on tight hole status. 
 
The South Prospect Sub-Thrust prospect is shown in Figure 4-5 and Figure 4-6.  This prospect is 
north of W. Rustavi #44, which produces oil from Eocene reservoirs and north of the Kumisi #1 
well, which penetrated Upper Cretaceous rocks at 2,880 meters.  
 
Three  prospective  reservoir  intervals  have  been  included  in  the  resource  estimates,  Middle 
Eocene, Lower Eocene, and Cretaceous.
12/3/2015
13
Gustavson Associates
Figure 4-5  2D Seismic Line Showing Sub-Thrust Prospect, Kumisi #1 Well, W. Rustavi
#44 Oil Well, and Location of Kumisi #2 Well
Figure 4-6  New Gravity Data Residual Anomalies Map Showing Potential Sub-Thrust
Exploration Targets and Seismic Line Locations
12/3/2015
14
Gustavson Associates
4.3 SEISMIC INTERPRETATION 
 
Skyland provided 2D seismic data, screen shots of interpreted seismic lines, and maps along with 
some well and horizon depth information.  Gustavson loaded the depth versions of these data 
into  the  IHS  Kingdom  SMT  software  and  created  an  interpretation  based  on  the  information 
Skyland provided.  The Kumisi #1 and W. Rustavi #44 wells were used to correlate the Middle 
Eocene, Lower Eocene and Upper Cretaceous horizons to the seismic.  The location of the wells 
and seismic data on License Block XIG are depicted in Figure 4-7 below.
Figure 4-7 Seismic and well data location
Figure 4-8 and Figure 4-9 are depth structure maps based on the Gustavson interpretations for 
the Middle Eocene, Lower Eocene, and Cretaceous target intervals that were used to determine
12/3/2015
15
Gustavson Associates
the areas for input into the probabilistic resource estimates. The seismic  data indicates that in 
general  the  section  dips  to  the  east  and  that  this  is  a  structurally  complex  tectonic  and 
stratigraphic area with many faults and structural features.
Figure 4-8 Middle and Lower Eocene Depth Structure Map with Area Used for Resource
Estimates
The same areas were used for both the Middle and Lower Eocene for the purposes of resource 
estimates. The intervals are close together in a vertical sense and the structural interpretation was 
judged to be identical. The minimum area is estimated to be 9.6 square kilometers, most likely 
18.0 square kilometers and maximum 25.0 square kilometers.
12/3/2015
16
Gustavson Associates
Figure 4-9 Upper Cretaceous Depth Structure Map with Area Used for Resource Estimates 
 
The updip part of the Upper Cretaceous structure is to the west with a thrust fault assumed to 
form part of the trap. The interpretation was tied to a mappable event that is below the Kumisi 1 
top.  The  minimum  area  is  estimated  to  be  17.9  square  kilometers,  most  likely  51.5  square 
kilometers and maximum 79.2 square kilometers. 
 
4.4 GROSS AND NET INTEREST IN THE PROPERTIES 
 
Georgia  Oil  and  Gas  (GOG)  owned  100  percent  interest  in  a  production  sharing  contract  for 
License  Block  XIG.    On  November  13,  2015,  Skyland  Petroleum  entered  into  a  Heads  of 
Agreement to acquire a 20 percent interest in the Block.  Skyland’s 20 percent interest in License 
Block XIG is evaluated in this report.
12/3/2015
17
Gustavson Associates
License  Block XIG  is subject to a production sharing contract  with the  Georgian  government.  
The  PSC  states  that  the  profit  oil  from  any  oil  and  gas  operations  will  be  allocated  in  the 
following manner:
•  Sixty percent of Profit Oil to the State 
•  Forty percent of Profit Oil to the Contractor
Profit Oil is defined as the amount of production, after deducting cost oil production allocated to 
costs  and  expenses,  that  will  be  divided  between  the  participating  parties  and  the  host 
government under the production sharing contract.6 
 
4.5 PRODUCT TYPES REASONABLY EXPECTED 
 
Medium  to  light  crude  oil  and  associated  gas  are  the  product  types  expected  in  the  Middle 
Eocene target reservoirs and natural gas in the Lower Eocene and Cretaceous target reservoirs.  
 
4.6 ESTIMATED DRILLING AND TESTING COSTS 
 
Skyland has provided us with an AFE that has the following costs for the Kumisi #2 well:
•  Near vertical well to 2,300 meters - USD3.2 million 
•  Sidetrack of 600 – 700 meters - USD1 million 
•  Total Cost - USD4.2 million
Skyland  reported  that  if  the  Kumisi  #2  well  is  successful  in  the  deeper  main  target,  then  a 
sidetrack will not be necessary.  If the deeper target is unsuccessful, then the sidetrack is planned 
for a total cost of up to $1 million.   
 
In addition, Stage 3 of the Work Commitment may require the drilling of a second exploratory 
well and an option for acquiring additional seismic data.  Skyland reports that there are no firm 
plans to drill a second well and the impetus to do so will depend on the results of the Kumisi #2
6 http://www.glossary.oilfield.slb.com/en/Terms/p/profit_oil.aspx
12/3/2015
18
Gustavson Associates
well.  If there is a second well, the target would be to a similar depth and have a similar cost to 
the Kumisi #2 well.   
 
In  regards  to  the  shooting  of  additional  seismic,  Skyland  reports  that  about  135  km2  of  2D 
seismic data were just acquired in 2014 – 2015.  Future acquisition of a 3D survey would likely 
occur if the Kumisi #2 well is successful.   
 
4.7  EXPECTED TIMING OF DRILLING AND COMPLETION 
 
As  described  previously,  the  Kumisi  #2  is  currently  being  drilled  on  the  subject  block  on  the 
prospect that is evaluated in this report.  The exact timing of TD, logging, testing and completion 
is not known at this time. 
 
4.8  EXPECTED PRICES 
 
If hydrocarbons are discovered on the subject block, there will likely be revenue from oil and 
natural gas production.  Research on crude oil prices in Georgia indicates that Brent pricing is 
referenced  minus  marketing  and  transportation.    Exact  figures  are  not  available  but  another 
operator reports that the price differential is about $12.00 per barrel7.   
 
Natural gas will likely be sold domestically as Georgia imports gas from neighboring countries.  
The  pricing  of  domestic  gas  in  Georgia  is  complex  and  would  depend  on  several  factors.  
Information on pricing  could only be found at the retail level where  residential and industrial 
customers pay 0.17 to 0.23 euro/m3. 
 
4.9  EXPECTED MARKETING AND TRANSPORTATION ARRANGEMENTS 
 
The Baku-Supsa Oil Pipeline (also known as the Western Route Export Pipeline and Western 
Early Oil Pipeline) runs 833 kilometers (518 miles) from Sanagachal Terminal in Azerbaijan to 
the Supsa Terminal in Georgia.  With a capacity of 145 MBOPD, it is operated by BP and passes 
                                                 
7 Iskander Energy Corporate Presentation October 2014
12/3/2015
19
Gustavson Associates
through Block XIM.  The Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan Oil Pipeline (BTC) runs 1,768 kilometers (1,099 
miles) from the Caspian Sea to the Mediterranean Sea.  The pipeline is owned and operated by a 
consortium of eleven energy companies called BTC Co.  Its capacity is 1 MMBOPD.  The South 
Caucasus Gas Pipeline (SCP) runs 692 kilometers (430 miles) from the Azerbaijan offshore gas 
field Shah-Deniz to Erzurum, Turkey.  Its capacity is 8.8 BCMPY.  Both the BTC and SCP lines 
run to the immediate south of Block XIA. 
 
Figure 4-10 depicts the oil and gas pipelines in and around Georgia.
Figure 4-10  Oil and Gas Pipelines in and around Georgia
(economist.com, 2008)
4.10  IDENTITY AND RELEVANT EXPERIENCE OF THE OPERATOR 
 
GOG is an oil and gas exploration, development, and production company and is organized and 
existing under the laws of British Virgin Islands.   
 
The registered address and other pertinent information for the company is the following:
•  Palm Grove House, P.O. Box 438, Road Town, Tortola, British Virgin Islands; 
•  Registration No: 1473418; 
•  The Date of Incorporation: 08 April, 2008.
12/3/2015
20
Gustavson Associates
5.  GEOLOGY
5.1 STRUCTURE 
 
The subject block is located in a tectonically complex area to the south of the Greater Caucasus 
and across the Lesser Caucasus. Oil and gas production has been established primarily from the 
Rioni Basin near the Black Sea and the Kartli Basin (also referred to as the Kura Basin) on the 
eastern side of Georgia (also known as the Karthaliny or Western or Upper Kura basin) which 
are flexural foreland basins formed in Neogene time by loading of the Achara-Trialet Thrust Belt 
(Lesser Caucasus) (Figure 5-1).  Both basins are bounded on the north by the Greater Caucasus 
fold and thrust area, which is composed of shallow marine carbonate rocks.  The Achara-Trialet 
Thrust Belt is composed of Paleogene age strata formed in a rifted extensional basin (Robinson 
et  al.,  1997).    This  area  is  characterized  by  large  anticlines  and  associated  faulting  involving 
Cretaceous through Paleogene rocks.  The pre-rift basement rocks include the Dziruli Massif that 
now  separates  the  Rioni  Basin  from  the  Kartli  Basin.    The  basin  complex  extends  through 
Azerbaijan to the Caspian Sea.
Figure 5-1  Exploration License Block XIG, Basins, and Mountain Areas
(from Robinson et al., 1997)
12/3/2015
21
Gustavson Associates
The  region  of  Georgia  and  Azerbaijan  between  the  Black  Sea  and  the  Caspian  Sea  (roughly 
located in the red oval in Figure 5-2) is composed of accreted terranes8.  These terranes include 
island arcs and continental fragments that moved from Gondwana to be accreted to the Eurasian 
Plate  in  several  stages  (Adamia  et  al.,  2011;  Zakariadze  et  al.,  2007;  Robinson  et  al.,  1997; 
Zonenshain, et al., 1990).  The paleogeographic maps included in Figure 5-2 trace the process 
through  time.    The  Cretaceous  carbonate  rocks  and  the  Cenozoic  age  clastic  rocks  that  are 
exploration targets in Georgia were deposited in rift basins, back-arc and foreland style basins 
that were formed in the area of the Black Sea and Caspian Sea over and between these terranes 
during the Mesozoic and Cenozoic (Figure 5-2) (Adamia, et al., 2011).
Figure 5-2 Paleogeographic Reconstructions of the Area
(during Paleozoic, Mesozoic and Cenozoic times)
8 A continental or oceanic plate fragment added to the margin of another tectonic plate by collision and welding.
12/3/2015
22
Gustavson Associates
The  collision  and  rotation  of  the  Africa-Arabian  plate  with  the  Eurasian  Plate  resulted  in  the 
Alpine Orogeny, which formed the Rioni and Kartli basins and the folded and thrusted structural 
traps that are being explored for hydrocarbons.  The structural complexity of the area is shown in 
Figure 5-3.
Figure 5-3 Regional Structural Fault Map
5.2 STRATIGRAPHY 
 
Paleozoic and Mesozoic rocks in the Kartli (Kura) Basin are dominated by marine carbonates.  
This interval includes volcanic and volcaniclastic rocks and marls.   
 
The Cretaceous strata consist of platform carbonates, sandy limestones, marls, and volcaniclastic 
rocks  of  back-arc  and  continental  shelf  origin.  Cretaceous  rocks  are  important  hydrocarbon 
reservoirs  in  the  North  Caucasus  region.    The  Manavi  11  well  discovered  oil  in  fractured 
Cretaceous carbonate rocks in Block XIE in Georgia to the east of the subject block.  The Manavi 
structure is a faulted anticline that is along strike to the Ninotsminda Field.  Before mechanical
12/3/2015
23
Gustavson Associates
failures,  the  well  tested  40.5  degree  API  oil  from  a  148  meter  hydrocarbon  column9.    The 
Manavi 11 well could be used as an analog for new exploration plays in Georgia (Morariu and 
Noual, 2009).  Cretaceous age reservoir rocks include rocks encountered in the Manavi 11 well. 
 
Marine  carbonates  give  way  to  marine  sandy  limestones  and  clastics  during  the  Paleocene 
(Figure 5-4).  The Eocene was characterized by the advent of submarine volcanic eruptions that 
deposited  lava,  tuffs  and  tuffaceous  turbidites  interbedded  with  marine  clastic  and  marine 
carbonate  deposits.    Reservoirs  of  Middle  Eocene  age  are  characterized  as  volcaniclastic 
interbedded  with  siltstones  and  some  volcanic  andesitic  flows.    The  volcaniclastic  sandstones 
were deposited as gravity flows, or turbidites, in deep marine settings.  The reservoir quality of 
these  volcaniclastic  sandstones  has  reportedly  been  improved  by  diagenetic  alteration  to 
laumontite and by fracturing (Robinson et al., 1997).  Volcanism decreased as shallow marine 
clastic and carbonate deposits dominated the Late Eocene. 
 
Oligocene  age  rocks  contain  interbedded  sandstone  and  shale  deposited  in  shallow  marine 
depositional  settings  in  restricted  basins.  The  Oligocene  succession  of  sandstones  and 
gypsiferous  clays  continues  into  the  Miocene.    Miocene  age  deposits  range  from  marine 
turbidites to fluvial and deltaic deposits indicating a change from marine to shallow marine to 
continental setting.  The Maikop Series of Oligocene to Early Miocene age contains both source 
rocks and reservoir rocks that produce oil in the Kura Basin. 
 
Jurassic age sedimentary rocks consisting of volcaniclastic sandstone, shale, limestone and marl 
unconformably overly basement are present in the Block VIII region.  Here approximately 1,500 
meters  of  lower  Cretaceous  rocks,  which  consist  of  volcaniclastic  sandstones,  limestone,  and 
shale, transgressively overly the Jurassic.  Similar rocks comprise the 1,800 meter thick upper 
Cretaceous  interval.    Cenozoic  age  sedimentary  rocks  consist  of  marine  sandstone,  clay,  and 
limestone that can total approximately 9,000 meters of section where present.  Igneous intrusions 
are also present on the surface as well as basement highs.
9 Blakeoilandgas.com
12/3/2015
24
Gustavson Associates
Figure 5-4 Stratigraphic Column of the Kura Basin Region
(showing source rocks and tectonics)
12/3/2015
25
Gustavson Associates
5.3 PETROLEUM SYSTEM 
 
The aspects of a petroleum system include mature source rock, reservoir rock, and trapping of 
the reservoir rock where hydrocarbons migrated from the mature source rock can accumulate. 
 
5.3.1  Source Rocks 
 
Numerous  source  rocks  have  been  investigated  for  the  oils  found  in  the  Kura  Basin  and  the 
Lesser Caucasus.  These consist of shale, chalkstone, and mudrock of Cretaceous, Paleogene and 
Neogene age (Gudushauri and Sanishvili, 2000) (Table 5-1).  Cretaceous Aptian and Albian age 
marl source rocks have also been identified.  Jurassic rocks are also potential source rocks. 
 
Much of the historic production from wells in eastern Georgia is considered to be sourced from 
the Oligocene-Miocene  age Maikop Series.  The total organic carbon content typically ranges 
between 0.3-1.6% (Strait and Georgian, 2011).  Table 5-1 shows the organic content of some 
rocks of Neogene (N), Paleogene (P), and one Cretaceous (K) sample. These were reported in the 
scheme  of  katagenetic 
(MK),  and 
apokatagenesis (AK) (Gudshauri and Sanishvili, 2000; Trofimuk et al., 1984).  Protokatagenesis 
roughly compares to immature to submature source rocks up to vitrinite reflectance values of Ro 
0.50 % (Trofimuk et al., 1984).  Mezokatagenesis begins Ro 0.50 % just before the beginning of 
the  oil  window  and  ends  at  Ro  2.00  %  at  the  base  of  the  wet  gas  window  (Dow,  1977).  
Apokatagenesis begins at Ro 2.00 % and ranges to Ro 6.00 %, past the dry gas preservation limit 
(Dow, 1977).
stages,  protokatagenesis
(PK),  mezokatagenesis
Table 5-1  Kura Basin Source Rock Maturity, TOC, and Age
12/3/2015
26
Gustavson Associates
Oil typing was done on produced oils (and well head seeps) and natural oil seep samples from 
the Shromisubani, Natanebi, Guliani, and Okumi fields in West Georgia, the Uplistsikhe field 
and the surface at Akhalkalaki in the Kartli Basin and Vedzebi North and Ninotsminda fields in 
East  Georgia  (Robinson,  et  al.,  1997).    These  oils  were  compared  with  extracts  from  upper 
Eocene  rocks  in  two  wells  in  the  Kavtiskhevi  field  in  the  Kartli  basin  indicating  these  upper 
Eocene rocks were the source for the oil (Robinson, et al., 1997).  Other oils were considered as 
of  mixed  multi-migration  origin  but  interpreted  as  from  source  rocks  of  Tertiary  to  Late 
Cretaceous in age (Robinson, et al., 1997)  An analysis of oil from the Vedzebi North discovery 
suggests a Late Cretaceous age source rock for this oil.   
 
5.3.2  Reservoir Rocks 
 
Miocene age rocks are the oil reservoirs in the Norio and Satskhenisi fields, which are to the 
north of License Block XIG in the Kartli Basin (Robinson, 1997).  They include the Sarmatian, 
Chokrak, and Maikop reservoirs.  
 
Middle Eocene age reservoir rocks account for more than 90% of historic production within the 
other fields in the Kartli Basin.  Clastic rocks of this age are proven reservoirs in the Samgori-
Patardzeuli,  South  Dome,  Ninotsminda  and  Teleti  fields.    These  reservoirs  are  predominately 
volcaniclastic rocks.  Reservoir properties are good where tuffaceous rocks have been partially 
altered  to  laumontite  by  hydrothermal  solutions,  which  has  increased  average  porosity  to  12 
percent and average permeability to 15 millidarcies (Robinson, 1997).  Microfractures within the 
altered laumontite intervals and tectonic fractures also enhance reservoir permeability. Much of 
the information about this reservoir comes from studies on samples from the Samgori oil fields 
(Vernik, 1990). In addition to fracturing enhancing permeability of these reservoirs, where the 
tuffs  are  altered  to  Laumontite  tuffs  secondary  permeability  and  porosity  increases  (Vernik, 
1990).  Grynberg et al (1993) state that oil production from the Samgori Field is from fractured 
bodies of laumontized tuff sealed by andesite-basalt tuffs and tuffites. 
 
Cretaceous reservoir rocks are productive in the North Caucasus, particularly the Terek-Caspian 
Basin  of  Russia  (Ulmishek,  2001).    In  the  North  Caucasus  Cretaceous  carbonate  reservoirs
12/3/2015
27
Gustavson Associates
produce at rates from 3,000 to 15,000 barrels of oil per day.  Recovery factors in these reservoirs 
are  reportedly  50  percent  (Morariu  and  Noual,  2009).  Cretaceous  reservoir  rocks  have  been 
encountered  in  the  Manavi  11  well  in  Block  XIE  along  strike  to  the  Ninotsminda  oil  field  of 
Georgia.  The Cretaceous reservoirs consist of carbonate rocks where the normally low porosity 
and permeability have been enhanced by fracturing due to tectonic movement (Ulmishek, 2001). 
 
Jurassic  sandstone  potential  reservoirs  are  characterized  by  porosity  of  up  to  10%  and 
permeability of approximately 15 millidarcies (mD).  Potential reservoir rocks of Cretaceous age 
have  porosity  of  up  to  21%  and  permeability  of  35mD.    Eocene  age  sandstone  reservoirs  are 
characterized by porosity of up to 20% and permeability of 11 mD.  Porosity in reservoir rocks 
of the Maikop interval is approximately 18% with permeability of 122 mD.  Potential reservoir 
rocks of Miocene age exhibit porosity of 27% to 32% with permeability of 121 mD to 554 mD 
(Strait and Georgian, 2011). 
 
5.3.3  Traps 
 
There are anticlines present that have been defined by surface mapping and have been drilled.  
Some of these structures may also have exploration potential in deeper Cretaceous and Jurassic 
age strata.  Additional traps include sub-thrust anticlines and other thrust related traps that are not 
detectable from surface geologic mapping.  Seismic data are necessary to delineate these traps 
and  find  exploration  targets.    Many  traps  suggested  by  the  seismic  data  are  unconfirmed  and 
closure is not evident.  These traps may require 3D seismic data to better define the targets.
12/3/2015
28
Gustavson Associates
6.  EXPLORATION HISTORY
Many of the discoveries in Georgia have been in the foreland basins and fold and thrust belts.  
To date, eighteen discoveries have been made, of which fifteen of those are in Georgia’s portion 
of the Kura Basin (Tethys, 2013).  The historic exploration targets in Georgia have been traps 
involving Eocene strata (Robinson et al., 1997).   
 
Exploration in the country began in the late 19th century with shallow drilling beneath surface 
seeps.  By 1866, more than 100 shallow wells (less than 100 meters (328 feet)) had been drilled 
in eastern Georgia.  After World War II, drilling targets were anticlines identified on seismic.  
More than 1,300 deep wells were drilled during the Soviet Era and small discoveries were made 
(Tethys, 2013). 
 
The state company GruzNeft was the only license holder in the country between 1930 and 1994, 
during which time 197 MMBBL were produced.  Peak production was achieved in 1981 with 
rates around 70 MBOPD.  Also during this time, seventeen oil fields were discovered, but only 5 
were commercially successful (Tethys, 2013). 
 
Only two large discoveries were made in the Kura Basin, the Samgori-Patardzeuli-South Dome 
(Samgori)  Field  and  its  eastwards  extension,  the  Ninotsminda  Field.    The  Samgori  Field  was 
discovered  in  1974.    It  has  a  cumulative  production  of  210  MMBBL  and  is  still  producing.  
Initial flow rates in the field were as high as 5,000 BOPD per well.  The Ninotsminda Field has 
produced  12  MMBBL  of  oil  and  8.5  BCF  of  gas  to  date  and  is  still  being  developed.    Well 
performance in this field is dependent on fractures and well flow at rates around 700-800 BOPD 
(Tethys, 2013) have been achieved. 
 
Approximately fifteen companies have held licenses in Georgia since 1994, with nine companies 
at present.  Between 1994 and 2012, 10.7 MMBBL of oil was produced from existing fields, but 
no new commercial discoveries have been made.  In 2006, Frontera Resources started to acquire 
80 square kilometers (31 square miles) of 3D seismic in Block XII in eastern Georgia (Tethys, 
2013) (Figure 6-1).
12/3/2015
29
Gustavson Associates
Block  VIII  has  been  tested  to  Jurassic  age  rocks.    Exploration  activity  focused  primarily  on 
Cretaceous  age  targets  of  the  Ahalkalaki  and  East  Kavtiskhevi  anticlines,  which  have  some 
surface expression on the northeastern border of the block.  The map in Figure 6-1 shows oil 
flow or oil shows in wells as black triangles.  Gas flow or gas shows are shown as red triangles 
(Strait and Georgian, 2011).
Figure 6-1 Map of Oil and Gas Occurrences in Georgia
Oil and gas seeps are present and oil and gas shows have been encountered in numerous wells on 
Block VIII.  These occurrences have been found in Cretaceous sedimentary rocks and carbonate 
rocks, and Eocene age clastic rocks.  Oil and gas shows from the Maikop and a nine day test of 
40  tonnes  of  oil  from  Maikop  at  1,032  meters  in  the  #13  well  also  were  reported  (Strait  and 
Georgian, 2011). 
 
There  are  a  number  of  wells  shown  on  Figure  6-1  and  the  geologic  map  that  fall  on  License 
Block XIG.  The status of these wells is largely unavailable for this Report.
12/3/2015
30
Gustavson Associates
7.  RISKS
The risk of finding commercial quantities of hydrocarbons is significant for this area. The 2D 
seismic dataset provided is widely spaced, especially for the apparent structural complexity here. 
There are numerous apparent faults that could either enhance the fracturing of the reservoir rock 
or cause compartmentalization of the hydrocarbons. The Kumisi #1 well reportedly tested water 
with non-commercial quantities of gas from the Middle and Lower Eocene with the Cretaceous 
results unknown. The principle risk here is in finding reservoir quality rock or a fracture density 
sufficient to provide storage and productivity of hydrocarbons.
12/3/2015
31
Gustavson Associates
8.  PROBABILISTIC RESOURCE ESTIMATE
8.1  GENERAL 
 
A probabilistic resource analysis is most applicable for projects such as evaluating the potential 
resources of an exploratory area like these exploration licenses, where little data are available as 
to the values of the reservoir parameters.  The range of the expected reservoir data is quantified 
by probability distributions, and an iterative approach yields an expected probability distribution 
for potential resources. This approach allows consideration of most likely resources for planning 
purposes,  while  gaining  an  understanding  of  what  volumes  of  resources  may  have  higher 
certainty, and what potential upside may exist for the project.  
 
This method involves estimating probability distributions for uncertain reservoir parameters and 
performing  a  statistical  risk  analysis  involving  multiple  iterations  of  reserve  calculations 
generated by random numbers and the specified distributions of reservoir parameters.  To do this, 
each  parameter  incorporated  in  our  resource  calculations  was  evaluated  for  its  expected 
probability distribution.  The parameters for these input distributions were selected based on a 
review of all available data. 
 
The analysis for this project was carried out considering the range of values for all parameters in 
the  volumetric  resource  equations.    All  prospects  identified  by  Gustavson’s  analysis  of  the 
seismic and surface data were analyzed in detail.   
 
8.2  INPUT PARAMETERS  
 
This method involves estimating probability distributions for the range of reservoir parameters 
and performing  a statistical risk analysis involving multiple iterations of resource calculations 
generated by random numbers and the specified distributions of reservoir parameters. To do this, 
each  parameter  incorporated  in  our  resource  calculation  was  evaluated  for  its  expected 
probability distribution.
12/3/2015
32
Gustavson Associates
The input parameters used were based on a combination of the data provided by Skyland and 
engineering experience.  The porosity estimates are a blend of matrix and fracture porosity as 
these types of reservoirs typically have very low matrix porosity but are enhanced by fractures.  
The  gross thicknesses  were counted up from the available logs.  The net to  gross  ratios were 
based on literature provided as well as independent verification from available logs.  Reservoir 
depths  and  areas  were  calculated  from  our  independent  seismic  interpretation  of  the  prospect.  
Summaries of input parameters are shown in Table 8-1 through Table 8-3. 
 
Due  to  the  paucity  of  data  that  are  available  about  the  likely  distribution  of  the  reservoir 
parameters,  simple  triangular  distributions  with  specification  of  minimum,  most  likely,  and 
maximum values were used for most of the parameters.  For reservoir area, P90, most likely or 
mode, and P10 values were specified for the triangular distributions.  The exception to this is the 
Cretaceous reservoir area and net thickness, for which cumulative distributions with specification 
of P90, P50, and P10 values were used.10  Note that these parameters represent average parameters 
over the entire prospect. So, for example, the porosity ranges do not represent the range of what 
porosity might be in a particular well or a particular interval, but rather the reasonable range of 
the average porosity for the whole prospect.  Gustavson is of the opinion that this is a reasonable 
approximation, and has used the same methodology.
10  The  original  intention  was  that  the  low  values  specified  would  represent  P90  values;  however,  this  assumption 
resulted in some negative values.  Truncation of the distributions at zero caused the resulting distribution to differ 
from the intended parameters; therefore, the cumulative distribution was used to specify the desired parameters.
12/3/2015
33
Gustavson Associates
Table 8-1 Summary of Input Parameters for Middle Eocene
Source of Parameter
Min
Most 
Likely
Max
35  
350 
0.65 
4,856
1.38
0.38 
6 
30
2,372 
492
0.10
25
36 
400 
0.7 
5,840
1.54
0.395 
12 
35
4,448 
738
0.25
30
40 
450 
0.75 
6,100
1.69
0.41 
20 
40
6,178 
951
0.35
35
Max
0.75
6,900
1.69
0.41 
20 
30
6,178 
886 
0.40
85
CanArgo report for 
West Rustavi field
Seismic interpretation 
Patton paper
Oil Gravity, API 
Gas Oil Ratio, scf/bbl  Patton paper 
Gas Gravity 
Reservoir Depth, ft. 
Temperature 
Gradient, °F/100ft 
Pressure Gradient, 
psi/ft. 
Porosity, % 
Water Sat., % 
Productive Area, 
acres 
Gross Thickness, ft
Patton paper
Rustavi field 
Rustavi field 
Seismic interpretation
logs 
Grynberg, et al. paper, 
and Kumisi 1 well 
Experience with 
similar reservoirs
Net to Gross, frac
% Recovery
Table 8-2 Summary of Input Parameters for Lower Eocene
Gas Gravity 
Fraction N2 
Fraction CO2 
Reservoir Depth, ft. 
Temperature 
Gradient, °F/100ft 
Pressure Gradient, 
psi/ft. 
Porosity, % 
Water Sat., % 
Productive Area, 
acres 
Gross Thickness, ft 
Net to Gross, frac
% Recovery
Source of Parameter
CanArgo report on 
West Rustavi Field 
Gas sample 
Gas sample 
Seismic interpretation 
Patton paper
Patton paper
Rustavi field 
Skyland 
Seismic interpretation
logs 
Kumisi 1 well 
Experience with 
similar reservoirs
Min
0.65
5,578
1.38
0.38 
6 
20
2,372 
492 
0.10
75
Most 
Likely
0.7
0.112 
0.0025 
6,562
1.54
0.395 
13 
25
4,448 
525 
0.20
80
12/3/2015
34
Gustavson Associates
Table 8-3 Summary of Input Parameters for Cretaceous
Gas Gravity 
Fraction N2 
Fraction CO2 
Reservoir Depth, ft. 
Temperature 
Gradient, °F/100ft 
Pressure Gradient, 
psi/ft. 
Porosity, % 
Water Sat., % 
Productive Area, 
acres 
Net Thickness, ft
% Recovery
Source of Parameter
Can Argo report on 
West Rustavi Field 
Gas sample 
Gas sample 
Seismic interpretation 
Patton paper
Patton paper
Previous report 
Previous report 
Seismic interpretation
Previous report 
Experience with 
similar reservoirs
Min
0.65
7,809
1.38
0.38 
5 
30
Most 
Likely
0.7
0.112 
0.0025 
9,614
1.54
0.395 
10 
40
Max
0.75
10,000
1.69
0.41 
13 
50
4,423 
49.2
12,726 
164.1
19,571 
328.1
75
80
85
In  a  probabilistic  analysis,  dependent  relationships  can  be  established  between  parameters  if 
appropriate.   For example, portions of a  reservoir with the lowest effective porosity  generally 
may be expected to have the highest connate water saturation, whereas higher porosity sections 
have lower water saturation.  In such a case, it is appropriate to establish an inverse relationship 
between porosity and water saturation, such that if a high porosity is randomly estimated in a 
given  iteration,  corresponding  low  water  saturation  is  estimated.    The  degree  of  such  a 
correlation  can  be  controlled  to  be  very  strong  or  weak.    This  type  of  dependency,  with  a 
medium strength of -0.7, was used in this study for porosity with water saturation. 
 
8.3 PROBABILISTIC SIMULATION 
 
Probabilistic resource analysis was performed using the Monte Carlo simulation software called 
“@  Risk”.  This  software  allows  for  input  of  a  variety  of  probability  distributions  for  any 
parameter.  Then  the  program  performs  a  large  number  of  iterations,  either  a  large  number 
specified by the user, or until a specified level of stability is achieved in the output. The results 
include  a  probability  distribution  for  the  output,  sampled  probability  for  the  inputs,  and
12/3/2015
35
Gustavson Associates
sensitivity analysis showing which input parameters have the most effect on the uncertainty in 
each output parameter. 
 
After  distributions  and  relationships  between  input  parameters  were  defined,  a  series  of 
simulations were run wherein points from the distributions were randomly selected and used to 
calculate  a  single  iteration  of  estimated  potential  resources.  The  iterations  were  repeated  until 
stable statistics (mean and standard deviation) result from the resulting output distribution. This 
occurred after 5,000 iterations.   
 
8.4 RESULTS  
 
The output distributions were then used to characterize the Prospective Resources.  Graphs of 
cumulative probability versus prospective resources were constructed.  Results are summarized 
in Table 8-4 and Table 8-5.  There is no certainty that it will be commercially viable to produce 
any portion of the resources.  The distribution graphs for the resource estimates can be found in 
the Appendix to this Report.
Table 8-4   Gross Unrisked Prospective Resources, License Block XIG, South Prospect
Reservoir
Middle Eocene
Middle Eocene 
Lower Eocene 
Cretaceous 
Arithmetic 
Total Gas
Parameter 
Prospective Oil Resources, 
MMBbl 
Prospective Solution Gas 
Resources, BCF 
Prospective Gas Resources, BCF 
Prospective Gas Resources, BCF 
Prospective Gas Resources, 
BCF
Low
Estimate
Best
Estimate
High
Estimate
48
19  
146  
112
277
104
42  
319  
674
192
77  
600  
1,979
1,035
2,656
12/3/2015
36
Gustavson Associates
Table 8-5  Unrisked Prospective Resources Net to Skyland (20%), License Block XIG,
South Prospect
Low
Estimate
Best
Estimate
High
Estimate
9.7
3.9 
29.2 
22.4
20.7
8.3 
63.9 
134.7
38.4
15.3 
120.1 
395.7
55.5
206.9
531.1
Reservoir
Middle Eocene
Middle Eocene 
Lower Eocene 
Cretaceous 
Arithmetic 
Total Gas
Parameter 
Prospective Oil Resources, 
MMBbl 
Prospective Solution Gas 
Resources, BCF 
Prospective Gas Resources, BCF 
Prospective Gas Resources, BCF 
Prospective Gas Resources, 
BCF
Note that these estimates do not include consideration for the risk of failure in exploring for these 
resources.  Prospective Resources are defined as “those quantities of petroleum estimated, as of a 
given  date,  to  be  potentially  recoverable  from  undiscovered  accumulations  by  application  of 
future development projects. Prospective Resources have both an associated chance of discovery 
and a chance of development. Prospective Resources are further subdivided in accordance with 
the  level  of  certainty  associated  with  recoverable  estimates  assuming  their  discovery  and 
development and may be sub-classified based on project maturity.”11 There is no certainty that 
any portion of the resources will be discovered. If discovered, there is no certainty that it will be 
commercially viable to produce any portion of the resources. The Low Estimate represents the 
P90 values from the probabilistic analysis (in other words, the value is greater than or equal to the 
P90 value 90% of the time), while the Best Estimate represents the P50 and the High Estimate 
represents the P10.12
11 Petroleum Resources Management System, Society of Petroleum Engineers (SPE), March 2007, Page 3. 
12 Petroleum Resources Management System, Society of Petroleum Engineers (SPE), March 2007, Page 2.
12/3/2015
37
Gustavson Associates
It  should  be  noted  that  the  shape  of  the  probability  distributions  all  result  in  wide  spacing 
between the minimum and maximum expected resources. This is reflective of the high degree of 
uncertainty  associated  with  any  evaluation  such  as  this  one  prior  to  actual  field  discovery, 
development, and production. Also note that, in general, the high probability resource estimates 
at the left side of these distributions represents downside risk, while the low probability estimates 
on  the  right  side  of  the  distributions  represent  upside  potential.    These  distributions  do  not 
include consideration of the probability of success of discovering commercial quantities of oil, 
but rather represent the likely distribution of oil discoveries, if successfully found.
12/3/2015
38
Gustavson Associates
9.  COMPETENT EXPERT’S CONSENT FORM
The  information  in  this  report  that  relates  to  Exploration  Results,  Mineral  Resources  or  Ore 
Reserves is based on the information compiled by and under the supervision of Letha Chapman 
Lencioni, who is a Professional Engineer.  Ms. Lencioni is employed by Gustavson Associates.  
She has sufficient experience which is relevant to the style of mineralization and type of deposit 
under  consideration  and  to  the  activity  which  she  is  undertaking  to  qualify  as  a  Competent 
Expert  as  defined  in  the  2005  Edition  of  the  VALMIN  Code.    Ms.  Lencioni  consents  to  the 
inclusion of the report of the matters based on her information in the form and context in which it 
appears. 
 
Gustavson Associates LLC and Letha Lencioni hereby consent to the use of all or any part of this 
Resource  Evaluation  Report  for  Skyland’s  leaseholds  in  the  Republic  of  Georgia,  as  of  18 
November, 2015, in any document filed with any Australian Securities Commission by MUI.
I, Letha Chapman Lencioni, Professional Engineer of 5757 Central Avenue, Suite D, Boulder, 
Colorado, 80301, USA, hereby certify:
•  I  am  an  employee  of  Gustavson  Associates,  which  prepared  a  detailed  analysis  of  the
properties of MUI Corp.  The effective date of this evaluation is November 18, 2015.
•  I do not have, nor do I expect to receive, any direct or indirect interest in the securities of
MUI Corporation or its affiliated companies, nor any interest in the subject properties.
•  I have read and understood the requirements of the Code for the Technical Assessment 
and  Valuation  of  Mineral  and  Petroleum  Assets  and  Securities  for  Independent  Expert 
Reports, the 2005 Edition of The VALMIN Code.
•  I am a Competent Person as defined by clause 20 of the 2005 VALMIN Code. I attended 
the University of Tulsa and I graduated with a Bachelor of Science Degree in Petroleum 
Engineering in 1980; I am a Registered Professional Engineer in the States of Colorado 
and Wyoming, and I have in excess of 30 years’ experience in the conduct of evaluation 
and engineering studies relating to oil and gas fields.
•  I have reviewed the Report to which this Consent Statement applies.
12/3/2015
39
Gustavson Associates
I verify that the Report is based on and fairly and accurately reflects in the form and context in 
which  it  appears,  the  information  in  my  supporting  documentation  relating  to  Petroleum 
Resources.
CONSENT
I consent to the release of the Report and this Consent Statement by the directors of:
………………………………………………………………………………………………............
Gustavson Associates, LLC
Signature of Competent Person:
Registered Professional Engineer, State of Colorado 
Registered Professional Engineer, State of Wyoming
Professional Membership:
Signature of Witness:
December 3, 2015
Date:
29506 
8493
Membership Number:
Michele Bishop
Boulder, CO   USA
Print Witness Name and
Residence (e.g. Town/Suburb):
12/3/2015
40
Gustavson Associates
Signature of Witness:
Additional Deposits covered by the Report for which the Competent Person signing this form is 
accepting responsibility: 
 
 
None. 
 
 
Additional Reports related to the deposit for which the Competent Person signing this form is 
accepting responsibility: 
 
None.
December 3, 2015
Signature of Competent Person:
Registered Professional Engineer, State of Colorado 
Registered Professional Engineer, State of Wyoming
Professional Membership:
Date:
29506 
8493
Membership Number:
Michele Bishop
Boulder, CO   USA
Print Witness Name and
Residence (e.g. Town/Suburb):
12/3/2015
41
Gustavson Associates
10. CERTIFICATE OF QUALIFICATION
I, Letha Chapman Lencioni, Professional Engineer of 5757 Central Avenue, Suite D, Boulder, 
Colorado, 80301, USA, hereby certify:
1.  I am an employee of Gustavson Associates, which prepared a detailed analysis of the oil 
and gas properties of Skyland.  The effective date of this evaluation is December 3, 2015. 
2.  I do not have, nor do I expect to receive, any direct or indirect interest in the securities of
MUI Corp. or its affiliated companies, nor any interest in the subject property.
3.  I attended the University of Tulsa and I graduated with a Bachelor of Science Degree in 
Petroleum Engineering in 1980; I am a Registered Professional Engineer in the States of 
Colorado and Wyoming; I have been a member of the Society of Petroleum Evaluation 
Engineers  since  1998;  and  I  have  in  excess  of  30  years’  experience  in  the  conduct  of 
evaluation  and  engineering  studies  relating  to  oil  and  gas  fields,  including  estimating 
quantities of reserves and resources.
4.  As  a  Registered  Professional  Engineer  in  the  States  of  Colorado  and  Wyoming  and  a 
member of the Society of Petroleum Evaluation Engineers, I am subject to the codes of 
ethics / rules of conduct of all these associations/boards.
Letha Chapman Lencioni 
Vice-President, Petroleum Engineering 
Gustavson Associates, LLC 
 Colorado Registered Engineer #29506 
Wyoming Registered Engineer #8493
12/3/2015
42
Gustavson Associates
11.  REFERENCES
Adamia, Shota, Guram Zakariadze, Tamar Chkhotua, Nino Sadradze, Nini Tsereteli, Aleksandre
Chabukiani, and Aleksandre Gventsadze, 2011, Geology of the Caucasus:  A Review: 
Turkish Journal of Earth Sciences, Vol. 20, p 489-544.
ARI, 2009, CMM and CBM development in the Tkibuli-Shaori Region, Georgia: Advanced
Resources International, Inc., Prepared for GIG/Saknakhshiri and U.S. Trade and 
Development Agency.
Dow, W. G., 1977, Kerogen Studies and Geological Interpretations:  Journal of Geochemical
Exploration, Vol. 7, p. 79-99.
GOG, Apr 2013, License blocks with license holders.jpg 
 
Grynberg, M. E., D. Papava, M. Shengelia, A. Takaishvili, A. Nanadze, and D. K. Patton, 1993, 
Petrophysical Characteristics of the Middle Eocene Laumontite Tuff Reservoir, Samgori 
Field, Republic of Georgia: Journal of Petroleum Geology, Vol. 16(3), p. 313-322
Gudushauri, Soso V., and Sanishvili, Artem V., 2000, Geological and Geochemical Promises of 
Oil and Gas Prospects of the West Georgia and Georgian Sector of the Black Sea Basin: 
AAPG Search and Discovery Article #90024.
Morariu, D., and V. Noual, 2009, Cretaceous Play—New Exploration Potential in the Eastern 
Georgia:  Neftegazovaya Geologia, Teoria I Practika, No. 4, http://www.ngtp.ru/4/22-
2009.pdf.
Patton, D. K., 1993, Samgori Field, Republic of Georgia: Critical Review of Island-Arc Oil and
Gas: Journal of Petroleum Geology, Vol. 16(2), p 153-168
Robinson, Andrew G., Eric T. Griffith, Andrew R. Gardiner, and Andrew K. Home, 1997,
Petroleum Geology of the Georgian Fold and Thrust Belts and Foreland Basins, in A. G. 
Robinson, ed., Regional and Petroleum Geology of the Black Sea and surrounding 
Region: AAPG Memoir 68, p. 347-367.
Strait Oil & Gas and Georgian Energy Limited, 2011, Block VIII geological composition, oil and
gas prospects: 48 p.
and Gas Prospects: 43p.
Strait Oil & Gas and Georgian Energy Limited, 2011, Block XIG Geological Composition, Oil
Tethys Petroleum, 2013, “Exploration and Petroleum Geology of the Kura Basin in Georgia”. 
 
Trofimuk, A. A, V. S. Vyshemirsky, A. E. Kontorovich, S. G. Neruchev, E. A. Rogozina, B. A.
Sokolov, V. L. Sokolov, 1984, Stages and Deep Zoning of Oil and Gas Generation in 
Basins of Different Type and Their Impact Upon Oil and Gas Distribution: Proceedings 
27th International Geological Congress, Vol. 13, pp. 193-210.
12/3/2015
43
Gustavson Associates
Ulmishek, Gregory F., 2001, Petroleum Geology and Resources of the Middle Caspian Basin,
Former Soviet Union: U. S. Geological Survey, Bull. 2201-A, 42 p.
Vernik, Lev, 1990, A New Type of Reservoir Rock in Volcaniclastic Sequences: AAPG Bull. V.
74, No. 6, p. 830-836
Zakariadze, Guram S., Yildirim Dilek, S. A. Adamia, R. E. Oberhansli, S. F. Karpendo, B. A.
Bazylev, and N. Soloveva, 2007, Geochemistry and geochronology of the Neoproterozoic 
Pan-African Transcaucasian Massif (Republic of Georgia) and implications for island arc 
evolution of the late Precambrian Arabian-Nubian Shield: Gondwana Research, Vol. 11, 
1-1, p. 92-108.
Zonenshain, Lev P., Michael I. Kuzmin, and Lev M Natapov, 1990, Geology of the USSR: A 
Plate-Tectonic Synthesis: American Geophysical Union, Geodynamics Series, Vol 21, 
242 p.
12/3/2015
44
Gustavson Associates
APPENDIX A
Resource Distributions
Prospective Oil Resources /Middle Eocene South Prospect
100%
m i m.—
3 m -
E m -
h
g 60%
5 _
E 50% macaw—
° _
5 was
° 30%
E
2
g 20%
10% nonsu—
0%
0.0 50.0 100.0 150.0 200.0 250.0 300.0 350.0 400.0 450.0
Oll Resourcesﬂvﬂvmbl
Prospective Solution Gas Resources / Middle Eocene South Prospect
100%
90% P90=ls a 7
2 m
g 70%
h
a
E 60%
h
2
3 50% nouns—
5
a 40%
>
‘3 30%
3
£
a 20%
10% Pm:76 7 —
0%
0.0 20.0 40.0 60.0 80.0 100.0 120.0 140.0 160.0 150.0
GI! Resource, BCF


Prospective Gas Resources / Lower Eocene South Prospect
100%
90% P903“? 0 —
a 00%
H 70%
1.
a
g m
E
E 50% P50=sls a —
D
3 m
'3
>
‘5 30%
E
1‘:
g 21m
1010 “was —
0%
0.0 200.0 400.0 500.0 300.0 1000.0 1200.0 1400.0 1500.0
GnskesouchBCF
Prospective Gas Resources / Cretaceous South Prospect
100%
90% mm 1
a 00%
El 70%
x.
a
E 60%
h
3
E 5090 750:5737—
U
a 40%
>
E 30%
‘E
ﬂ
: 10%
10% mums —
0%
0.0 1000.0 2000.0 3000.0 4000.0 9000.0 5000.0
Gas Resuurces, BCF


12. Additional	  Information
12.1  Company	  Information
The	   Company	   is	   an	   Australian	   company	   listed	   on	   ASX.	   It	   is	   proposed	   that	   the	   Company	   change	   its	   name	   to	   “Skyland	  
Petroleum	  Limited”	  (should	  shareholder	  approval	  be	  granted	  at	  the	  General	  Meeting),	  with	  a	  proposed	  change	  of	  ASX	  code	  
from	  MUI	  to	  “SKP”.
Following	  the	  Acquisition,	  SPG	  will	  be	  a	  wholly	  owned	  subsidiary	  of	  the	  Company.
Immediately	  following	  the	  Acquisition,	  the	  group	  structure	  of	  the	  Enlarged	  Company	  is	  set	  out	  below	  (all	  entities	  are	  100%	  owned):
12.2  Continuous	   Disclosure	   and	   Documents	   Available	   for	   Inspection
The	  Company	  is	  a	  "disclosing	  entity"	  for	  the	  purposes	  of	  Part	  1.2A	  of	  the	  Corporations	  Act.	  As	  such,	  it	  is	  subject	  to	  regular	  
reporting	  and	   disclosure	   obligations	  which	  require	  it	  to	  disclose	   to	  ASX	   any	  information	  which	  it	  is	  or	  becomes	  aware	  of	  
concerning	  the	  Company	  and	  which	  a	  reasonable	  person	  would	  expect	  to	  have	  a	  material	  effect	  on	  the	  price	  or	  value	  of	  
the	   securities	   of	   the	   Company.	  The	   Company's	   announcements	   are	   available	   free	   of	   charge	   on	   the	   ASX	   website	   or	   on	  
request	  to	  the	  Company.
12.3  Material	  Contracts
Set	  out	  below	  is	  a	  summary	  of	  the	  contracts	  to	  which	  the	  Company	  (or	  SPG)	  is	  a	  party	  that	  are	  material	  to	  the	  terms	  of	  the	  
Offers,	   and	   the	   operations	   of	   the	   Company's	   business	   following	   the	   Acquisition,	   and	   as	   such	   may	   be	   relevant	   to	   new	  
investors	   making	   a	   decision	   to	   invest	   in	   the	   Company.	   To	   understand	   fully	   the	   terms	   and	   conditions	   of	   the	   contracts	   it	  
would	  be	  necessary	  to	  read	  each	  contract	  in	  full.
149
12.3.1  Share	  Exchange	  Agreement
The	  principal	  feature	  of	  the	  Share	  Exchange	  Agreement	  is	  that	  the	  Company	  will	  acquire	  all	  the	  issued	  capital	  in	  SPG	  from	  
the	  Vendors	  in	  consideration	  for	  the	  issue	  of	  the	  Acquisition	  Shares.
Completion	  of	  the	  Acquisition	  is	  subject	  to	  satisfaction	  (or	  waiver)	  of	  the	  following	  conditions	  precedent:
•
•
•
•
the	  Company	  conducting,	  and	  being	  satisfied	  in	  its	  absolute	  discretion,	  of	  the	  results	  of	  its	  due	  diligence	  investigations
on	  SPG	  and	  its	  oil	  and	  gas	  Projects;
the	  execution	  by	  the	  Vendors	  of	  any	  applicable	  and	  appropriate	   restriction	  agreements	  relating	  to	  the	  Acquisition
Shares;
The	  Company	  not	  issuing	  any	  further	  shares,	  options	  or	  any	  other	  right	  to	  subscribe	  for	  shares	  prior	  to	  Completion;
the	  parties	  obtaining	  all	  necessary	  regulatory,	  third	  party	  and	  shareholder	  consents	  and	  approvals,	  including	  but	  not
limited	  to	  the	  Company	  obtaining	  shareholder	  approval	  for:
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
the	  issue	  of	  the	  Acquisition	  Shares	  pursuant	  to	  ASX	  Listing	  Rule	  7.1;
the	  Consolidation	  of	  the	  Company's	  issued	  capital;
the	  issue	  of	  Shares	  under	  the	  Public	  Offer;
the	  change	  in	  the	  Company's	  activities	  from	  an	  investment	  company	  to	  an	  oil	  and	  gas	  exploration	  and
production	  company;
the	  approval	  of	  the	  issue	  of	  a	  maximum	  of	  170,000,000	  Shares	  at	  a	  price	  of	  $0.10	  per	  Share	  (to	  facilitate
the	  Maximum	  Subscription	  under	  the	  Prospectus);
the	  lodgment	  of	  this	  Prospectus	  prepared	  by	  the	  Company	  with	  ASIC	  with	  respect	  to	  the	  Offers	  and
ensuring	  compliance	  with	  Chapters	  1	  and	  2	  (Re-­‐compliance)	  of	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules;
the	  successful	  completion	  of	  the	  Public	  Offer;	  and
ASX	  issuing	  a	  letter	  to	  the	  Company	  confirming	  that	  it	  will	  re-­‐instate	  the	  quotation	  of	  the	  Shares	  on	  ASX
on	   Completion	   of	   the	   Acquisition	   upon	   completion	   of	   the	   Re-­‐compliance	   on	   terms	   and	   conditions
acceptable	  to	  the	  Company.
Under	  the	  Share	  Exchange	  Agreement,	  the	  Company	  will	  appoint	  seven	  persons	  nominated	  by	  the	  Vendors	  to	  the	  board	  of	  
directors	  of	  the	  Company	  on	  Completion	  of	  the	  Acquisition,	  being	  the	  Proposed	  Directors	  as	  defined	  in	  this	  document.
Messrs.	  Bell	  and	  Silva	  will	  resign	  as	  Directors	  on	  Completion	  of	  the	  Acquisition.
The	  terms	  of	  the	  Share	  Exchange	  Agreement	  is	  otherwise	  on	  terms	  considered	  standard	  for	  this	  type	  of	  agreement.
12.3.2  Personnel	  Services	  Agreements
Following	  the	  Acquisition,	  it	  is	  the	  intention	  of	  the	  Company	  to	  maintain	  relevant	  and	  appropriate	  employment	  contracts	  
and	   service	   agreements	   with	   its	   staff	   –	   those	   such	   staff	   being	   employed	   by	   entities	   contained	   within	   the	   SPG	   group	  
structure.
SPG	  	  has	  	  agreements	  	  with	  	  Vazon	  	  Energy	  	  Limited	  	  for	  	  the	  	  provision	  	  of	  	  services	  	  of	  	  Dr	  	  David	  	  Robson	  	  and	  	  Elizabeth	  
Landles.	  Vazon	  Energy	  Limited	  will	  be	  paid	  fees	  for	  the	  services	  of	  Dr	  Robson	  as	  Executive	  Chairman	  and	  Managing	  
Director	  and	  for	  the	  services	  of	  Ms	  Landles	  as	  Executive	  Director	  and	  Group	  Corporate	  Secretary.
Under	  these	  agreements	  Dr	   Robson	   will	  receive	  annual	  fees	   of	   USD	  541,752	   and	  Ms	  Landles	  will	  receive	  annual	  fees	  of	  
USD	  314,000.
150
Mr	  Mark	  Sarssam	  has	  a	  contract	  with	  SPG	  for	  his	  engagement	  as	  Chief	  Operating	  Officer	  which	  is	  on	  standard	  commercial	  
terms.	  Mark	  Sarssam	  is	  entitled	  to	  be	  paid	  a	  salary	  of	  USD	  $310,000	  per	  annum	  for	  his	  services.
The	  specific	  roles	  and	  experience	  of	  each	  Executive	  Director	  of	  SPG	  are	  set	  out	  in	  section	  7.4	  of	  this	  Prospectus.
12.3.3  Deeds	  of	  Indemnity,	  Insurance	  and	  Access
The	  Company	  has	  entered	  into	  Deeds	  of	  Indemnity,	  Insurance	  and	  Access	  with	  each	  of	  its	  Directors	  pursuant	  to	  which	  the	  
Company	  agrees	  to	  indemnify	  the	  Directors	  against	  certain	  liabilities	  incurred	  by	  the	  Directors	  whilst	  acting	  as	  a	  Director	  of	  
the	   Company	   (or	   a	   subsidiary),	   to	   insure	   the	   Directors	   against	   certain	   risks	   to	   which	   the	   Directors	   are	   exposed	   to	   as	   a	  
Director	  of	  the	  Company	  and	  to	  grant	  to	  the	  Director	  a	  right	  of	  access	  to	  certain	  records	  of	  the	  Company	  for	  a	  period	  of	  
seven	  years	  after	  the	  Director	  ceases	  to	  be	  a	  Director.
On	   completion	   of	   the	   Acquisition,	   the	   Company	   and	   the	   Proposed	   Directors	   (including	   Mr.	  Domenic	   Martino)	   (who	   are	  
nominees	   of	   the	   Vendors	   and	   proposed	   Directors	   of	   the	   Company,	   subject	   to	   shareholder	   approval)	   will	   enter	   into	  
separate	   Deeds	   of	   Indemnity,	   Insurance	   and	   Access	   on	   terms	   consistent	   with	   the	   presently	   existing	   Deeds	   of	   Indemnity	  
with	  Directors.
After	  the	  appointment	  of	  the	  Proposed	  Directors	  and	  Officers	  of	  SPG	  (see	  Sections	  7.4,	  7.5	  and	  7.6),	  the	  Proposed	  Directors	  
and	  Officers	  may	  enter	  into	  a	  Deed	  of	  Indemnity,	  Insurance	  and	  Access	  with	  the	  Company	  pursuant	  to	  which	  the	  Company	  
agrees	  to	  indemnify	  the	  Proposed	  Directors	  and	  Officers	  against	  certain	  liabilities	  incurred	  whilst	  acting	  as	  an	  officer	  of	  the	  
Company	  or	  the	   group,	  to	   insure	  the	  Officers	  against	  certain	  risks	  to	  which	  they	  may	  be	  exposed	  to	  as	  an	  Officer	  of	  the	  
Company	  and	   to	  grant	  to	  them	  a	  right	  of	  access	   to	  certain	  records	  of	   the	  Company	   for	  a	   period	   of	  seven	   years	  after	   he	  
ceases	  to	  be	  an	  officer.	   If	  so	  enacted,	  these	  Deeds	  will	  continue	  upon	  completion	  of	  the	  Acquisition.
12.3.4  Key	  Material	  SPG	  Contracts
The	  Directors	  consider	  that	  the	  key	  material	  contracts	  of	  SPG	  are	  the	  project	  contracts	  relating	  to	  the	  company’s	  asset	  in	  
Tajikistan	  (Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	  Field)	  and	  Georgia	  (Block	  XIG	  concession).
Tajikistan
As	   specified	   above	  and	  in	  Section	  10,	   the	   Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	   field	   is	   licensed	   to	   and	   owned	   by	   the	   State	   company	   Naftugaz.	  
SPG	  currently	  holds	   an	   Investment	   and	   Operating	   Agreement	   (“IOA”)	   for	   this	   field.	   Naftugaz	   remains	   the	   owner	   of	   the	  
license,	  but	  with	  SPG	   operating	  the	  field.
Under	   the	   terms	   of	   the	   IOA,	   SPG	   shall	   be	   responsible	   for	   all	   operations	   and	   operating	   expenses	   on	   the	   field	   and	   shall	  
receive	  a	  percentage	  of	  the	  incremental	  oil	  and	  gas	  produced	  as	  a	  result	  of	  SPG’s	  activities	  (70%	  whilst	  recovering	  costs	  and	  
50%	   thereafter).	   A	   6%	   taxation	   royalty	   is	   applicable,	   but	   this	   is	   permitted	   for	   cost	   recovery	   purposes.	   SPG	   will	   pay	   local	  
corporate	  profit	  taxes	  (15%)	  and	  other	  minimal	  fees.	  SPG	  entered	  into	  the	  Kyzyl-­‐Tumshuk	  IOA	  in	  October	  2015	  and	  must	  
commence	  works	  within	  12	  months.	  Initial	  works	  will	  include	  workovers	  and	  recompletions	  followed	  by	  drilling	  to	  target	  
both	  oil	  and	  gas	  production.
SPG	  expects	  to	  commence	  operations	  in	  Q1	  2016,	  subject	  to	  the	  Offers	  being	  successful.
Georgia
As	   specified	   in	   Section	   1 0 . 2 . 4 ,	  SPG	   will	   come	   into	   the	   Block	   XIG	   project	   through	   the	   acquisition	   of	   a	   wholly-­‐owned	  
GOG	   subsidiary,	  Tbilisi	  Petroleum	  Limited	  (“TBPL”).	  As	  at	  the	  date	  of	  this	  Prospectus,	  TBPL	  holds	  1%	  of	  the	  contract	  rights	  
under	  
the	   PSC	   and	   will,	   upon	   completion	   of	   the	   acquisition,	   receive	   a	   re-­‐adjustment	   of	   the	   PSC	   interest	   between	   the	  
contractor	   parties	  to	  the	  PSC	  through	  the	  assignment	  of	  19%	  of	  the	  contract	  interest	  from	  an	  existing	  affiliate	  under	  the	  
PSC	  (such	   affiliate	  also	  being	  a	  wholly-­‐owned	  subsidiary	  of	  GOG).
The	   share	   capital	   of	   TBPL	   (and	   the	   rights	   it	   has	   under	   the	   PSC)	   will	   be	   acquired	   from	   GOG	   for	   consideration	   of	  
USD2,000,000;	   representing	   an	   investment	   into	   the	   work	   programme	   and	   repayment	   of	   back	   costs	   to	   GOG.	   In	   turn,	   this	  
will	  translate	  into	  an	  effective	  carry	  for	  SPG	  of	  USD1,160,000	  to	  gain	  a	  20%	  working	  interest	  in	  the	  PSC,	  with	  USD840,000	  as	  
SPG’s	  equity	  share	  of	  well	  costs.
151
12.3.5  Agreement	  to	  Procure	  Capital
MUI	  has	  entered	  into	  an	  agreement	  with	  Cedrus	  Investments	  Limited	  for	  the	  procurement	  of	  Applications	  as	  part	  of	  the	  
Public	  Offer.	  The	  key	  terms	  of	  the	  agreement	  are	  as	  follows:
•
•
Cedrus	  Investments	  Limited	  is	  entitled	  to	  a	  fee	  of	  4%	  of	  the	  dollar	  amount	  of	  shares	  issued	  to	  investors	  as	  a	  direct
result	  of	  their	  services	  (provided	  Minimum	  Subscription	  is	  met);	  and
Subject	  to	  prior	  approval	  of	  an	  expense	  from	  the	  Company,	  reimbursement	  of	  expenses	  up	  to	  USD	  150,000.
12.4  Other	  Additional	  Information
12.4.1  Rights	  Attaching	   to	  Shares
Details	   of	   the	   rights	   attaching	   to	   Shares	   arise	   from	   a	   combination	   of	   statute,	   general	   law	   and	   the	   Constitution.	   The	  
following	  is	  a	  summary	  of	  the	  more	  significant	  rights,	  privileges	  and	  restrictions	  attaching	  to	  Shares	  and	  the	  Constitution.	  
This	  summary	  is	  not	  intended	  to	  be	  exhaustive	  and	  must	  be	  read	  subject	  to	  the	  full	  text	  of	  the	  Constitution.	   New	  Shares	  
issued	  under	  this	  Prospectus	  will	  rank	  pari	  passu	  in	  all	  respects	  with	  the	  Existing	  Shares.
12.4.2  Voting
Shareholders	   are	   entitled	   to	   notice	   of	   and	   to	   attend	   general	   meetings	   of	   the	   Company.	   Subject	   to	   the	   voting	   rights	   of	  
preference	   shares	   and	   any	   other	   shares	   which	   may	   in	   the	   future	   be	   issued	   with	   special	   or	   preferential	   rights,	   every	  
Shareholder	  present	  in	  person	  or	  by	  proxy,	  attorney	  or	  representative	  has	  one	  vote	  on	  a	  show	  of	  hands,	  and	  on	  a	  poll,	  one	  
vote	  for	  each	  fully	  paid	  Share.	  In	  the	  case	  of	  an	  equality	  of	  votes,	  the	  Chairman	  of	  the	  meeting	  shall	  not	  have	  a	  second	  or	  
casting	  vote.	   Preference	  shareholders	  have	  no	  right	  to	  vote	  save	  for	  in	  the	  circumstances	  set	  out	  in	  Listing	  Rule	  6.3.
12.4.3  Dividends
Subject	   to	   the	   dividend	   rights	   of	   preference	   shares	   and	   any	   shares	   which	   may	   in	   the	   future	   be	   issued	   with	   special	   or	  
preferential	  rights,	  the	  Directors	  may	  declare	  a	  dividend	  to	  be	  paid	  to	  Shareholders	  entitled	  to	  that	  dividend.	   The	  Directors	  
may	  set	  aside	  out	  of	  the	  profits	  of	  the	  Company	  such	  amounts	  as	  they	  determine	  as	  reserves	  to	  be	  applied	  at	  the	  discretion	  
of	   the	   Directors	   for	   any	   purpose	   for	   which	   the	   profits	   of	   the	   Company	   may	   be	   properly	   applied.	   Dividends	   may	   be	   paid	  
wholly	  or	  partly	  by	  the	  distribution	   of	  specific	  assets,	  including	   paid	   up	   shares	  in,	  or	  debentures	  of,	  the	   Company	  or	  any	  
other	  body	  corporate.
If	   the	   Company	   pays	   a	   dividend	   by	   distributing	   paid	   up	   shares	   in	   a	   body	   corporate	   whether	   by	   issue	   or	   transfer,	   each	  
member	  agrees	  to	  become	  a	  member	  of	  that	  body	  corporate	  and	  in	  the	  case	  of	  a	  transfer	  of	  shares	  appoints	  the	  Company	  
and	  each	  Director	  of	  the	  Company	  as	  its	  agent	  to	  execute	  the	  relevant	  instrument	  of	  transfer.
12.4.4  Capital	  Reductions
In	  accordance	  with	  Part	  2J.1	  of	  the	  Corporations	  Act,	  a	  meeting	  of	  members	  may,	  by	  resolution,	  resolve	  that	  the	  Company	  
may	   reduce	   its	   share	   capital	   by	   the	   distribution	   of	   specific	   assets,	   including	   paid	   up	   shares	   in,	   or	   debentures	   of,	   the	  
Company	  or	  any	  other	  body	  corporate.
If	  the	  Company	  reduces	  its	  share	  capital	  by	  distributing	  paid	  up	  shares	  in	  a	  body	  corporate	  whether	  by	  issue	  or	  transfer,	  
each	   member	   agrees	   to	   become	   a	   member	   of	   that	   body	   corporate	   and	   in	   the	   case	   of	   a	   transfer	   of	   shares	   appoints	   the	  
Company	  and	  each	  Director	  of	  the	  Company	  as	  its	  agent	  to	  execute	  the	  relevant	  instrument	  of	  transfer.
12.4.5  Capitalisation	  of	  Profits	  and	   Conversion	  of	  Shares
Subject	  to	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules,	  the	  Directors	  or	  Shareholders	  at	  a	  general	  meeting	  may	  resolve	  to	  capitalise	  and	  distribute	  
any	  undivided	  profits	  of	  the	  Company	  to	  members	  in	  the	  same	  proportions	  as	  if	  distributed	  by	  way	  of	  dividend.
The	  Company	  in	  general	  meeting	  may	  convert	  all	  or	  any	  of	  its	  shares	  into	  a	  larger	  or	  smaller	  number	  of	  shares	  by	  ordinary	  
resolution.
152
12.4.6  Rights	  on	  Winding	  Up
Subject	  to	  any	  rights	  or	  restrictions	  attached	   to	  a	  class	  of	  Shares,	  on	  a	   winding	  up	  of	  the	  Company,	  any	  surplus	  must	  be	  
divided	  among	  the	  members	  in	  the	  proportions	  which	  the	  amount	  paid	  on	  the	  Shares	  of	  a	  member	  is	  of	  the	  total	  amounts	  
paid	  and	  payable	  on	  the	  Shares	  of	  all	  members.
The	  liquidator	  in	  a	  winding	  up	  may,	  with	  the	  sanction	  of	  a	  special	  resolution	  of	  members,	  divide	  among	  the	  members	  the	  
whole	   or	   any	   part	   of	   the	   property	   of	   the	   Company	   and	   determine	   how	   the	   division	   is	   to	   be	   carried	   out	   as	   between	   the	  
members	  or	  different	  classes	  of	  members.	  
12.4.7  Offer	  of	  Shares
Without	   prejudice	   to	   any	   special	   rights	   conferred	   on	   the	   holders	   of	   any	   shares	   or	   class	   of	   shares	   and	   subject	   to	   the	  
Constitution,	  the	  Corporations	  Act	  and	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules,	  the	  Directors	  may	  issue	  shares	  and	  options	  on	  such	  terms	  and	  
conditions	  as	  the	  Directors	  think	  fit.
12.4.8  Transfer	  of	   Shares
Subject	   to	   the	   Constitution,	   the	   Corporations	   Act,	   the	   ASX	   Listing	   Rules	   and	   the	   ASTC	   Settlement	   Rules,	   the	   Shares	   are	  
freely	   transferable.	   A	   member	   may	   transfer	   shares	   by	   a	   market	   transfer	   in	   accordance	   with	   any	   manner	   required	   or	  
permitted	  by	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules,	  the	  Corporations	  Act	  or	  the	  ASTC	  Settlement	  Rules.	  Shares	  may	  also	  be	  transferred	  by	  
an	  instrument	  in	  writing	  in	  any	  usual	  or	  common	  form	  or	  in	  such	  other	  form	  as	  the	  Directors	  approve	  or	  in	  such	  form	  as	  is	  
required	  by	  the	  ASTC	  Settlement	  Rules.
12.4.9  Unmarketable	  Parcels
The	  Constitution	  provides	  that	  the	  Directors	  may	  cause	  the	  Company	  to	  sell	  a	  member's	  shares	  if	  that	  member	  holds	  less	  
than	   a	   marketable	   parcel	   of	   shares,	   provided	   that	   the	   procedures	   set	   out	   in	   the	   Listing	   Rules	   and	   Schedule	   1	   of	   the	  
Constitution	  are	  followed.	   A	  non-­‐marketable	  parcel	  of	  shares	  is	  defined	  in	  the	  ASX	  market	  rules	  and	  is,	  generally,	  a	  holding	  
of	  shares	  with	  a	  market	  value	  less	  than	  $500.
12.4.10 ASX	  Listing	  Rules
While	  the	  Company	  is	  admitted	  to	  the	  Official	  List	  of	  ASX,	  notwithstanding	  anything	  in	  the	  Constitution,	  if	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  
Rules	  prohibit	  an	  act	  being	  done,	  the	  act	  must	  not	  be	  done.	  If	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules	  require	  an	  act	  to	  be	  done	  or	  not	  to	  be	  
done,	  authority	  is	  given	   for	  that	  act	  to	  be	  done	  or	  not	  to	  be	  done,	  and	   if	  the	  ASX	   Listing	   Rules	  require	  a	   provision	  to	  be	  
included	   in	   the	   Constitution,	   the	   Constitution	   will	   be	   treated	   as	   containing	   that	   provision.	   If	   any	   provision	   of	   the	  
Constitution	   becomes	   inconsistent	   with	   the	   ASX	   Listing	   Rules,	   the	   Constitution	   will	   not	   be	   treated	   as	   containing	   that	  
provision	  to	  the	  extent	  of	  the	  inconsistency.
12.4.11 Variation	   of	   Rights
The	   Company	   may	   only	   modify	   or	   vary	   the	   rights	   attaching	   to	   any	   class	   of	   shares	   with	   the	   consent	   in	   writing	   of	   the	  
shareholders	  with	  at	  least	  75%	  of	  the	  votes	  in	  the	  class	  or	  by	  special	  resolution	  passed	  at	  a	  meeting	  of	  the	  holders	  of	  the	  
issued	  shares	  of	  that	  class.
12.4.12 Directors
The	   minimum	   number	   of	   Directors	   is	   3	   and	   the	   maximum	   is	   8	   unless	   the	   Company	   in	   a	   general	   meeting	   determines	  
otherwise.	   A	  Director	  is	  not	  required	  to	  hold	  any	  shares.
At	  the	  Company's	  annual	  general	  meeting,	  one-­‐third	  of	  all	  Directors	  shall	  retire	  from	  office	  and	  a	  Director	  must	  retire	  no	  
later	  than	  the	  third	  annual	  general	  meeting	  or	  3	  years	  following	  their	  last	  election	  or	  appointment.
12.4.13 Directors’	  Resolutions
The	  Directors	  may	  pass	  a	  resolution	  in	  a	  meeting	  by	  a	  majority	  of	  the	  votes	  cast	  by	  the	  Directors	  entitled	  to	  vote	  on	  the	  
resolution	   or	   without	   a	   Directors'	   meeting	   being	   held	   if	   all	   of	   the	   Directors	   entitled	   to	   vote	   on	   the	   resolution	   sign	   a	  
document	  containing	  a	  statement	  that	  they	  are	  in	  favour	  of	  the	  resolution	  set	  out	  in	  the	  document.
In	  the	  case	  of	  an	  equality	  of	  votes,	  the	  Chairman	  shall	  have	  a	  casting	  vote	  in	  addition	  to	  any	  vote	  which	  he	  or	  she	  has	  as	  a
153
Director.
12.4.14 Directors’	   Indemnity	   and	   Insurance
To	  the	  extent	  permitted	  by	  the	  Corporations	  Act,	  the	  Company	  may	  indemnify	  every	  person	  who	  is	  or	  has	  been	  an	  officer	  
of	  the	  Company	  and,	  where	  the	  Board	  considers	  it	  appropriate,	  any	  person	  who	  is	  or	  has	  been	  an	  officer	  of	  a	  related	  body	  
corporate	  of	  the	  Company	  against	  any	  liability	  incurred	  in	  his	  or	  her	  capacity	  as	  an	  officer	  of	  the	  Company	  or	  a	  related	  body	  
corporate.
Except	  to	  the	  extent	  prevented	  by	  the	  Corporations	  Act,	  the	  Company	  may	  pay,	  or	  agree	  to	  pay,	  a	  premium	  for	  a	  contract	  
insuring	  an	  officer	  of	  the	  Company	  or	  a	  related	  body	  corporate	  of	  the	  Company	  against	  any	  liability	  incurred	  by	  the	  person	  
in	  that	  capacity,	  except	  a	  liability	  (other	  than	  one	  for	  legal	  costs)	  arising	  out	  of:
•
•
conduct	  involving	  a	  wilful	  breach	  of	  duty	  in	  relation	  to	  the	  Company;	  or
a	  contravention	  of	  sections	  182	  or	  183	  of	  the	  Corporations	  Act.
12.4.15 Alteration	   to	   the	   Constitution
The	  Corporations	  Act	  provides	  that	  the	  Constitution	  can	  only	  be	  amended	  by	  a	  special	  resolution	  passed	  by	  at	  least	  75%	  of	  
the	  votes	  cast	  by	  members	  entitled	  to	  vote	  on	  the	  resolution.
12.4.16 Details	  of	  the	  Conversion	  Offer
The	  Company	  has	  sought	  approval	  under	  Resolution	  14	  of	  the	  Notice	  of	  General	  Meeting	  (to	  be	  considered	  on	  18	  February	  
2016)	   to	   issue	   13,000,000	   Shares	   (on	   a	   post-­‐Consolidation	   basis)	   to	   Roadhouse	   Electronics	   Pty	   Limited	   on	   conversion	   of	  
that	  entity’s	  convertible	  note,	  which	  has	  a	  principal	  amount	  of	  $500,000	  and	  accrued	  interest	  of	  $150,000	  as	  at	  the	  date	  of	  
the	  filing	  of	  the	  Notice	  of	  Meeting.
The	  shares	  in	  relation	  to	  the	  Conversion	  Offer	  will	  be	  issued	  on	  conversion	  of	  the	  convertible	  note	  in	  accordance	  with	  the	  
following	  calculation:
$650,000	   (principal	   and	   interest)	   will	   be	   converted	   at	   $0.001	   per	   share	   (pre-­‐Consolidation)	   in	   accordance	   with	  
the	  terms	  of	  the	  convertible	  note,	  resulting	  in	  650,000,000	  Shares	  being	  issued,	  on	   which	  the	  consolidation	  (at	  
50:1)	  will	  become	  13,000,000	  Shares.
The	  Shares	  are	  expected	  to	  be	  issued	  as	  soon	  as	  possible	  after	  the	  date	  of	  the	  General	  Meeting	  (upon	  Completion	  of	  the	  
Acquisition)	   and	   in	   any	   event	   no	   later	   than	   3	   months	   (or	   such	   later	   date	   to	   the	   extent	   permitted	   by	   any	   ASX	   waiver	   or	  
modification	  of	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules)	  after	  the	  date	  of	  the	  General	  Meeting.	  It	  is	  intended	  that	  the	  allotment	  will	  occur	  on	  
the	  same	  date.
The	  shares	  being	  issued	  pursuant	  to	  the	  Conversion	  Offer	  are	  to	  be	  fully	  paid	  ordinary	  Shares	  and	  will	  rank	  equally	  in	  all	  
respects	  with	  the	  existing	  ordinary	  Shares	  on	  issue	  in	  the	  Company.
The	  shares	  being	  issued	  pursuant	  to	  the	  Conversion	  Offer	  are	  being	  issued	  in	  relation	  to	  a	  convertible	  note	  and	  accordingly	  
no	  funds	  will	  be	  raised	  from	  the	  issue.
12.4.17 Details	  of	  the	  Options	  Offer
The	  Company	  has	  sought	  approval	  under	  Resolution	  16	  of	  the	  Notice	  of	  General	  Meeting	  (to	  be	  considered	  on	  18	  February	  
2016)	  to	  adopt	  a	  Stock	  Incentive	  Plan	  to:
o
o
establish	  a	  method,	  and	  establish	  an	  incentive	  by	  which	  Eligible	  Persons	  can	  participate	  in	  the	  future	  growth	  and
profitability	  of	  the	  Company;	  and	  
attract	  and	  retain	  a	  high	  standard	  of	  managerial	  and	  technical	  personnel	  for	  the	  benefit	  of	  the	  Company.
Shareholder	  approval	  has	  been	  sought	  in	  relation	  to	  the	  Stock	  Incentive	  Plan	  to	  enable	  the	  Company	  to	  issue	  the	  Options	  
under	  the	  Options	  Offer	  without	  being	  required	  to	  include	  such	  Options	  within	  the	  Company’s	  15%	  limit	  for	  the	  purpose	  of	  
ASX	  Listing	  Rule	  7.1.
The	  Board	  is	  of	  the	  opinion	  that	  the	  engagement	  and	  retention	  of	  highly-­‐skilled	  and	  qualified	  executive	  and	  employees	  will	  
be	   a	   crucial	   factor	   in	   the	   Company’s	   ongoing	   commercial	   success.	   Given	   that	   the	   Company	   will,	   in	   accordance	   with	   the	  
resolutions	  set	  out	  in	  the	  Notice	  of	  Meeting	  for	  the	  General	  Meeting,	  undertake	  commercial	  activities	  in	  the	  upstream	  oil
154
and	   gas	   industry,	   the	   Board	   considers	   that	   for	   the	   purposes	   of	   achieving	   strategic	   objectives,	   acting	   as	   a	   reputable	   and	  
competitive	   player	   in	   the	   market,	   and	   maximising	   shareholder	   value,	   it	   is	   important	   to	   be	   able	   to	   offer	   balanced	   and	  
proportionate	  remuneration	  to	  the	  Company’s	  human	  capital	  assets.
A	  summary	  of	  the	  terms	  of	  the	  Stock	  Incentive	  Plan	  is	  set	  out	  below	  at	  Section	  12.4.18.
A	  summary	  of	  the	  terms	  of	  the	  Options	  under	  the	  Stock	  Incentive	  Plan	  –	  being	  those	  Options	  subject	  to	  the	  Options	  Offer	  (as	  
specified	  above)	  –	  is	  set	  out	  at	  Section	  0.
12.4.18 Summary	  of	  the	  Stock	  Incentive	  Plan
Eligibility
“Eligible	  Person”	  means	  any	  director,	  employee	  or	  consultant	  of	  the	  Company	  or	  any	  
subsidiary.
Administration
Grant
Option	  Price
Exercise	  Period
Lapse
Shares	  Issued
Restrictions	  on	  
Transfer
Regulatory	  Approval
The	  Remuneration	  and	  Nomination	  Committee	  (the	  “Committee”)	  shall	  have	  the	  power	  to	  
determine	  to	  which	  Eligible	  Persons	  Options	  are	  to	  be	  granted	  and	  to	  grant	  such	  Options.	  
The	  Plan	  shall	  be	  managed	  by	  the	  Committee	  which	  shall	  have	  the	  power	  to	  determine	  the	  
appropriate	  procedures	  for	  the	  administration	  of	  the	  Plan.
The	  Board	  shall	  appoint	  the	  Committee	  and	  where	  the	  Committee	  is	  not	  established	  for	  the	  
purposes	  of	  the	  Plan	  the	  Board	  shall	  be	  responsible	  for	  the	  administration	  of	  the	  Plan.	  
The	  Company	  may	  grant	  Options	  to	  any	  Eligible	  Persons	  on	  the	  basis	  of	  recommendations	  of	  
grant	  by	  the	  Committee.	  
The	  Option	  Price	  on	  Shares	  that	  are	  subject	  of	  any	  Options	  shall	  in	  no	  circumstances	  be	  lower	  
than	  the	  Market	  Price	  of	  the	  Shares	  at	  the	  date	  of	  the	  grant	  of	  the	  Option.
The	  “Market	  Price”	  shall	  be	  the	  price	  of	  the	  Shares	  (being	  the	  ordinary	  shares	  of	  the	  Company	  
or,	  in	  the	  event	  of	  an	  adjustment	  due	  to	  any	  subdivision,	  consolidation	  or	  reclassification	  of	  the	  
ordinary	  shares	  of	  the	  Company,	  the	  payment	  of	  stock	  dividends	  by	  the	  Company	  (other	  than	  
dividends	  in	  the	  ordinary	  course)	  (or	  other	  relevant	  changes	  in	  the	  capital	  stock	  of	  the	  
Company)	  on	  any	  stock	  exchange	  on	  which	  the	  Company’s	  Shares	  are	  listed	  (to	  be	  determined	  
by	  where	  the	  majority	  of	  the	  trading	  volume	  and	  value	  of	  the	  Shares	  occurs)	  on	  the	  last	  
Business	  Day	  preceding	  the	  date	  of	  the	  grant	  of	  the	  Option.
The	  Committee	  shall	  have	  the	  power	  to	  determine	  the	  Option	  Price.	  
Options	  may	  be	  exercised	  from	  time	  to	  time	  before	  the	  expiry	  date	  and	  the	  exercise	  period	  
shall	  be	  determined	  by	  the	  Committee.	  
To	  be	  determined	  by	  the	  Committee.
A	  share	  issued	  on	  the	  exercise	  of	  an	  option	  shall	  be	  a	  fully	  paid	  ordinary	  share	  in	  the	  Company	  
ranking	  equally	  with,	  and	  having	  the	  same	  rights	  and	  entitlements	  attaching	  to	  it	  as,	  other	  
ordinary	  shares	  in	  the	  Company	  on	  issue	  at	  the	  date	  of	  the	  allotment	  of	  the	  option	  share.	  
Options	  may	  only	  be	  transferred,	  assigned	  or	  charged	  to	  Permitted	  Assigns	  (being	  any	  
person/entity	  entitled	  to	  have	  the	  options	  assigned	  thereto	  under	  securities	  laws	  current	  in	  
that	  jurisdiction	  and	  at	  that	  time	  current	  and	  permitted)	  or	  otherwise	  with	  SPG’s	  prior	  written	  
consent.	  
If	  required	  by	  any	  stock	  exchange	  on	  which	  the	  Company’s	  shares	  are	  listed,	  the	  Plan	  shall	  be	  
subject	  to	  the	  approval	  of	  the	  shareholders	  to	  be	  given	  by	  a	  resolution	  of	  such	  shareholders	  at	  
a	  general	  meeting.	  Any	  Options	  granted	  prior	  to	  such	  approval	  and	  acceptance	  shall	  be	  
conditional	  upon	  such	  approval	  and	  acceptance	  being	  given	  and	  no	  such	  Options	  may	  be	  
exercised	  unless	  and	  until	  such	  approval	  is	  given.
155
12.4.19 Summary	  of	  Option	  Terms
The	  Options	  will	  not	  be	  quoted	  on	  the	  ASX.	  
The	  Options	  will	  be	  exercisable	  at	  any	  time	  prior	  to	  5:00pm	  AEST,	  five	  years	  from	  the	  date	  of	  issue.	  Options	  not	  
exercised	  on	  or	  before	  the	  Expiry	  Date	  will	  automatically	  lapse.
The	  Options	  may	  be	  exercised	  wholly	  or	  in	  part	  by	  completing	  an	  application	  form	  for	  Shares	  (Notice	  of	  Exercise)	  
delivered	  to	  the	  Company’s	  share	  registry	  and	  received	  by	  it	  any	  time	  prior	  to	  the	  Expiry	  Date.	  
Each	  Option	  will	  entitle	  the	  holder	  to	  subscribe	  (in	  respect	  of	  each	  Option	  held)	  for	  a	  Share	  with	  an	  exercise	  price	  of	  
$0.125	  per	  Share.	  
Upon	  the	  exercise	  of	  an	  option	  and	  receipt	  of	  all	  relevant	  documents	  and	  payment,	  the	  holder	  will	  be	  allotted	  and	  
issued	  a	  Share	  ranking	  pari	  passu	  with	  the	  then	  issued	  Shares.	  The	  Company	  will	  apply	  to	  ASX	  to	  have	  the	  Shares	  
granted	  Official	  Quotation.	  
A	  summary	  of	  the	  terms	  and	  conditions	  of	  the	  Options,	  including	  the	  Notice	  of	  Exercise,	  will	  be	  sent	  to	  all	  holders	  of	  
Options	  when	  the	  initial	  holding	  statement	  is	  sent.	  
Any	  Notice	  of	  Exercise	  received	  by	  the	  Company’s	  share	  registry	  on	  or	  prior	  to	  the	  Expiry	  Date	  will	  be	  deemed	  to	  be	  a	  
Notice	  of	  Exercise	  as	  at	  the	  last	  Business	  Day	  of	  the	  month	  in	  which	  such	  notice	  is	  received.	  
There	  will	  be	  no	  participating	  entitlements	  inherent	  in	  the	  Options	  to	  participate	  in	  new	  issues	  of	  capital	  which	  may	  be	  
offered	  to	  Shareholders	  during	  the	  currency	  of	  the	  Options.	  Prior	  to	  any	  new	  pro	  rata	  issue	  of	  securities	  to	  
Shareholders,	  holders	  of	  Options	  will	  be	  notified	  by	  the	  Company	  and	  will	  be	  afforded	  7	  Business	  Days	  before	  the	  
record	  date	  (to	  determine	  entitlements	  to	  the	  issue),	  to	  exercise	  Options.	  
In	  the	  event	  of	  any	  reconstruction	  (including	  consolidation,	  sub-­‐division,	  reduction	  or	  return)	  of	  the	  issued	  capital	  of	  the	  
Company	  prior	  to	  the	  Expiry	  Date,	  all	  rights	  of	  an	  Option	  Holder	  are	  to	  be	  changed	  in	  a	  manner	  consistent	  with	  the	  ASX	  
Listing	  Rules.	  Subject	  to	  the	  Corporations	  Act,	  the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules	  and	  the	  constitution	  of	  the	  company,	  the	  Options	  
may	  be	  transferred	  at	  any	  time	  prior	  to	  the	  Expiry	  Date.	  
Shares	  issued	  pursuant	  to	  the	  exercise	  of	  an	  Option	  will	  be	  issued	  not	  more	  than	  14	  days	  after	  the	  date	  of	  the	  Notice	  of	  
Exercise.
12.5  ASX	   Corporate	   Governance	   Council	   Principles	   and	   Recommendations
The	   Company	   has	   adopted	   comprehensive	   systems	   of	   control	   and	   accountability	   as	   the	   basis	   for	   the	   administration	   of	  
corporate	  governance.	  The	  Board	  is	  committed	  to	  administering	  the	  policies	  and	  procedures	  with	  openness	  and	  integrity,	  
pursuing	  the	  true	  spirit	  of	  corporate	  governance	  commensurate	  with	  the	  Company's	  needs.
To	   the	   extent	   applicable,	   the	   Company	   has	   adopted	   The	   Corporate	   Governance	   Principles	   and	   Recommendations	   (3rd	  
Edition)	  as	  published	  by	  ASX	  Corporate	  Governance	  Council	  (the	  “Recommendations”).	  In	  light	  of	  the	  Company’s	  size	  and	  
nature,	  the	  Board	  considers	  that	  the	  current	  board	  is	  a	  cost	  effective	  and	  practical	  method	  of	  directing	  and	  managing	  the	  
Company.	  As	  the	  Company’s	  activities	  develop	  in	  size,	  nature	  and	  scope,	  the	  size	  of	  the	  Board	  and	  the	  implementation	  of	  
additional	  corporate	  governance	  policies	  and	  structures	  will	  be	  reviewed.
The	  Company’s	  main	  corporate	  governance	  policies	  and	  practices	  as	  at	  the	  date	  of	  this	  Prospectus	  are	  outlined	  below	  and	  
the	  Company’s	  full	  Corporate	  Governance	  Plan	  is	  available	  upon	  request	  from	  the	  Company	  Secretary.
12.5.1  Board	   of	  Directors
The	  Board	  is	  responsible	  for	  the	  corporate	  governance	  of	  the	  Company.	  The	  Board	  develops	  strategies	  for	  the	  Company,	  
reviews	  strategic	  objectives	  and	  monitors	  performance	  against	  those	  objectives.	   The	  goals	  of	  the	  corporate	  governance	  
processes	  are	  to:
• maintain	  and	  increase	  Shareholder	  value;
•
•
ensure	  a	  prudential	  and	  ethical	  basis	  for	  the	  Company’s	  conduct	  and	  activities;	  and
ensure	  compliance	  with	  the	  Company’s	  legal	  and	  regulatory	  objectives.
In	  order	  to	  be	  consistent	  with	  these	  goals,	  the	  Board	  assumes	  the	  following	  responsibilities:
•
•
to	  develop	  initiatives	  for	  profit	  and	  asset	  growth;
to	  review	  the	  corporate,	  commercial	  and	  financial	  performance	  of	  the	  Company	  on	  a	  regular	  basis;
156
•
•
to	  act	  on	  behalf	  of,	  and	  being	  accountable	  to,	  the	  Shareholders;	  and
to	   identify	   business	   risks	   and	   implementing	   actions	   to	   manage	   those	   risks	   and	   corporate	   systems	   to	   assure
quality.
The	  Company	  is	  committed	  to	  the	  circulation	  of	  relevant	  materials	  to	  Directors	  in	  a	  timely	  manner	  to	  facilitate	  Directors’	  
participation	  in	  the	  Board	  discussions	  on	  a	  fully-­‐informed	  basis.
12.5.2  Composition	  of	  the	  Board
Election	  of	  Board	  members	  is	  substantially	  the	  province	  of	  the	  Shareholders	  in	  general	  meeting.	   However,	  subject	  thereto,	  
the	  Company	  is	  committed	  to	  the	  following	  principles:
•
•
the	  Board	  is	  to	  comprise	  persons	  with	  a	  blend	  of	  skills,	  experience	  and	  attributes	  appropriate	  for	  the	  Company	  and
its	  business;	  and
the	  principal	  criterion	  for	  the	  appointment	  of	  new	  directors	  is	  their	  ability	  to	  add	  value	  to	  the	  Company	  and	  its
business.
Following	  settlement	  of	  the	  Acquisition,	  the	  Board	  will	  consist	  of	  8	  Directors	  and	  will	  adopt	  an	  Audit	  Committee	  Charter,	  a	  
Reserves	   Committee	   Charter	   (being	   a	   committee	   established	   to	   review	   the	   results	   of	   reserves	   and	   resources,	   where	  
appropriate)	  and	  a	  Remuneration	  and	  Nomination	  Committee	  Charter.	  In	  connection	  with	  this	  and	  following	  completion	  of	  
the	  Acquisition	  the	  Board	  will	  appoint	  an	  Audit	  Committee,	  a	   Reserves	  Committee	  and	  a	  Remuneration	  and	  Nominations	  
Committee.
In	   addition,	   following	   completion	   of	   the	   Acquisition,	   the	   Board	   will	   adopt	   a	   Board	   Charter	   which	   will	   govern	   the	  
membership	  and	  responsibility	  of	  each	  board	  member.
Where	  a	  casual	  vacancy	  arises	  during	  the	  year,	  the	  Board	  will	  have	  procedures	  to	  select	  the	  most	  suitable	  candidate	  with	  
the	   appropriate	   experience	   and	   expertise	   to	   ensure	   a	   balanced	   and	   effective	   Board.	   Any	   Director	   appointed	   during	   the	  
year	  to	  fill	  a	  casual	  vacancy	  or	  as	  an	  addition	  to	  the	  Board,	  holds	  office	  until	  the	  next	  general	  meeting	  and	  is	  then	  eligible	  
for	  re-­‐election	  by	  the	  Shareholders.
Each	   Director	   has	   confirmed	   to	   the	   Company	   that	   he	   anticipates	   being	   available	   to	   perform	   his	   or	   her	   duties	   as	   a	   non-­‐	  
executive	  director	  or	  executive	  director	  without	  constraint	  from	  other	  commitments.
The	   Directors	   consider	   an	   independent	   Director	   to	   be	   a	   non-­‐executive	   director	   who	   is	   free	   of	   any	   interest,	   position,	  
association	   or	   relationship	   that	   might	   influence,	   or	   reasonably	   be	   perceived	   to	   influence	   his	   or	   her	   capacity	   to	   bring	   an	  
independent	  judgement	  to	  bear	  on	  issues	  before	  the	  Board	  and	  to	  act	  in	  the	  best	  interests	  of	  the	  Company	  and	  its	  security	  
holders	  generally.	  The	  Directors	  will	  consider	  the	  materiality	  of	  any	  given	  relationship	  on	  a	  case-­‐by-­‐case	  basis	  and	  reviews	  
the	  independence	  of	  each	  Director	  in	  light	  of	  interests	  disclosed	  to	  the	  Board	  from	  time	  to	  time.
The	  Company’s	  Board	  Charter	  sets	  out	  guidelines	  of	  materiality	  for	  the	  purpose	  of	  determining	  independence	  of	  Directors	  
in	  accordance	  with	  the	  Recommendations	  and	  has	  adopted	  a	  definition	   of	  independence	  that	  is	  based	   on	  that	  set	  out	  in	  
the	  Recommendations.
The	   Board	   will	   consider	   whether	   there	   are	   any	   factors	   or	   considerations	   which	   may	   mean	   that	   a	   Director’s	   interest,	  
position,	  association	  or	  relationship	  might	  influence,	  or	  reasonably	  be	  perceived	  to	  influence,	  the	  capacity	  of	  the	  Director	  
to	  bring	  an	  independent	  judgement	  to	  bear	  on	  issues	  before	  the	  Board	  and	  to	  act	  in	  the	  best	  interests	  of	  the	  Company	  and	  
its	  Shareholders	  generally.
12.5.3  Identification	   and	   Management	   Risk
The	   Board’s	   collective	   experience	   will	   enable	   accurate	   identification	   of	   the	   principal	   risks	   that	   may	   affect	   the	   Company’s	  
business.	   Key	  operational	  risks	  and	  their	  management	  will	  be	  recurring	  items	  for	  deliberation	  at	  Board	  meetings.
The	   Board	   will	   be	   responsible	   for	   overseeing	   the	   establishment	   of	   and	   approving	   risk	   management	   strategies,	   policies,	  
procedures	  and	   systems	  of	  the	  Company.	  The	  Company’s	  management	  is	  responsible	  for	  establishing	  the	  Company’s	  risk	  
management	  framework.
The	  Company	  will	  regularly	  undertake	  reviews	  of	  its	  risk	  management	  procedures	  to	  ensure	  that	  it	  complies	  with	  its	  legal	  
obligations,	  including	  assisting	  the	  Managing	  Director	  or	  Chief	  Financial	  Officer	  to	  provide	  required	  declarations.
12.5.4  Ethical	  Standards
157
The	   Company	   will	   carry	   on	   business	   honestly	   and	   fairly,	   acting	   only	   in	   ways	   that	   reflect	   well	   on	   the	   Company	   and	   in	  
compliance	  with	  all	  laws	  and	  regulations.
The	   Board	   also	   proposes	   to	   adopt	   a	   policy	   document	   which	   will	   outline	   employees’	   obligations	   of	   compliance	   with	   the	  
Code	  of	  Conduct,	  and	  explains	  how	  the	  code	  interacts	  with	  the	  Company’s	  other	  corporate	  governance	  policies.
It	  is	  proposed	  that	  responsibilities	  incorporated	  in	  the	  Code	  of	  Conduct	  will	  include	  protection	  of	  the	  Company’s	  business,	  
using	   the	   Company’s	   resources	   in	   an	   appropriate	   manner,	   protecting	   confidential	   information	   and	   avoiding	   conflicts	   of	  
interest.
12.5.5  Independent	  Professional	  Advice
Subject	   to	   the	   Chairman’s	   approval	   (not	   to	   be	   unreasonably	   withheld),	   the	   Directors,	   at	   the	   Company’s	   expense,	   may	  
obtain	  independent	  professional	  advice	  on	  issues	  arising	  in	  the	  course	  of	  their	  duties.
12.5.6  Remuneration	  Arrangements
The	   remuneration	   of	   an	   executive	   Director	   will	   be	   decided	   by	   the	   Board	   supported	   by	   recommendation	   of	   the	  
Remuneration	   and	   Nomination	   Committee,	   without	   the	   affected	   executive	   Director	   participating	   in	   that	   decision-­‐making	  
process.
The	  total	  maximum	  remuneration	  of	  non-­‐executive	  Directors	  is	  initially	  set	  by	  the	  Constitution	  and	  subsequent	  variation	  is	  
by	   ordinary	   resolution	   of	   Shareholders	   in	   general	   meeting	   in	   accordance	   with	   the	   Constitution,	   the	   Corporations	   Act	   and	  
the	  ASX	  Listing	  Rules,	  as	  applicable.	   The	  determination	  of	  non-­‐executive	  Directors’	  remuneration	  within	  that	  maximum	  will	  
be	  made	  by	  the	  Board	  having	  regard	  to	  the	  inputs	  and	  value	  to	  the	  Company	  of	  the	  respective	  contributions	  by	  each	  non-­‐	  
executive	   Director.	   The	   current	   amount	   has	   been	   set,	   for	   Shareholder	   approval	   at	   the	   upcoming	   February	   General	  
Meeting,	  at	  an	  amount	  not	  to	  exceed	  $500,000	  per	  annum.
In	   addition,	   a	   Director	   may	   be	   paid	   fees	   or	   other	   amounts	   (i.e.	   subject	   to	   any	   necessary	   Shareholder	   approval,	   non-­‐cash	  
performance	  incentives	  such	  as	  Options)	  as	  the	  Directors	  determine	  where	  a	  Director	  performs	  special	  duties	  or	  otherwise	  
performs	  services	  outside	  the	  scope	  of	  the	  ordinary	  duties	  of	  a	  Director.
Directors	   are	   also	   entitled	   to	   be	   paid	   travelling,	   hotel	   and	   other	   expenses	   incurred	   by	   them	   respectively	   in	   or	   about	   the	  
performance	  of	  their	  duties	  as	  Directors	  in	  accordance	  with	  market	  standards.
The	   Board	   reviews	   and	   approves	   the	   remuneration	   policy	   to	   enable	   the	   Company	   to	   attract	   and	   retain	   executives	   and	  
Directors	  who	  will	  create	  value	  for	  Shareholders	  having	  consideration	  to	  the	  amount	  considered	  to	  be	  commensurate	  for	  a	  
company	  of	  its	  size	  and	  level	  of	  activity	  as	  well	  as	  the	  relevant	  Directors’	  time,	  commitment	  and	  responsibility.	  The	  Board	  is	  
also	   responsible	   for	   reviewing	   any	   employee	  
including	   the	   appropriateness	   of	  
performance	  hurdles	  and	  total	  payments	  proposed.
incentive	   and	   equity-­‐based	   plans
The	  proposed	  role	  of	  the	  Remuneration	  and	  Nomination	  Committee	  is	  to	  review	  and	  make	  recommendations	  to	  the	  Board	  
and	   to	  ensure	  that	  the	  remuneration	  policies	  and	   practices	   are	  consistent	  with	  the	  Company’s	  strategic	  goals	  and	  human	  
resources	   objectives.	   In	   addition,	   it	   is	   proposed	   that	   the	   Committee	   will	   be	   responsible	   for	   reviewing	   and	   making	  
recommendations	   in	   relation	   to	   the	   composition	   and	   performance	   of	   the	   Board	   and	   its	   committees	   and	   ensuring	   that	  
adequate	   succession	   plans	   are	   in	   place	   (including	   for	   the	   recruitment	   and	   appointment	   of	   Directors	   and	   senior	  
management).	  Independent	  advice	  may	  be	  sought	  by	  the	  Remuneration	  and	  Nomination	  Committee	  where	  appropriate.
12.5.7  Trading	  Policy
The	  Board	   has	  adopted	   a	   policy	  that	   sets	   out	  the	  guidelines	  on	   the	  sale	   and	   purchase	   of	  securities	   in	   the	  Company	  by	  its	  
key	   management	   personnel	   (i.e.	   Directors	   and,	   if	   applicable,	   any	   employees	   reporting	   directly	   to	   the	   Managing	   Director).	  
The	   Securities	   Trading	   Policy	   explains	   the	   types	   of	   conduct	   in	   relation	   to	   dealings	   in	   Shares	   that	   are	   prohibited	   under	   the	  
Corporations	  Act	  and	  to	  establish	  procedures	  in	  relation	  to	  such	  persons’	  dealing	  in	  the	  Shares.
Under	   the	   terms	   of	   the	   policy,	   buying	   or	   selling	   Shares	   is	   not	   permitted	   at	   any	   time	   by	   any	   person	   who	   possesses	   inside	  
information	  in	  a	  manner	  contrary	  to	  the	  Corporations	  Act	  or	  where	  short-­‐term	  or	  speculative	  trading	  is	  involved.	  The	  policy	  
generally	   provides	   that	   the	   written	   acknowledgement	   of	   the	   Chair	   or	   the	   Compliance	   Officer	   as	   so	   determined	   by	   the	  
Board	  (or	  the	  Board	  in	  the	  case	  of	  the	  Chairman)	  must	  be	  obtained	  prior	  to	  trading.
12.5.8  External	  Audit
158
The	   Company	   in	   general	   meetings	   is	   responsible	   for	   the	   appointment	   of	   the	   external	   auditors	   of	   the	   Company,	   and	   the	  
Board	  from	  time	  to	  time	  will	  review	  the	  scope,	  performance	  and	  fees	  of	  those	  external	  auditors.
12.5.9  Audit	  Committee
The	  Company	  will	  on	  completion	  of	  the	  Acquisition	  adopt	  an	  Audit	  Committee	  Charter,	  and	  will	  have	  an	  audit	  committee.	  
The	  Audit	  Committee	  will	  assist	  in	  the	  Company	  in	  meeting	  its	  financial	  reporting	  obligations	  and	  other	  tasks,	  including	  but	  
not	   limited	   to,	   monitoring	   and	   reviewing	   any	   matters	   of	   significance	   affecting	   financial	   reporting	   and	   compliance,	   the	  
integrity	  of	  the	  financial	  reporting	  of	  the	  Company,	  the	  Company’s	  internal	  financial	  control	  system	  and	   risk	  management	  
systems	  and	  the	  external	  audit	  function.
12.5.10 Diversity	  Policy
The	  Board	  has	  not	  adopted	  a	  diversity	  policy,	  however	  the	  Company	  aims	  to	  achieve,	  amongst	  other	  things,	  a	  diverse	  and	  
skilled	   workforce,	   a	   workplace	   culture	   characterised	   by	   inclusive	   practices	   and	   behaviours	   for	   the	   benefit	   of	   all	   staff,	  
improved	  employment	  and	  career	  development	  opportunities	  for	  women	  and	  a	  work	  environment	  that	  values	  and	  utilises	  
the	  contributions	  of	  employees	  with	  diverse	  backgrounds,	  experiences	  and	  perspectives.
12.5.11 Departures	  from	  Recommendations
Following	   re-­‐admission	   to	   the	   Official	   List	   of	   ASX,	   the	   Company	   will	   be	   required	   to	   report	   any	   departures	   from	   the	  
Recommendations	  in	  its	  annual	  financial	  report.
The	   Company’s	   expected	   departures	   from	   the	   Recommendations	   following	   completion	   of	   the	   Acquisition	   are	   set	   out	  
below.	   Investors	   may	   download	   a	   copy	   of	   the	   current	   version	   of	   the	   ASX	   Corporate	   Governance	   Council’s	   Corporate	  
Governance	  Principles	  and	  Recommendations	  at:	  http://www.asx.com.au/regulation/corporate-­‐governance-­‐council.htm.
Principle	  
2.5
Recommendation	  
The	   chair	   of	   the	   Board	   of	   a	   listed	   entity	  
should	  be	  an	  independent	  director	  and,	  in	  
particular,	  should	  not	  be	  the	  same	  person	  
as	  the	  CEO	  of	  the	  entity.
1.5
5.1
Companies	   should	   establish	   a	   policy	  
concerning	   diversity	   and	   disclose	   that	  
policy.
complying	   with
A	  listed	  entity	  should	  have	  a	  written	  policy	  
continuous	  
for	  
disclosure	   obligations	   under	  
the	   ASX	  
Listing	   Rules	   and	   disclose	   that	   policy	   or	   a	  
summary	  of	  it.
its
12.5.12 Interests	  of	  Directors,	  Experts	  and	  Advisors
Nature	  of	  and	  Explanation	  for	  Departure	  
It	   is	   customary	   in	   corporate	   structures	   for	   companies	  
based	   within,	   or	   conducting	   business	   within,	  the	   fSU	   for	  
the	   chief	   executive	   officer	   to	   hold	   the	   position	   of	  
chairperson.	  
SPG	   relies	   heavily	   upon	   its	   knowledge	   of	   local	   business	  
customs	   in	   order	   to	   advance	   its	   oil	   and	   gas	   operations,	  
ultimately	   with	   a	   view	   to	   maximising	   benefit	   for	  SPG’s	  
shareholders.
The	  Company	  is	  not	  of	  a	  size	  that	  justifies	  establishing	  a	  
policy	   concerning	   diversity	   to	   gender,	   age,	   ethnicity	   and	  
cultural	   background	   and	   disclosing	   the	   proportion	   of	  
women	   employees	   in	   the	   Company,	   women	   in	   senior	  
executive	  position	  and	  women	  on	  the	  Board.
The	   Company	   does	   not	   have	   a	   formal	   written	   policy	  
regarding	  compliance	  with	  Listing	  Rules
Listing	   Rule	   compliance	   is	   governed	   by	   the	   Corporate	  
Compliance	   Committee	   and	   the	   Board	   Charter	   which	  
includes	   obligations	   as	   to	   shareholder	   and	   market	  
communication.
Other	  than	  as	  set	  out	  below	  or	  elsewhere	  in	  this	  Prospectus,	  no:	  
Director	  or	  Proposed	  Director	  of	  the	  Company;
person	  named	  in	  this	  Prospectus	  as	  performing	  a	  function	  in	  a	  professional,	  advisory	  or	  other	  capacity	  in
connection	  with	  the	  preparation	  or	  distribution	  of	  this	  Prospectus;	  or	  
promoter	  of	  the	  Company,
a)
b)
c)
159
has,	  or	  had	  within	  2	  years	  before	  the	  date	  of	  this	  Prospectus,	  any	  interest	  in:	  
a)
b)
the	  formation	  or	  promotion	  of	  the	  Company;
any	  property	  acquired	  or	  proposed	  to	  be	  acquired	  by	  the	  Company	  in	  connection	  with	  its	  formation	  or
proportion	  or	  in	  connection	  with	  the	  Offers;	  or	  
the	  issue	  of	  New	  Shares	  under	  this	  Prospectus,
c)
and	   no	   amounts	   have	  been	   paid	   or	   agreed	  to	   be	   paid	   and	   no	   benefits	   have	   been	   given	   or	   agreed	  to	   be	   given	   to	  any	   of	  
those	  persons	  as	  an	  inducement	  to	  become,	  or	  to	  qualify	  as,	  a	  Director	  or	  expert	  of	  the	  Company	  or	  otherwise	  for	  services	  
rendered	  by	  them	  in	  connection	  with	  the	  formation	  or	  promotion	  of	  the	  Company	  or	  the	  issue	  of	  New	  Shares	  under	  this	  
Prospectus.
Directors’	  Remuneration
Executive	  Directors	  remuneration	  is	  summarized	  at	  Section	  12.3.2.
The	  Constitution	  provides	  that	  the	  Directors	  are	  entitled	  to	  such	  remuneration	  as	  the	  Company	  determines,	  but	  the	  ASX	  
Listing	  Rules	  require	  that	  the	  remuneration	  of	  non-­‐executive	  Directors	  must	  not	  exceed,	  in	  aggregate,	  a	  maximum	  annual	  
amount	   fixed	   by	   the	   Company	   in	   general	   meeting	   for	   that	   purpose.	   At	   the	   date	   of	   this	   Prospectus,	   the	   Company's	  
aggregate	   maximum	   remuneration	   for	   non-­‐executive	   Directors	   is	   to	   be	   increased	   to	   $500,000	   per	   annum,	   subject	   to	  
approval	  by	  Shareholders	  through	  the	  approval	  of	  Resolution	  15	  at	  the	  General	  Meeting	  of	  the	  Company	  to	  be	  held	  on	  18	  
February	  2016.
Interests	   of	   Directors
The	  Directors	  are	  not	  required,	  pursuant	  to	  the	  Constitution	  of	  the	  Company,	  to	  hold	  any	  shares	  in	  the	  Company.	  As	  at	  the	  
date	   of	   this	   Prospectus,	   the	   Directors	   and	   the	   Proposed	   Directors	   and	   their	   associates	   have	   interests	   in	   the	   following	  
securities	  in	  the	  Company:
Director
Directly
Shares	  Held
Indirectly
Options	  Held
Directly
Indirectly
Dr.	  David	  Robson	  
Ms.	  Elizabeth	  Landles	  
Mr.	  Mark	  Sarssam
Mr.	  Piers	  Johnson	  
Dr.	  Raden	  Sukhyar	  
Mr.	  Ghassan	  Zok	  
Mr.	  Timothy	  Hargreaves	  
Mr.	  Domenic	  Martino	  
Mr.	  John	  Bell	  
Mr.	  Philip	  Silva
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐
The	  Directors	  and	  the	  Proposed	  Directors	  and	  their	  associates	  will	  have	  interests	  in	  the	  following	  securities	  in	  the	  Company	  
post	  the	  Acquisition,	  the	  Consolidation	  and	  the	  Share	  Offers:
Director*
Shares	  Held
Options	  Held
Directly
38,546,470
Dr.	  David	  Robson**	  
Ms.	  Elizabeth	  Landles**	  
Mr.	  Mark	  Sarssam	  
Mr.	  Piers	  Johnson	  
Dr.	  Raden	  Sukhyar	  
Mr.	  Ghassan	  Zok	  
Mr.	  Timothy	  Hargreaves	  
Mr.	  Domenic	  Martino	  
Mr.	  John	  Bell	  
Mr.	  Philip	  Silva	  
*No	  Directors	  or	  Proposed	  Directors	  will	  participate	  in	  the	  Public	  Offer.
**Dr.	  David	  Robson	  and	  Ms.	  Elizabeth	  Landles	  are	  both	  shareholders	  of	  Vazon	  Associates	  Limited.
Indirectly	  
285,560,000	  
285,560,000	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐
Directly	  
4,000,000	  
3,000,000	  
3,000,000	  
1,250,000	  
1,250,000	  
1,250,000	  
1,250,000	  
1,250,000
-­‐	  
-­‐
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐
Indirectly	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐	  
-­‐
160
-­‐	  
-­‐
Other	   Interests	   of	   Directors
The	  Company	  has	  entered	  into	  Deeds	  of	  Indemnity,	  Insurance	  and	  Access	  with	  each	  of	  the	  Directors	  pursuant	  to	  which	  the	  
Company	  agrees	  to	  indemnify	  the	  Directors	  against	  certain	  liabilities	  incurred	  by	  the	  Directors	  whilst	  acting	  as	  a	  Director	  of	  
the	   Company	   (or	   any	   subsidiary),	   to	   insure	   the	   Directors	   against	   certain	   risks	   to	   which	   the	   Directors	   are	   exposed	   to	   as	   a	  
Director	  of	  the	  Company	  and	   to	   grant	  to	  the	  Director	  a	   right	   of	  access	   to	  certain	  records	   of	  the	  Company	  for	  a	   period	   of	  
seven	  years	  after	  the	  Director	  ceases	  to	  be	  a	  Director.
The	  Company	  intends	  to	  enter	  into	  a	  similar	  Deed	  of	  Indemnity,	  Insurance	  and	  Access	  with	  the	  Proposed	  Directors.
Interests	  of	  Experts	  and	   Advisors
Hunt	   &	   Humphry	   have	   acted	   as	   Australian	   solicitors	   to	   the	   Company	   in	   providing	   general	   advice,	   and	   assisting	   in	   the	  
Company's	  due	  diligence	  enquiries,	  in	  relation	  to	  the	  Offers	  and	  this	  Prospectus.	  Hunt	  &	  Humphry	  will	  receive	  professional	  
fees	  of	  approximately	  $50,000	  in	  respect	  of	  services	  provided	  in	  relation	  to	  this	  Prospectus.
William	  Buck	  Audit	  (Vic)	  Pty	  Limited	  has	  acted	  as	  investigating	  accountant	  to	  the	  Company	  in	  relation	  to	  this	  Offer.	  William	  
Buck	   Audit	   (Vic)	   Pty	   Limited	   will	   receive	   professional	   fees	   of	   approximately	   $42,835	   (net	   of	   Goods	   and	   Services	   Tax)	   in	  
respect	   of	   services	   provided	   in	   relation	   to	   the	   Offer.	   William	   Buck	   Audit	   (Vic)	   Pty	   Limited	   is	   currently	   the	   Company's	  
auditor.
Gustavson	  Associates	   LLC	  has	  acted	  as	  independent	  technical	  specialist	  to	  the	  Company	  in	  relation	   to	  this	  Prospectus	  and	  
will	  receive	  fees	  of	  approximately	  $43,000	  for	  these	  services.
12.5.13 Expenses	  of	  the	  Offers
It	   is	   estimated	   that	   the	   expenses	   of	   the	   Offers	   will	   be	   $990,000	   for	  Minimum	   Subscription	   with	  the	  ability	  to	  offer	   up	   to	  
$1,110,000	  in	  the	  case	  of	  fulfilling	  the	  Maximum	   Subscription.	  These	  costs	  are	  estimated	  as	  follows:	  
.
Minimum	  
Subscription
Maximum	  
Subscription
Independent	  Technical	  Expert’s	  Report
Investigating	  Accountants’	  Report
Independent	  Geologists’	  Report	  (USD	  30,000)
Legal	  services
Company	  secretarial,	  accounting	  and	  prospectus	  preparation
Printing,	  ASX,	  ASIC,	  registry	  services
Capital	  raising	  fee	  (@	  4%)	  1
Total	  estimated	  costs
$25,000
$40,000
$45,000
$90,000
$60,000
$160,000
$560,000
$990,000
$25,000
$40,000
$45,000
$90,000
$60,000
$160,000
$680,000
$1,100,000
1	  The	  Public	  Offer	  is	  not	  underwritten.	  Cedrus	  Investments	  Limited	  is	  entitled	  to	  a	  fee	  of	  4%	  of	  the	  dollar	  amount	  of	  shares	  
issued	  to	  investors	  as	  a	  direct	  result	  of	  their	  services	  (provided	  Minimum	  Subscription	  is	  met).	  	  The	  above	  table	  reflects	  the	  
maximum	   amount	   payable	   to	   Cedrus	   Investments	   Limited,	   should	   they	   procure	   the	   entire	   Public	   Offering	   (refer	   section	  
12.3.5).
12.5.14 Consents	  and	  Disclaimers	  of	  Responsibilities
The	   following	   have	   given	   their	   written	   consents,	   and	   have	   not	   withdrawn	   those	   consents	   before	   the	   lodgement	   of	   this	  
Prospectus	  with	  ASIC,	  in	  the	  following	  terms:
•
Hunt	  &	   Humphry	  has	  given,	  and	  at	  the	  time	  of	  lodging	  this	  Prospectus	  with	  ASIC,	  has	  not	  withdrawn	  its	  written
consent	   to	   be	   named	   in	   this	   Prospectus	   as	   solicitors	   for	   the	   Company	   in	   the	   form	   and	   context	   in	   which	   it	   is	   so
named;
• Mr.	  Kriechbaum	  has	  given,	   and	   at	   the	   time	   of	   lodging	   this	   Prospectus	   with	   ASIC,	   has	   not	   withdrawn	   his	  written
consent	  to	  be	  named	   in	  this	  Prospectus	  as	  a	  technical	  specialist	  for	   SPG	  in	  the	   form	  and	  context	  in	  which	  he	  is
so	  named	  and	  for	  the	  inclusion	  in	  this	  Prospectus	  of	  the	  information	  in	  section	  10.1.7;
161
•
Gustavson	  Associates	   LLC	  has	  given,	  and	  at	  the	  time	  of	  lodging	  this	  Prospectus	  with	  ASIC,	  has	  not	  withdrawn	  its
written	   consent	   to	   be	   named	   in	   this	   Prospectus	   as	   an	   independent	   technical	   specialist	   for	   the	   Company	   in	   the
form	   and	   context	  in	   which	   it	  is	  so	   named	   and	   for	   the	   inclusion	  in	   this	   Prospectus	   of	  its	   Independent	   Geologist's
Report;
• William	   Buck	   Pty	   Limited	   has	   given,	  and	   at	   the	   time	   of	   lodging	   this	  Prospectus	   with	   ASIC,	  has	   not	   withdrawn	  its
written	  consent	  to	  be	  named	  in	  this	  Prospectus	  as	  auditors	  for	  the	  Company	  in	  the	  form	  and	  context	  in	  which	  it	  is
so	  named;	  and
• William	   Buck	   Pty	   Limited	   has	   given,	  and	   at	   the	   time	   of	   lodging	  this	   Prospectus	   with	   ASIC,	   has	   not	  withdrawn	   its
written	   consent	   to	   be	   named	   in	   this	   Prospectus	   as	   investigating	   accountant	   for	   the	   Company	   in	   the	   form	   and
context	  in	   which	   it	   is	   so	   named	   and	   for	  the	   inclusion	   in	   this	   Prospectus	   of	  its	   Investigating	   Accountant's	   Report;
and
No	   entity	   or	   person	   referred	   to	   in	   this	   Section	   above	   authorised	   or	   caused	   the	   issue	   of	   this	   Prospectus	   nor	   makes	   any	  
express	   or	   implied	   warranty	   in	   relation	   to	   the	   Company,	   this	   Prospectus	   or	   the	   Offer	   and	   further,	   no	   entity	   or	   person	  
referred	  to	  in	  this	  Section	  above	  has	  made	  any	  statement	  that	  is	  included	  in	  the	  Prospectus	  or	  any	  statement	  on	  which	  a	  
statement	  made	  in	  this	  Prospectus	  is	  based,	  except	  as	  stated	  above.	   To	  the	  maximum	  extent	  permitted	  by	  law,	  each	  of	  the	  
entities	   and	   persons	   referred	   to	   above	   expressly	   disclaims	   and	   takes	   no	   responsibility	   for	   any	   statements	   in	   or	   omissions	  
from	   this	   Prospectus	   except	   the	   reference	   to	   its	   name	   and	   any	   statement	   or	   report	   included	   in	   this	   Prospectus	   with	   the	  
consent	  of	  that	  party	  as	  specified	  above.
There	  are	  a	  number	  of	  persons	  or	  entities	  referred	  to	  elsewhere	  in	  this	  Prospectus	  who	  are	  not	  experts	  and	  who	  have	  not	  
made	   statements	   included	   in	   this	   Prospectus	   nor	   are	   there	   any	   statements	   made	   in	   this	   Prospectus	   on	   the	   basis	   of	   any	  
statements	  made	  by	  those	  persons.	  These	  persons	  did	  not	  consent	  to	  being	  named	  in	  the	  Prospectus	  and	  did	  not	  authorise	  or	  
cause	  the	  issue	  of	  the	  Prospectus.
12.5.15 Constitution	  Available	  for	  Inspection
The	  Constitution	  of	  the	  Company	  is	  available	  for	  inspection	  during	  normal	  business	  hours	  free	  of	  charge	  at	  the	  Registered	  
Office	  of	  the	  Company,	  until	  the	  Offer	  Closing	  Date.
13. Applications
13.1  If	  You	  Wish	  to	  Apply	  under	  the	  Offers
If	   you	   wish	   to	   apply	   for	   Shares	   under	   the	   Public	   Offer,	   complete	   the	   accompanying	   Public	   Offer	   Application	   Form	   in	  
accordance	  with	  the	  instructions	  set	  out	  on	  the	  form.
Please	  then	  send	  your	  completed	  Public	  Offer	  Application	  Form	  to	  the	  Company’s	  Registry	  by	  no	  later	  than	  5:00pm	  (AEST)	  
on	  the	  Closing	  Date.
You	  must	  apply	  for	  a	  minimum	  parcel	  of	  20,000	  Shares	  representing	  a	  minimum	  investment	  of	  $2,000.
Applications	  for	  less	  than	  the	  minimum	  application	  of	  20,000	  Shares	  (equivalent	  to	  $2,000)	  will	  not	  be	  accepted.
The	  Directors	  do	   not	  represent	  that	   any	  Application	   to	   participate	   in	  the	  Public	  Offer	  will	  be	  successful.	   In	  relation	  to	   the	  
Public	   Offer,	   the	   Directors	   reserve	   the	   right	   to	   issue	   securities	   to	   Applicants	   under	   the	   Public	   Offer	   at	   their	   absolute	  
discretion.	  	  Directors	  may	  allot	  to	  an	  Applicant	  a	  lesser	  number	  of	  Shares	  than	  the	  number	  for	  which	  the	  Applicant	  applies,	  
or	   to	   reject	   an	   Application	   under	   the	   Public	   Offer,	  or	   to	   not	  proceed	   with	   the	   placing	   of	  the	   Public	  Offer	   pursuant	   to	   this	  
Prospectus.	   If	   the	   number	   of	   Shares	   allotted	   is	   fewer	   than	   the	   number	   applied	   for,	   surplus	   Application	   Monies	   will	   be	  
refunded	  in	  full.	   Interest	  will	  not	  be	  paid	  on	  monies	  refunded.
13.2  Payment	  for	  the	  Shares
The	   Offer	   Price	   of	   $0.10	   per	   New	   Share	   under	   the	   Offer	   is	   payable	   in	   full	   with	   your	   Application.	   No	   brokerage	   or	   stamp	  
duty	  is	  payable	  on	  the	  issue	  of	  New	  Shares.
162
14. Questions	   and	   Enquiries
If	   you	   have	   any	   questions	   concerning	   the	   Offers,	   your	   existing	   holding	   of	   Shares,	   or	   any	   part	   of	   this	   Prospectus,	   please	  
contact	  MUI	  Corporation	  Limited’s	  Company	  Secretary.	  
	  
Enquiries	  in	  relation	  to	  the	  Offer	  should	  be	  directed	  to	  MUI	  Corporation	  Limited’s	  Company	  Secretary,	  Ms.	  Louisa	  Martino:
Address	  
Level	  5	  
56	  Pitt	  Street	  
Sydney	  
New	  South	  Wales	  
2000
Telephone	  
Tel:	  +61	  (02)	  8823	  3179
Fax:	  +61	  (02)	  8823	  3179
Email:	  Louisa.youens@mui.net.au
163
15. Directors’	  Authorisation
This	  Prospectus	  is	  issued	  by	  the	  Company	  and	  its	  issue	  has	  been	  authorised	  by	  a	  resolution	  of	  the	  Directors.
Each	  Director	  and	  Proposed	  Director	  has	  consented	  to	  the	  lodgement	  of	  this	  Prospectus	  with	  ASIC	  in	  accordance	  with	  
section	  720	  of	  the	  Corporations	  Act	  and	  has	  not	  withdrawn	  that	  consent.
Signed	  for	  and	  on	  behalf	  of	  MUI	  Corporation	  Limited	  by:
…………………………………………….	  
John Bell	  
Non	  Executive	  Director
For	  and	  on	  behalf	  of	  	  
MUI	  Corporation	  Limited
164
16. Definitions
Where	   the	   following	   terms	   are	   used	   in	   this	   Prospectus	  
they	  have	  the	  following	  meanings:
Company	   means	   MUI	   Corporation	   Limited	   ABN	   54	   072	  
350	  817.
ABN	  means	  Australian	  Business	  Number.
Acquisition	   means	   the	   acquisition	   by	   MUI	   Corporation	  
of	  all	  of	  the	  issued	  capital	  in	  SPG.
Acquisition	   Shares	   means	   798,647,010	   ordinary	   shares	  
(post	  Consolidation)	  in	  MUI	  Corporation.
AEST	  means	  Australian	  Eastern	  Standard	  Time.
Company	   Secretary	   means	   the	   company	   secretary	   of	  
the	  Company.
Completion	   means	   completion	   of	   the	   Share	   Exchange	  
Agreement	  in	  accordance	  with	  its	  terms	  and	  conditions.
Constitution	  means	  the	  constitution	  of	  the	  Company.
Consolidation	   means	   the	   50:1	   consolidation	   of	   the	  
capital	  of	  the	  Company	  the	  subject	  of	  a	  resolution	  at	  the	  
General	  Meeting.
AIPN	   means	   the	   Association	   of	   International	   Petroleum	  
Negotiators.
Consolidation	  Date	  means	  18	  February	  2016.
API	  means	  American	  Petroleum	  Institute.
Applicant	   means	   a	   person	   who	   submits	   a	   valid	  
Application	  Form	  pursuant	  to	  this	  Prospectus.
Application	   means	   an	   application	   by	   way	   of	   a	  
completed	   Application	   Form	   to	   subscribe	   	   for	   	   New	  
Shares	  under	  this	  Prospectus.
Application	   Monies	   means	   monies	   received	  
Applicants	  in	  respect	  of	  their	  Application.
from
Application	   Form	   means	   the	   Share	   Offer	   Application	  
Form,	   Vendor	   Application	   Form	   and	   Option	   Offer	  
Application	  Form	  enclosed	  with	  this	  Prospectus.
ASIC	   means	   the	   Australian	   Securities	   and	   Investments	  
Commission.
ASTC	   means	   ASX	   Settlement	   and	   Transfer	   Corporation	  
Pty	  Limited	  ABN	  008	  504	  532.
ASTC	   Settlement	   Rules	   means	   the	   official	   settlement	  
rules	  of	  ASTC.
ASX	  means	  ASX	  Limited	  ABN	  008	  624	  691.
ASX	  Listing	  Rules	  means	  the	  official	  listing	  rules	  of	  ASX.
Australian	   Financial	   Services	   Licence	   has	   the	   meaning	  
ascribed	   to	   that	   term	   in	   section	   9	   of	   the	   Corporations	  
Act.
Board	  means	  the	  board	  of	  Directors	  of	  the	  Company.
Business	  Day	  means	  a	  day	  on	  which	  banks	  are	  open	  for	  
business	  in	  the	  applicable	  jurisdiction.
Conversion	   Shares	   means	   shares	   offered	  
Noteholder	  
Convertible	  Note.
in	   satisfaction	   of
to	   the	  
the
the
terms	   of
Convertible	   Note	   means	   the	   Convertible	   Note	   held	   by	  
Roadhound	   Electronics	   Pty	   Ltd	  
in	   MUI	   Corporation	  
Limited.
Conversion	   Offer	   means	   an	   offer	   of	   up	   to	   13,000,000	  
Shares	  to	  the	  Noteholder.
Corporations	   Act	   means	   the	   Corporations	   Act	   2001	  
(Cth).
Director	   means	   a	   director	   of	   the	   Company	   (and	   where	  
context	  requires	  includes	  the	  Proposed	  Directors).
EIA	   means	   the	   United	   States	   Energy	  
Administration.
Information
Enlarged	   Company	   means	   MUI	   Corporation	   Limited	  
assuming	   completion	   of	   the	   Acquisition	   whereby	   SPG	  
will	  become	  a	  wholly	  owned	  subsidiary.
Existing	   Shares	   or	   Existing	   Pre	   Consolidation	   Shares	  
means	  Shares	  already	  allotted	  and	  issued	  as	  at	  the	  date	  
of	  the	  Prospectus.
Expiry	   Date	   means	   the	   date	   12	   months	   from	   when	   the	  
Company	   satisfies	   the	   requirements	   of	   the	   ASX	   Listing	  
Rules	   in	   relation	   to	   the	   re-­‐listing	   of	   its	   securities	   in	  
relation	  to	  the	  Acquisition.
fSU	  or	  FSU	  means	  the	  states	  of	  the	  former	  Soviet	  Union	  
(Armenia,	   Azerbaijan,	   Belarus,	  
Estonia,	   Georgia,	  
Kazakhstan,	   Kyrgyzstan,	   Latvia,	   Lithuania,	   Moldova,	  
Russia,	  
and	  
Uzbekistan).
Turkmenistan,	   Ukraine
Tajikistan,
Chairman	   means	   the	   chairman	   of	   the	   Board	   from	   time	  
to	  time.
fSU	  Oil	  &	  Gas	  Projects	  means	  the	  oil	  and	  gas	  projects	  in	  
Tajikistan	  and	  Georgia.
CHESS	   means	   the	   Clearing	   House	   Electronic	   Subregistry	  
System.
General	   Meeting	   means	   the	   general	   meeting	   of	   the	  
Company	  scheduled	  to	  be	  held	  on	  18	  February	  2016.
Closing	   Date	   means	   24	   February	   2016	   or	   	   such	   	   other	  
date	  and	  time	  as	  may	  be	  determined	  by	  the	  Directors.
GOG	  means	  Georgia	  Oil	  &	  Gas	  Limited.
165
Independent	   Geologist's	   Report	   means	   the	   report	   of	  
Gustavson	   Associates	   LLC	   dated	   3	   December	   2015	   and	  
contained	  in	  Section	  11	  to	  this	  Prospectus.
JORC	   Code	   means	   the	   2004	   Australian	   Code	   for	  
Reporting	  of	  Exploration	  Results,	  Mineral	  Resources	  and	  
Oil	  and	  Gas	  Reserves.
New	   Shares	   means	   the	   proposed	  
issue	   of	   up	   to	  
170,000,000	   Shares	   at	   $0.10	   offered	   under	   the	   Public	  
Offer	  and	  generally	  in	  accordance	  with	  the	  provisions	  of	  
this	  Prospectus.
Notice	   of	   Meeting	   means	   the	   notice	   convening	   the	  
General	  Meeting.
Offers	   means	   the	   Public	   Offer,	   Vendor	   Offer,	   Option	  
Offer	  and	  Conversion	  Offer	  under	  this	  Prospectus	  as	  the	  
context	  requires.
Offer	   Price	   means	   $0.10	   in	   respect	   of	   the	   subscription	  
for	   each	   Share	   pursuant	   to	   the	   Public	   Offer	   under	   this	  
Prospectus
Official	  List	  means	  the	  official	  list	  of	  ASX.
Official	  Quotation	  means	  the	  quotation	  of	  securities	  on	  
the	  securities	  market	  operated	  by	  ASX.
MUI	   Corporation	   or	   MUI	   means	   MUI	   Corporation	  
Limited	  ABN	  54	  072	  350	  817.
Noteholder	  means	  the	  holder	  of	  the	  Convertible	  Note.
Option	   Offer	   means	   an	   offer	   made	   to	   (among	   others)	  
employees	   and	   consultants	   of	   the	   Company	   under	   the	  
terms	  of	  the	  Company’s	  Stock	  Incentive	  Plan.
Post	  Consolidation	  Shares	  means	  the	  Shares	  on	  issue	  in	  
the	  Company	  post	  the	  Consolidation.
PSC	  means	  Production	  Sharing	  Contract.
Proposed	   Directors	   means	   those	   persons	   identified	   at	  
Section	   7 . 4	   to	   this	   Prospectus	   as	   well	   as	   Mr.	   Domenic	  
Martino.
Prospectus	  means	  this	  prospectus	  as	  modified	  or	  varied	  
by	  any	  supplementary	  document	  made	  by	  the	  Company	  
and	  lodged	  with	  ASIC.
PRMS	   means	   Petroleum	   Resources	  
	   Management	  
System	   developed	   by	   	   the	   American	   	   Association	   of	  
Petroleum	   Geologists,	  
the	   Society	   of	   Petroleum	  
Evaluation	   Engineers	   and	   the	   Society	   of	   Exploration	  
Geophysicists,	   and	   approved	   by	   the	   Society	  
	   of	  
Petroleum	  Engineers.
Public	  Offer	  means	  the	  offer	  of	  New	  Shares	  to	  the	  public	  
under	  this	  Prospectus.
Qualified	  Petroleum	  Reserves	  and	  Resources	  Estimator	  
(QPREE)	   means	   a	   professional	   as	   defined	   in	   the	   ASX	  
Listing	  Rules	  5.41-­‐5.42
Record	   Date	   means	   the	   Record	   Date	   for	   Consolidation	  
of	  capital,	  intended	  to	  be	  18	  February	  2016.
Share	   Exchange	   Agreement	   means	   the	   agreement	  
between	  the	  Company,	  and	  SPG	  dated	  29	  January	  2016.
Section	  means	  a	  section	  of	  this	  Prospectus.
Share	  means	  a	  fully	  paid	  ordinary	  share	  in	  the	  capital	  of	  
the	  Company.
Shareholder	  means	  a	  holder	  of	  Shares.
Share	  Placement	  means	  the	  Public	  Offer.
SPE-­‐PRMS	   or	   PRMS	   means	   the	   Society	   of	   Petroleum	  
Engineers	   Petroleum	   Resource	   Management	   System	  
(PRMS),	   the	   oil	   and	   gas	   industry’s	   global	   standard	   for	  
resource	  classification	  and	  reporting
SPG	   means	   Skyland	   Petroleum	   Group	   Limited	   a	  
company	  
in	   the	   Cayman	   Islands	   with	  
company	   number	   OG-­‐296850	   and	   was	   incorporated	   on	  
19	  February	  2015.
incorporated
Transaction	   Offers	   means	   the	   Offers	   excluding	   the	  
Public	  Offer.
USA	  means	  the	  United	  States	  of	  America.
USD	   means	   United	   States	   Dollars,	   being	   the	   lawful	  
currency	  of	  the	  USA.
USGS	  means	  the	  United	  States	  Geological	  Survey.
VALMIN	   Code	   means	   the	   code	   for	   the	   Technical	  
Assessment	   and	   Valuation	   of	   Mineral	   and	   Petroleum	  
Assets	  and	  Securities	  for	  Independent	  Expert	  Reports.
Vendor	   Offer	   means	   an	   offer	   of	   up	   to	   798,647,010	  
Shares	  to	  Vendors	  in	  relation	  to	  the	  Acquisition.
Vendor	   Shares	   means	   up	   to	   798,647,010	   Shares	   to	   be	  
issued	  to	  Vendors.
Vendors	  means	   the	   shareholders	  of	   SPG	   as	  specified	   in	  
the	  Notice	  of	  Meeting.
$	  means	  Australian	  dollars	  unless	  otherwise	  specified.
Units	  of	  Measurement
Mcm/d	  
Mcf/d	  
Bopd	  
Bcf
means	  thousand	  cubic	  metres	  per	  day.	  
means	  thousand	  cubic	  feet	  per	  day.	  
means	  barrels	  of	  oil	  per	  day.	  
means	  billion	  cubic	  feet.
166
MMbbl	  or	  MMBBL	  
BOE	  
BCM	  
MMboe	  
API	  Gravity	  
m3
psi	  
M	  
km
means	  million	  barrels.	  
means	  barrels	  of	  oil	  equivalent.	  
means	  billion	  cubic	  metres.	  
means	  million	  barrels	  of	  oil	  equivalent.	  
means	  a	  measure	  of	  the	  relative	  density	  of	  a	  petroleum	  liquid	  relative	  to	  water.	  
means	  cubic	  metres.	  
means	  pounds	  per	  square	  inch.	  
means	  metres.	  
means	  kilometres.
167
THIS	  PAGE	  HAS	  INTENTIONALLY	  BEEN	  LEFT	  BLANK
168