
EX-99.T3C1 2 ext3c_1.htm EXHIBIT T3C.1
Exhibit T3C.1
 
FORM OF
SENIOR NOTES INDENTURE
Dated as of [●], 2016
Between
PARAGON OFFSHORE PLC
and
U.S. BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION,
as Trustee, Paying Agent and Transfer Agent
SENIOR NOTES DUE 2021
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
 
1
ARTICLE 1 DEFINITIONS AND INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE
 
 
1
Definitions
Section 1.01
6
Other Definitions
Section 1.02
Rules of Construction
6
Section 1.03
Incorporation by Reference of Trust Indenture Act 7
Section 1.04
Acts of Holders
7
Section 1.05
 
 
 
9
ARTICLE 2 THE NOTES  
 
 
 
9
Form and Dating; Terms
Section 2.01
10
Execution and Authentication
Section 2.02
Section 2.03
Registrar and Paying Agent
10
11
Paying Agent to Hold Money in Trust
Section 2.04
11
Holder Lists
Section 2.05
Section 2.06
Transfer and Exchange
11
12
Replacement Notes
Section 2.07
12
Outstanding Notes
Section 2.08
Section 2.09
Treasury Notes
13
13
Temporary Notes
Section 2.10
13
Cancellation
Section 2.11
Section 2.12
Defaulted Interest
13
14
CUSIP and ISIN Numbers
Section 2.13
14
ARTICLE 3 REDEMPTION 
 
 
 
Notices to Trustee
Section 3.01
14
Selection of Notes to Be Redeemed or Purchased14
Section 3.02
14
Notice of Redemption
Section 3.03
Section 3.04
Effect of Notice of Redemption
15
15
Deposit of Redemption or Purchase Price
Section 3.05
16
Notes Redeemed or Purchased in Part
Section 3.06
Section 3.07
Optional Redemption
16
17
Mandatory Redemption
Section 3.08
17
Section 3.09
Purchase of Notes
 
 
 
17
ARTICLE 4 COVENANTS  
 
 
 
Section 4.01
Payment of Notes
17
17
Maintenance of Office or Agency
Section 4.02
17
Taxes
Section 4.03
Section 4.04
Stay, Extension and Usury Laws
18
18
Corporate Existence
Section 4.05
Section 4.06
Compliance Certificate
18
-i-
Merger, Consolidation or Sale of All Assets
Successor Entity Substituted
ARTICLE 5
SUCCESSORS
 
Section 5.01
Section 5.02
 
ARTICLE 6 DEFAULTS AND REMEDIES
 
Section 6.01
Section 6.02
Section 6.03
Section 6.04
Section 6.05
Section 6.06
Section 6.07
Section 6.08
Section 6.09
Section 6.10
Section 6.11
Section 6.12
 
ARTICLE 7
TRUSTEE
Events of Default and Remedies
Acceleration
Other Remedies
Waiver of Past Defaults
Control by Majority
Limitation on Suits
Rights of Holders to Receive Payment
Collection Suit by Trustee
Restoration of Rights and Remedies
Trustee May File Proofs of Claim
Priorities
Undertaking for Costs
21
21
21
 
22
 
22
23
24
24
25
25
26
26
26
26
26
27
27
Duties of Trustee
Rights of Trustee
Individual Rights of Trustee
Trustee’s Disclaimer
Notice of Defaults
Reports by Trustee to Holders of the Notes
Compensation and Indemnity
Replacement of Trustee
Successor Trustee by Merger, etc.
Eligibility; Disqualification
Preferential Collection of Claims Against the Company
Section 7.01
Section 7.02
Section 7.03
Section 7.04
Section 7.05
Section 7.06
Section 7.07
Section 7.08
Section 7.09
Section 7.10
Section 7.11
 
ARTICLE 8 LEGAL DEFEASANCE AND COVENANT DEFEASANCE
 
Section 8.01
Section 8.02
Section 8.03
Section 8.04
Option to Effect Legal Defeasance or Covenant Defeasance
Legal Defeasance and Discharge
Covenant Defeasance
Conditions to Legal or Covenant Defeasance
Deposited Money and Government Securities to Be Held in Trust; Other
Miscellaneous Provisions
Repayment to the Company
Reinstatement
Section 8.05
Section 8.06
Section 8.07
 
ARTICLE 9 AMENDMENT, SUPPLEMENT AND WAIVER
 
Section 9.01
Section 9.02
Section 9.03
Section 9.04
Without Consent of Holders
With Consent of Holders
Compliance with Trust Indenture Act
Revocation and Effect of Consents
-ii-
Notation on or Exchange of Notes
Trustee to Sign Amendments, etc.
Section 9.05
Section 9.06
 
ARTICLE 10
[RESERVED.]
 
ARTICLE 11 SATISFACTION AND DISCHARGE
 
Section 11.01
Section 11.02
 
ARTICLE 12 MISCELLANEOUS
 
Section 12.01
Section 12.02
Section 12.03
Satisfaction and Discharge
Application of Trust Money
[Reserved]
Notices
Communication by Holders with Other Holders
27
28
30
30
30
30
30
31
32
32
32
 
 32
 
32
32
33
33
35
35
36
36
36
36
38
38
38
38
39
39
 
39
40
 
40
 
40
40
42
Section 12.04
Section 12.05
Section 12.06
Section 12.07
Section 12.08
Section 12.09
Section 12.10
Section 12.11
Section 12.12
Section 12.13
Section 12.14
Section 12.15
Section 12.16
Section 12.17
Section 12.18
Section 12.19
Section 12.20
-iii-
Certificate and Opinion as to Conditions Precedent
Statements Required in Certificate or Opinion
Rules by Trustee and Agents
No Personal Liability of Directors, Officers, Employees and
Shareholders
Governing Law
Waiver of Jury Trial
Force Majeure
No Adverse Interpretation of Other Agreements
Successors
Severability
Counterpart Originals
Table of Contents, Headings, etc.
Facsimile and PDF Delivery of Signature Pages
U.S.A. PATRIOT Act
Payments Due on Non-Business Days
Consent to Jurisdiction and Service
Accounting Provisions
42
42
43
43
43
43
43
43
43
43
43
43
44
44
44
44
44
Appendix A          Provisions Relating to Initial Notes and PIK Notes
Exhibit A          Form Note
-iv-
INDENTURE, dated as of [●], 2016, between Paragon Offshore plc, a public limited company
incorporated under the laws of England and Wales (together with any successor obligor to its
obligations under this Indenture and the Notes pursuant to Article 5, the “Company”) and U.S.
Bank National Association, as Trustee, Paying Agent and Transfer Agent.
W I T N E S S E T H
WHEREAS, the Company has been authorized to create and issue $60,000,000 aggregate
principal amount of Senior Notes due 2021 (the “Initial Notes”) pursuant to the Joint Chapter 11
Plan of the Company and its affiliated debtors;
NOW, THEREFORE, the Company and the Trustee agree as follows for the benefit of each other
and for the equal and ratable benefit of the Holders of the Notes.
ARTICLE 1
DEFINITIONS AND INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE
Section 1.01Definitions. “Accounting Change” means any change in GAAP.
“Affiliate” of any specified Person means any other Person, directly or indirectly, controlling or
controlled by or under direct or indirect common control with such specified Person. For the
purposes of this definition, “control,” as used with respect to any Person, means the possession,
directly or indirectly, of the power to direct or cause the direction of the management or policies of
such Person, whether through the ownership of voting securities, by agreement or otherwise. For
purposes of this definition, the terms “controlling,” “controlled by” and “under common control
with” have correlative meanings.
“Agent” means any Registrar, Paying Agent or Transfer Agent.
“Bankruptcy Law” means Title 11, U.S. Code, as amended, or any similar federal, state or foreign
law for the relief of debtors.
“Baseline Price” means $1.50 per Parent Ordinary Share, subject to adjustment for any sub-
division of shares or consolidation of shares of the Parent Ordinary Shares.
“Board of Directors” means:
(1)          with respect to a corporation, the Board of Directors of the corporation or any committee
thereof duly authorized to act on behalf of such Board of Directors;
(2)          with respect to a partnership, the Board of Directors of the general partner of the
partnership;
(3)          with respect to a limited liability company, the managing member or members or any
controlling committee of managing members thereof; and
(4)          with respect to any other Person, the board or committee of such Person serving a
similar function.
“Business Day” means each day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or other day on which banking
institutions in New York, New York or another place of payment are authorized or required by law
to close.
“Capital Stock” means:
(1)          in the case of a corporation, corporate stock;
(2)          in the case of an association or business entity, any and all shares, interests,
participations, rights or other equivalents (however designated) of corporate stock;
(3)          in the case of a partnership or limited liability company, partnership interests (whether
general or limited) or membership interests, respectively;
(4)          in the case of certain companies formed or incorporated under the laws of a jurisdiction
other than one in the United States (including the Cayman Islands), shares; and
(5)          any other interest or participation that confers on a Person the right to receive a share of
the profits and losses of, or distributions of assets of, the issuing Person,
but excluding from all of the foregoing any debt securities convertible into Capital Stock, whether
or not such debt securities include any right of participation with Capital Stock.
“Change of Control” means any “person” (as such term is used in the Exchange Act) or related
persons constituting a “group” (as such term is used in the Exchange Act) is or becomes the
“beneficial owner” (as defined in Rules 13d-3 and 13d-5 under the Exchange Act), directly or
indirectly, of the Capital Stock of the Company (or other securities convertible into such Capital
Stock) representing the majority of the combined voting power of all outstanding Capital Stock
(other than Capital Stock having such power only by reason of the happening of a contingency)
of the Company entitled to vote in the election of the Board of Directors of the Company. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a transaction will not be deemed to involve a Change of Control if
(I)(a) the Company becomes a direct or indirect Wholly-Owned Subsidiary of a Person or directly
or indirectly sells, transfers, conveys or otherwise disposes of all or substantially all of the
properties or assets of the Company and its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, to such Person or a
Wholly-Owned Subsidiary thereof and (b) the holders of the Voting Stock of such Person
immediately following that transaction are substantially the same as the holders of the
Company’s Voting Stock immediately prior to that transaction or (II) such transaction constitutes a
redomestication.
“Company” has the meaning set forth in the recitals hereto.
“continuing” means, with respect to any Default or Event of Default, that such Default or Event of
Default has not been cured or waived.
“Corporate Trust Office of the Trustee” shall be at the address of the Trustee specified in Section
12.02 or such other address as to which the Trustee may give notice to the Holders and the
Company.
“Custodian” means the Trustee, as custodian with respect to the Notes in global form, or any
successor entity thereto.
“Default” means any event that is, or with the passage of time or the giving of notice or both would
be, an Event of Default.
“Daily VWAP” means for each Trading Day the per share volume-weighted average price as
displayed under the heading “Bloomberg VWAP” on Bloomberg page “[    ]” (or its equivalent
successor if such page is not available) in respect of the period from the scheduled open of
trading until the scheduled close of trading of the primary trading session on such Trading Day
(or if such volume-weighted average price is unavailable, the market value of one share of the
Parent Ordinary Shares on such Trading Day determined, using a volume-weighted average
method, by a nationally recognized independent investment banking firm retained for this
purpose by the Company). The “Daily VWAP” shall be determined without regard to after-hours
trading or any other trading outside of the regular trading session trading hours.
-2-
“Definitive Note” means a certificated Initial Note or PIK Note that does not include the Global
Notes Legend.
“Depositary” means, with respect to the Notes issuable or issued in whole or in part in global
form, the Person specified in Section 2.03 as the Depositary with respect to the Notes, and any
and all successors thereto appointed as Depositary hereunder and having become such
pursuant to the applicable provision of this Indenture.
“DTC” means the Depository Trust Company.
“Equity Interests” means Capital Stock and all warrants, options or other rights to acquire Capital
Stock (but excluding any debt security that is convertible into, or exchangeable for, Capital
Stock).
“Exchange Act” means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and the rules and
regulations of the SEC promulgated thereunder.
“GAAP” means generally accepted accounting principles in the United States set forth in the
opinions and pronouncements of the Accounting Principles Board of the American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants and statements and pronouncements of the Financial Accounting
Standards Board or in such other statements, opinions or pronouncements by such other entity
as have been approved by a significant segment of the U.S. accounting profession, which are in
effect from time to time.
“Holder” means a Person in whose name a Note is registered on the Registrar’s books.
“Indenture” means this Indenture, as amended or supplemented from time to time.
“Initial Notes” has the meaning set forth in the recitals hereto.
“Interest Payment Date” means June 30 and December 31 of each year to the Stated Maturity of
the Notes.
“Issue Date” means the date on which the Initial Notes are issued under this Indenture.
“Lien” means, with respect to any asset, any mortgage, lien (statutory or otherwise), pledge,
hypothecation, charge, security interest or encumbrance of any kind in respect of such asset,
whether or not filed, recorded or otherwise perfected under applicable law, including any
conditional sale or other title retention agreement, any lease in the nature thereof, any option or
other agreement to sell or give a security interest in and any filing of or agreement to give any
financing statement under the Uniform Commercial Code (or equivalent statutes) of any
jurisdiction, other than a precautionary financing statement in respect of a lease not intended as a
security agreement; provided that in no event shall an operating lease be deemed to constitute a
Lien.
-3-
“Notes” means the Initial Notes and more particularly means any Note authenticated and
delivered under this Indenture. For all purposes of this Indenture, the term “Notes” shall also
include any PIK Notes and Notes to be issued or authenticated upon transfer, replacement or
exchange of Notes.
”Observation Period” means, as to any Interest Payment Date, the 30 day period following the
31st day prior to an applicable Interest Payment Date.
“Officer” means, with respect to any Person, the Chairman of the Board of Directors, any other
Directors, the Chief Executive Officer, the President, the Chief Financial Officer, any Executive
Vice President, Senior Vice President or Vice President, the Treasurer, any Assistant Treasurer,
the Secretary or any Assistant Secretary of such Person or, in the event that such Person is a
partnership or a limited liability company that has no such officers, a person duly authorized by
the general partner, managers, members or a similar body to act on behalf of such Person.
“Officer’s Certificate” means a certificate signed by an Officer of the Company.
“Opinion of Counsel” means a written opinion from legal counsel who is reasonably acceptable
to the Trustee. The counsel may be an employee of or counsel to the Company or any Subsidiary
of the Company.
“Parent Ordinary Shares” means the ordinary shares, nominal value $0.01 per share, of the
Company.
“Permitted Foreign Jurisdiction” means each of the Cayman Islands, Bermuda, Switzerland, the
United Kingdom, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, Ireland,
Barbados, the British Virgin Islands, Cyprus or Gibraltar, any other member country of the
European Union, or any territory of any of the foregoing, as determined in good faith by the Board
of Directors of the Company.
“Person” means any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture, association, joint-stock
company, trust, unincorporated organization, limited liability company or government or other
entity.
“PIK Notes” means additional Notes issued under this Indenture issued on the Interest Payment
Date in connection with any interest payment with respect to the Notes made by increasing the
outstanding principal amount of the Notes or by issuing additional Notes.
”POS Trading Price” means the mean average of the Trading Prices for each of the Trading Days
occurring during the Observation Period.
“Record Date” means for the interest payable on any applicable Interest Payment Date the June
15 or December 15 (whether or not a Business Day) next preceding such Interest Payment Date.
“Responsible Officer” means, when used with respect to the Trustee, any officer within the
corporate trust department of the Trustee having direct responsibility for the administration of this
Indenture, or any other officer to whom any corporate trust matter is referred because of such
officer’s knowledge of and familiarity with the particular subject.
“SEC” means the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission or any successor thereto.
“Securities Act” means the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and the rules and regulations of
the SEC promulgated thereunder.
-4-
“Stated Maturity” means, with respect to any series of indebtedness, the date on which the final
payment of principal was scheduled to be paid in the documentation governing such
indebtedness as of the date of incurrence thereof (or any later date agreed to by the parties after
such date of Incurrence), and will not include any contingent obligations to repay, redeem or
repurchase any such interest or principal prior to the date originally scheduled for the payment
thereof.
“Subsidiary” means, with respect to any specified Person:
(1)          any corporation, association or other business entity (other than a partnership or limited
liability company) of which more than 50% of the total voting power of shares of Capital Stock
entitled (without regard to the occurrence of any contingency and after giving effect to any voting
agreement or stockholders’ agreement that effectively transfers voting power) to vote in the
election of directors, managers or trustees of the corporation, association or other business entity
is at the time owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by that Person or one or more of the other
Subsidiaries of that Person (or a combination thereof); or
(2)          any partnership (whether general or limited) or limited liability company of which (a) the
sole general partner or member of which is such Person or a Subsidiary of such Person, or (b) if
there is more than a single general partner or member, either (x) the only managing general
partners or managing members of which are such Person or one or more Subsidiaries of such
Person (or any combination thereof) or (y) more than 50% of the capital accounts, distribution
rights, total equity and voting interests or general and limited partnership interests, as applicable,
are owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by such Person or one or more of the other
Subsidiaries of that Person or a combination thereof, whether in the form of membership, general,
special or limited partnership interests or otherwise.
“TIA” or “Trust Indenture Act” means the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as amended, and the rules
and regulations of the SEC promulgated thereunder.
“Trading Day” means a day on which (i) trading in the Parent Ordinary Shares generally occurs
on The New York Stock Exchange or, if the Parent Ordinary Shares is not then listed on The
New York Stock Exchange, on the principal other U.S. national or regional securities exchange
on which the Parent Ordinary Shares are then listed or, if the Parent Ordinary Shares are not then
listed on a U.S. national or regional securities exchange, on the principal other market on which
the Parent Ordinary Shares are then traded and (ii) a Daily VWAP for the Parent Ordinary Shares
is available on such securities exchange or market; provided that if the Parent Ordinary Shares
are not so listed or traded, “Trading Day” means a Business Day.
“Trading Price” means with respect to the Parent Ordinary Shares on a Trading Day, the Daily
VWAP, or, if the Parent Ordinary Shares are not listed on the New York Stock Exchange or a
U.S. national or regional securities exchange on a Trading Day or a Daily VWAP for the Parent
Ordinary Shares is not available on such securities exchange or market, the average of the
reported closing bid and asked prices of such security on such date in the over-the-counter
market or comparable system as shown by a system of automated dissemination of quotations of
securities prices then in common use comparable to the National Association of Securities
Dealers, Inc. Automated Quotations System; provided, however, that if no such sales price or bid
and asked prices have been quoted during the Observation Period, then “Trading Price” means
the value of such Parent Ordinary Shares as determined reasonably and in good faith by the
Board of Directors of the Company.
“Trustee” means U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee, until a successor replaces it in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this Indenture and thereafter means the successor
serving hereunder.
-5-
“Voting Stock” of any specified Person as of any date means the Capital Stock of such Person
that is at the time entitled to vote in the election of the Board of Directors of such Person.
“Wholly-Owned Subsidiary” of a Person means a Subsidiary, all of the Equity Interests of which
(other than directors’ qualifying shares or shares that are required by the applicable laws and
regulations of the jurisdiction of organization of such Subsidiary to be owned by the government
of such jurisdiction or individual corporate citizens of such jurisdiction) are owned by such
Person or another Wholly-Owned Subsidiary of such Person.
Section 1.02          Other Definitions. TermDefined in Section
“Agent Members”
“Alternate Offer”
“Authentication Order”
“Change of Control Offer”
“Change of Control Payment”
“Change of Control Purchase Date”
“Clearstream”
“Covenant Defeasance”
“Euroclear”
“Event of Default”
“Global Note”
“Global Notes Legend”
“Initial Global Note”
“Legal Defeasance”
“Note Register”
“Payment Default”
“Paying Agent”
“PDF”
“PIK Global Note”
“Registrar”
“Successor Company”
“Transfer Agent”
2.1(c) of Appendix A
4.08(f)
2.02(c)
4.08(a)
4.08(a)
4.08(a)
1.1(a) of Appendix A
8.03
1.1(a) of Appendix A
6.01
2.1(b) of Appendix A
2.2(e) of Appendix A
2.1(b) of Appendix A
8.01(a)
2.03(a)
6.01
2.03(a)
12.16
2.1(b) of Appendix A
2.03(a)
5.01(a)
2.03(a)
Section 1.03Rules of Construction. Unless the context otherwise requires:
(1)          a term defined in Section 1.01 or 1.02 has the meaning assigned to it therein, and a term
used herein that is defined in the Trust Indenture Act, either directly or by reference therein, shall
have the meaning assigned to it therein;
(2)          subject to Section 12.20, an accounting term not otherwise defined has the meaning
assigned to it in accordance with GAAP;
(3)          “or” is not exclusive;
(4)          words in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular;
(5)          provisions apply to successive events and transactions;
-6-
(6)          unless the context otherwise requires, any reference to an “Appendix,” “Article,”
“Section,” “clause,” “Schedule” or “Exhibit” refers to an Appendix, Article, Section, clause,
Schedule or Exhibit, as the case may be, of this Indenture;
(7)          the words “herein,” “hereof” and other words of similar import refer to this Indenture as a
whole and not any particular Article, Section, clause or other subdivision;
(8)          “including” means including without limitation;
(9)          references to sections of, or rules under, the Securities Act, the Exchange Act or the
Trust Indenture Act shall be deemed to include substitute, replacement or successor sections or
rules adopted by the SEC from time to time;
(10)          unless otherwise provided, references to agreements and other instruments shall be
deemed to include all amendments and other modifications to such agreements or instruments,
but only to the extent such amendments and other modifications are not prohibited by the terms of
this Indenture; and
(11)          in the event that a transaction meets the criteria of more than one category of permitted
transactions or listed exceptions, the Company may classify, divide or reclassify such transaction
as it, in its sole discretion, determines.
Section 1.04          Incorporation by Reference of Trust Indenture Act. Whenever this Indenture
refers to a provision of the Trust Indenture Act as applicable to this Indenture, the provision is
incorporated by reference in and made a part of this Indenture.
The following Trust Indenture Act terms used in this Indenture have the following meanings:
“indenture to be made” means this Indenture;
“obligor” means the Company and any successor obligor upon the Notes.
All other terms used in this Indenture that are defined by the Trust Indenture Act, defined by Trust
Indenture Act reference to another statute or defined by SEC rule under the Trust Indenture Act
have the meanings so assigned to them.
Section 1.05          Acts of Holders. Any request, demand, authorization, direction, notice, consent,
waiver or other action provided by this Indenture to be given or taken by Holders may be
embodied in and evidenced by one or more instruments of substantially similar tenor signed by
such Holders in person or by an agent duly appointed in writing.  Except as herein otherwise
expressly provided, such action shall become effective when such instrument or instruments or
record or both are delivered to the Trustee and, where it is hereby expressly required, to the
Company.  Proof of execution of any such instrument or of a writing appointing any such agent, or
the holding by any Person of a Note, shall be sufficient for any purpose of this Indenture and
(subject to Section 7.01) conclusive in favor of the Trustee and the Company if made in the
manner provided in this Section 1.05.
(b)          The fact and date of the execution by any Person of any such instrument or writing may
be proved (1) by the affidavit of a witness of such execution or by the certificate of any notary
public or other officer authorized by law to take acknowledgments of deeds, certifying that the
individual signing such instrument or writing acknowledged to him the execution thereof or (2) in
any other manner deemed reasonably sufficient by the Trustee.  Where such execution is by or
on behalf of any legal entity other than an individual, such certificate or affidavit shall also
constitute proof of the authority of the Person executing the same.  The fact and date of the
execution of any such instrument or writing, or the authority of the Person executing the same,
may also be proved in any other manner that the Trustee deems sufficient.
-7-
(c)          The ownership of Notes shall be proved by the Note Register.
(d)          Any request, demand, authorization, direction, notice, consent, waiver or other action by
the Holder of any Note shall bind every future Holder of the same Note and the Holder of every
Note issued upon the registration of transfer thereof or in exchange therefor or in lieu thereof, in
respect of any action taken, suffered or omitted by the Trustee or the Company in reliance
thereon, whether or not notation of such action is made upon such Note.
(e)          The Company may set a record date for purposes of determining the identity of Holders
entitled to make, give or take any request, demand, authorization, direction, notice, consent,
waiver or other action provided in this Indenture to be made, or to vote on or consent to any
action authorized or permitted to be taken by Holders; provided that the Company may not set a
record date for, and the provisions of this clause shall not apply with respect to, the giving or
making of any notice, declaration, request or direction referred to in clause (f) below.  Unless
otherwise specified, if not set by the Company prior to the first solicitation of a Holder made by
any Person in respect of any such action, or in the case of any such vote, prior to such vote, any
such record date shall be the later of 30 days prior to the first solicitation of such consent or vote
or the date of the most recent list of Holders furnished to the Trustee prior to such solicitation or
vote.  If any record date is set pursuant to this clause (e), the Holders on such record date, and
only such Holders, shall be entitled to make, give or take such request, demand, authorization,
direction, notice, consent, waiver or other action (including revocation of any action), whether or
not such Holders remain Holders after such record date; provided that no such action shall be
effective hereunder unless made, given or taken on or prior to the applicable Expiration Date by
Holders of the requisite principal amount of Notes, or each affected Holder, as applicable, on
such record date.  Promptly after any record date is set pursuant to this clause, the Company, at
its own expense, shall cause notice of such record date, the proposed action by Holders and the
applicable Expiration Date to be given to the Trustee in writing and to each Holder in the manner
set forth in Section 12.02.
(f)          The Trustee may set any day as a record date for the purpose of determining the Holders
entitled to join in the giving or making of (1) any notice of default under Section 6.01, (2) any
declaration of acceleration referred to in Section 6.02, (3) any direction referred to in Section 6.05
or (4) any request to pursue a remedy as permitted in Section 6.06.  If any record date is set
pursuant to this clause, the Holders on such record date, and no other Holders, shall be entitled
to join in such notice, declaration, request or direction, whether or not such Holders remain
Holders after such record date; provided that no such action shall be effective hereunder unless
made, given or taken on or prior to the applicable Expiration Date by Holders of the requisite
principal amount of Notes or each affected Holder, as applicable, on such record date.  Promptly
after any record date is set pursuant to this clause, the Trustee, at the Company’s expense, shall
cause notice of such record date, the proposed action by Holders and the applicable Expiration
Date to be given to the Company and to each Holder in the manner set forth in Section 12.02.
(g)          Without limiting the foregoing, a Holder entitled to take any action hereunder with regard
to any particular Note may do so with regard to all or any part of the principal amount of such
Note or by one or more duly appointed agents, each of which may do so pursuant to such
appointment with regard to all or any part of such principal amount.  Any notice given or action
taken by a Holder or its agents with regard to different parts of such principal amount pursuant to
this clause shall have the same effect as if given or taken by separate Holders of each such
different part.
-8-
(h)          Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, a Holder, including a Depositary that is
the Holder of a Global Note, may make, give or take, by a proxy or proxies duly appointed in
writing, any request, demand, authorization, direction, notice, consent, waiver or other action
provided in this Indenture to be made, given or taken by Holders, and a Depositary that is the
Holder of a Global Note may provide its proxy or proxies to the beneficial owners of interests in
any such Global Note through such Depositary’s standing instructions and customary practices.
(i)          The Company may fix a record date for the purpose of determining the Persons who are
beneficial owners of interests in any Global Note held by a Depositary entitled under the
procedures of such Depositary, if any, to make, give or take, by a proxy or proxies duly appointed
in writing, any request, demand, authorization, direction, notice, consent, waiver or other action
provided in this Indenture to be made, given or taken by Holders; provided that if such a record
date is fixed, only the beneficial owners of interests in such Global Note on such record date or
their duly appointed proxy or proxies shall be entitled to make, give or take such request,
demand, authorization, direction, notice, consent, waiver or other action, whether or not such
beneficial owners remain beneficial owners of interests in such Global Note after such record
date.  No such request, demand, authorization, direction, notice, consent, waiver or other action
shall be effective hereunder unless made, given or taken on or prior to the applicable Expiration
Date.
(j)          With respect to any record date set pursuant to this Section 1.05, the party hereto that sets
such record date may designate any day as the “Expiration Date” and from time to time may
change the Expiration Date to any earlier or later day; provided that no such change shall be
effective unless notice of the proposed new Expiration Date is given to the other party hereto in
writing, and to each Holder of Notes in the manner set forth in Section 12.02, on or prior to both
the existing and the new Expiration Date.  If an Expiration Date is not designated with respect to
any record date set pursuant to this Section 1.05, the party hereto which set such record date
shall be deemed to have initially designated the 90th day after such record date as the Expiration
Date with respect thereto, subject to its right to change the Expiration Date as provided in this
clause (j).
ARTICLE 2
THE NOTES
Section 2.01          Form and Dating; Terms.Provisions relating to the Initial Notes and any other
Notes issued under this Indenture are set forth in Appendix A, which is hereby incorporated in
and expressly made a part of this Indenture.  The Notes and the Trustee’s certificate of
authentication shall each be substantially in the form of Exhibit A hereto, which is hereby
incorporated in and expressly made a part of this Indenture.  The Notes may have notations,
legends or endorsements required by law, rules or agreements with national securities
exchanges to which the Company is subject, if any, or usage (provided that any such notation,
legend or endorsement is in a form acceptable to the Company).  Each Note shall be dated the
date of its authentication.  The Notes shall be in denominations of $1.00 and integral multiples of
$1.00 in excess thereof.
(b)          The aggregate principal amount of Notes that may be authenticated and delivered under
this Indenture is unlimited.
The terms and provisions contained in the Notes shall constitute, and are hereby expressly
made, a part of this Indenture, and the Company and the Trustee, by their execution and delivery
of this Indenture, expressly agree to such terms and provisions and to be bound thereby. 
However, to the extent any provision of any Note conflicts with the express provisions of this
Indenture, the provisions of this Indenture shall govern and be controlling.
-9-
The Notes shall be redeemable as provided in Article 3.
PIK Notes ranking pari passu with the Initial Notes may be created and issued from time to time
by the Company without notice to or consent of the Holders and shall be consolidated with and
form a single class with the Initial Notes and shall have the same terms as to status, redemption
or otherwise (other than Issue Date, the first Interest Payment Date and the first date from which
interest will accrue) as the Initial Notes.
Section 2.02          Execution and Authentication.At least one Officer shall execute the Notes on
behalf of the Company by manual or facsimile signature.  If an Officer whose signature is on a
Note no longer holds that office at the time a Note is authenticated, the Note shall nevertheless
be valid.
(b)          A Note shall not be entitled to any benefit under this Indenture or be valid or obligatory
for any purpose until authenticated substantially in the form of Exhibit A attached hereto by the
manual signature of an authorized signatory of the Trustee.  The signature shall be conclusive
evidence that the Note has been duly authenticated and delivered under this Indenture.
(c)          On the Issue Date, the Trustee shall, upon receipt of a written order of the Company
signed by an Officer (an “Authentication Order”), authenticate and deliver the Initial Notes.  In
addition, at any time and from time to time, the Trustee shall, upon receipt of an Authentication
Order, authenticate and deliver any PIK Notes in an aggregate principal amount specified in such
Authentication Order for such PIK Notes issued hereunder.
(d)          The Trustee may appoint an authenticating agent acceptable to the Company to
authenticate Notes.  An authenticating agent may authenticate Notes whenever the Trustee may
do so.  Each reference in this Indenture to authentication by the Trustee includes authentication
by such agent.  An authenticating agent has the same rights as an Agent to deal with Holders,
the Company or an Affiliate of the Company.
(e)          The Trustee shall authenticate and make available for delivery upon a written order of
the Company signed by one Officer of the Company (a) Initial Notes for original issue on the
Issue Date in an aggregate principal amount of $60,000,000, (b) subject to the terms of this
Indenture, PIK Notes and (c) any other Global Notes issued in exchange for any of the foregoing
in accordance with this Indenture.  Such order shall specify the amount of the Notes to be
authenticated, the date on which the original issue of Notes is to be authenticated and whether
the Notes are to be Initial Notes or PIK Notes or Notes issued in exchange therefor.
Section 2.03          Registrar and Paying Agent. The Company shall maintain an office or agency
where Notes may be presented for registration of transfer (“Transfer Agent”) or for exchange
(“Registrar”) and at least one office or agency where Notes may be presented for payment
(“Paying Agent”).  The Registrar shall keep a register of the Notes (“Note Register”) and of their
transfer and exchange.  The Company may appoint one or more co-registrars, one or more
additional paying agents and one or more additional transfer agents.  The term “Registrar”
includes any co-registrar, the term “Paying Agent” includes any additional paying agent and the
term “Transfer Agent” includes any additional transfer agent.  The Company may change any
Paying Agent or Registrar without prior notice to any Holder.  The Company shall notify the
Trustee in writing of the name and address of any Agent not a party to this Indenture.  If the
Company fails to appoint or maintain another entity as Registrar or Paying Agent, the Trustee
shall act as such.  The Company or any of its Subsidiaries may act as Paying Agent or Registrar.
(b)          The Company initially appoints DTC to act as Depositary with respect to the Global
Notes.  The Company initially appoints the Trustee to act as Paying Agent and Registrar for the
Notes and to act as Custodian with respect to the Global Notes.
-10-
Section 2.04          Paying Agent to Hold Money in Trust. The Company shall, no later than 11:00
a.m. (New York City time) on each due date for the payment of principal and interest on any of the
Notes, deposit with a Paying Agent a sum sufficient to pay such amount, such sum to be held in
trust for the Holders entitled to the same, and (unless such Paying Agent is the Trustee) the
Company shall promptly notify the Trustee of its action or failure so to act.  The Company shall
require each Paying Agent other than the Trustee to agree in writing that such Paying Agent shall
hold in trust for the benefit of Holders or the Trustee all money held by such Paying Agent for the
payment of principal, premium and interest on the Notes, and shall notify the Trustee of any
default by the Company in making any such payment.  While any such default continues, the
Trustee may require a Paying Agent to pay all money held by it to the Trustee.  The Company at
any time may require a Paying Agent to pay all money held by it to the Trustee.  Upon payment
over to the Trustee, a Paying Agent shall have no further liability for the money.  If the Company
or a Subsidiary acts as Paying Agent, it shall segregate and hold in a separate trust fund for the
benefit of the Holders all money held by it as Paying Agent.  Upon any bankruptcy or
reorganization proceedings relating to the Company, the Trustee shall serve as Paying Agent for
the Notes.
Section 2.05          Holder Lists.The Trustee shall preserve in as current a form as is reasonably
practicable the most recent list available to it of the names and addresses of all Holders and shall
otherwise comply with Trust Indenture Act Section 312(b).  If the Trustee is not the Registrar, the
Company shall furnish to the Trustee at least two Business Days before each Interest Payment
Date and at such other times as the Trustee may request in writing, a list in such form and as of
such date as the Trustee may reasonably require of the names and addresses of the Holders,
and the Company shall otherwise comply with Trust Indenture Act Section 312(a).
Section 2.06          Transfer and Exchange. The Notes shall be issued in registered form and shall
be transferable only upon the surrender of a Note for registration of transfer and in compliance
with Appendix A.
(b)          To permit registrations of transfers and exchanges, the Company shall execute and the
Trustee shall authenticate Global Notes and Definitive Notes upon receipt of an Authentication
Order in accordance with Section 2.02 or at the Registrar’s request.
(c)          No service charge shall be imposed in connection with any registration of transfer or
exchange (other than pursuant to Section 2.07), but the Holders shall be required to pay any
transfer tax or similar governmental charge payable in connection therewith (other than any such
transfer taxes or similar governmental charge payable upon exchange or transfer pursuant to
Sections 2.10, 3.06, 3.09, 4.08 and 9.05).
(d)          All Global Notes and Definitive Notes issued upon any registration of transfer or
exchange of Global Notes or Definitive Notes shall be the valid obligations of the Company,
evidencing the same debt, and entitled to the same benefits under this Indenture, as the Global
Notes or Definitive Notes surrendered upon such registration of transfer or exchange.
(e)          Neither the Company nor the Registrar shall be required (1) to issue, to register the
transfer of or to exchange any Note during a period beginning at the opening of business 15 days
before the day of any selection of Notes for redemption under Section 3.02 and ending at the
close of business on the day of selection, (2) to register the transfer of or to exchange any Note
so selected for redemption, or tendered for repurchase (and not withdrawn) in connection with a
Change of Control Offer, in whole or in part, except the unredeemed or unpurchased portion of
any Note being redeemed or repurchased in part or (3) to register the transfer of or to exchange
any Note between a Record Date and the next succeeding Interest Payment Date.
-11-
(f)          Prior to due presentment for the registration of a transfer of any Note, the Trustee, any
Agent and the Company may deem and treat the Person in whose name any Note is registered
as the absolute owner of such Note for the purpose of receiving payment of principal, premium, if
any, and (subject to the Record Date provisions of the Notes) interest on such Notes and for all
other purposes, and none of the Trustee, any Agent or the Company shall be affected by notice to
the contrary.
(g)          Upon surrender for registration of transfer of any Note at the office or agency of the
Company designated pursuant to Section 4.02, the Company shall execute, and the Trustee
shall authenticate and mail, in the name of the designated transferee or transferees, one or more
replacement Notes of any authorized denomination or denominations of a like aggregate
principal amount.
(h)          At the option of the Holder, Notes may be exchanged for other Notes of any authorized
denomination or denominations of a like aggregate principal amount upon surrender of the Notes
to be exchanged at such office or agency.  Whenever any Global Notes or Definitive Notes are so
surrendered for exchange, the Company shall execute, and the Trustee shall authenticate and
mail, the replacement Global Notes and Definitive Notes which the Holder making the exchange
is entitled to in accordance with the provisions of Appendix A.
(i)          All certifications, certificates and Opinions of Counsel required to be submitted to the
Registrar pursuant to this Section 2.06 to effect a registration of transfer or exchange may be
submitted by mail or by facsimile or electronic transmission.
Section 2.07          Replacement Notes.If a mutilated Note is surrendered to the Trustee or if a
Holder claims that its Note has been lost, destroyed or wrongfully taken and the Trustee receives
evidence to its satisfaction of the ownership and loss, destruction or theft of such Note, the
Company shall issue and the Trustee, upon receipt of an Authentication Order, shall authenticate
a replacement Note if the Trustee’s requirements are otherwise met.  If required by the Trustee or
the Company, an indemnity bond must be provided by the Holder that is sufficient in the
judgment of the Trustee and the Company to protect the Company, the Trustee, any Agent and
any authenticating agent from any loss that any of them may suffer if a Note is replaced.  The
Company may charge the Holder for the expenses of the Company and the Trustee in replacing
a Note.  Every replacement Note is a contractual obligation of the Company and shall be entitled
to all of the benefits of this Indenture equally and proportionately with all other Notes duly issued
hereunder.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section 2.07, in case any mutilated,
lost, destroyed or wrongfully taken Note has become or is about to become due and payable, the
Company in its discretion may, instead of issuing a new Note, pay such Note.
Section 2.08          Outstanding Notes.The Notes outstanding at any time are all the Notes
authenticated by the Trustee except for those canceled by it, those delivered to it for cancellation,
those reductions in the interest in a Global Note effected by the Trustee in accordance with the
provisions hereof, and those described in this Section 2.08 as not outstanding.  Except as set
forth in Section 2.09, a Note does not cease to be outstanding because the Company or an
Affiliate of the Company holds the Note.
(b)          If a Note is replaced pursuant to Section 2.07, it ceases to be outstanding unless the
Trustee receives proof satisfactory to it that the replaced Note is held by a protected purchaser,
as such term is defined in Section 8-303 of the Uniform Commercial Code in effect in the State of
New York.
(c)          If the principal amount of any Note is considered paid under Section 4.01, it ceases to be
outstanding and interest on it ceases to accrue from and after the date of such payment.
(d)          If a Paying Agent (other than the Company, a Subsidiary or an Affiliate of any thereof)
holds, on the maturity date, any redemption date or any date of purchase pursuant to a Change of
Control Offer, money sufficient to pay Notes payable or to be redeemed or purchased on that
date, then on and after that date such Notes shall be deemed to be no longer outstanding and
shall cease to accrue interest.
-12-
Section 2.09          Treasury Notes.In determining whether the Holders of the requisite principal
amount of Notes have concurred in any direction, waiver or consent, Notes beneficially owned by
the Company, or by any Affiliate of the Company, shall be considered as though not outstanding,
except that for the purposes of determining whether the Trustee shall be protected in relying on
any such direction, waiver or consent, only Notes that a Responsible Officer of the Trustee knows
are so owned shall be so disregarded.  Notes so owned which have been pledged in good faith
shall not be disregarded if the pledgee establishes to the satisfaction of the Trustee the pledgee’s
right to deliver any such direction, waiver or consent with respect to the Notes and that the
pledgee is not the Company or any obligor upon the Notes or any Affiliate of the Company or of
such other obligor.
Section 2.10          Temporary Notes.Until definitive Notes are ready for delivery, the Company
may prepare and the Trustee, upon receipt of an Authentication Order, shall authenticate
temporary Notes.  Temporary Notes shall be substantially in the form of definitive Notes but may
have variations that the Company considers appropriate for temporary Notes and as shall be
reasonably acceptable to the Trustee.  Without unreasonable delay, the Company shall prepare
and the Trustee shall authenticate definitive Notes in exchange for temporary Notes.  Holders
and beneficial holders, as the case may be, of temporary Notes shall be entitled to all of the
benefits accorded to Holders, or beneficial holders, respectively, of Notes under this Indenture.
Section 2.11          Cancellation.The Company at any time may deliver Notes to the Trustee for
cancellation.  The Registrar and Paying Agent shall forward to the Trustee any Notes
surrendered to them for registration of transfer, exchange or payment.  The Trustee or, at the
direction of the Trustee, the Registrar or the Paying Agent and no one else shall cancel all Notes
surrendered for registration of transfer, exchange, payment, replacement or cancellation and
shall destroy cancelled Notes in accordance with its customary procedures (subject to the record
retention requirement of the Exchange Act).  Certification of the destruction of all cancelled Notes
shall, upon the written request of the Company, be delivered to the Company.  The Company
may not issue new Notes to replace Notes that it has paid or that have been delivered to the
Trustee for cancellation.
Section 2.12          Defaulted Interest.If the Company defaults in a payment of interest on the
Notes, it shall pay the defaulted interest in any lawful manner plus, to the extent lawful, interest
payable on the defaulted interest, to the Persons who are Holders on a subsequent special
record date, in each case at the rate provided in the Notes and in Section 4.01.  The Company
shall notify the Trustee in writing of the amount of defaulted interest proposed to be paid on each
Note and the date of the proposed payment, and at the same time the Company shall deposit
with the Trustee an amount of money equal to the aggregate amount proposed to be paid in
respect of such defaulted interest or shall make arrangements satisfactory to the Trustee for such
deposit prior to the date of the proposed payment, such money when deposited to be held in trust
for the benefit of the Persons entitled to such defaulted interest as provided in this Section 2.12. 
The Trustee shall fix or cause to be fixed each such special record date and payment date;
provided that no such special record date shall be less than ten days prior to the related payment
date for such defaulted interest.  The Trustee shall promptly notify the Company of such special
record date.  At least 15 days before the special record date, the Company (or, upon the written
request of the Company, the Trustee in the name and at the expense of the Company) shall mail
or deliver by electronic transmission in accordance with the applicable procedures of the
Depositary, or cause to be mailed or delivered by electronic transmission in accordance with the
applicable procedures of the Depositary to each Holder a notice that states the special record
date, the related payment date and the amount of such interest to be paid.
(b)          Subject to the foregoing provisions of this Section 2.12 and for greater certainty, each
Note delivered under this Indenture upon registration of transfer of or in exchange for or in lieu of
any other Note shall carry the rights to interest accrued and unpaid, and to accrue interest, which
were carried by such other Note.
-13-
Section 2.13CUSIP and ISIN Numbers.
The Company in issuing the Notes may use CUSIP or ISIN numbers (if then generally in use)
and, if so, the Trustee shall use CUSIP or ISIN numbers in notices of redemption or exchange or
in Offers to Purchase as a convenience to Holders; provided that any such notice may state that
no representation is made as to the correctness of such numbers either as printed on the Notes
or as contained in any notice of redemption or Change of Control Offer and that reliance may be
placed only on the other identification numbers printed on the Notes, and any such redemption or
exchange shall not be affected by any defect in or omission of such numbers.  The Company
shall as promptly as practicable notify the Trustee in writing of any change in the CUSIP or ISIN
numbers.
ARTICLE 3
REDEMPTION
Section 3.01          Notices to Trustee.If the Company elects to redeem Notes pursuant to Section
3.07, it shall furnish to the Trustee, at least two Business Days before notice of redemption is
required to be mailed or caused to be mailed to Holders pursuant to Section 3.03 (unless a
shorter notice shall be agreed to by the Trustee) setting forth (1) the Section of this Indenture
pursuant to which the redemption shall occur, (2) the redemption date and (3) the principal
amount of the Notes to be redeemed.
Section 3.02          Selection of Notes to Be Redeemed or Purchased.If less than all of the Notes
of a series are to be redeemed pursuant to Section 3.07 or purchased, the Trustee shall select
the Notes of that series to be redeemed or purchased (1) if the Notes are listed on any national
securities exchange, in compliance with the requirements of the principal national securities
exchange on which the Notes are listed or (2) if the Notes are not so listed, on a pro rata basis
(or, in the case of Notes issued as Global Notes, based on a method as the Depositary or its
nominee or successor may require, or where such nominee or successor is the Trustee, a
method that most nearly approximates pro rata selection  as the Trustee deems fair and
appropriate) unless otherwise required by law.
(b)          The Trustee shall promptly notify the Company in writing of the Notes selected for
redemption or purchase and, in the case of any Note selected for partial redemption or purchase,
the principal amount thereof to be redeemed or purchased.  Notes and portions of Notes selected
shall be in amounts of $1.00 or integral multiples of $1.00; provided that no Notes of $2,000 in
principal amount or less shall be redeemed in part.  Except as provided in the preceding
sentence, provisions of this Indenture that apply to Notes called for redemption or purchase also
apply to portions of Notes called for redemption or purchase.
(c)          After the redemption date or purchase date, upon surrender of a Note to be redeemed or
purchased in part only, a new Note or Notes in principal amount equal to the unredeemed or
unpurchased portion of the original Note, representing the same indebtedness to the extent not
redeemed or not purchased, shall be issued in the name of the Holder of the Notes upon
cancellation of the original Note (or appropriate book entries shall be made to reflect such partial
redemption).
Section 3.03          Notice of Redemption.The Company shall mail or deliver by electronic
transmission in accordance with the applicable procedures of the Depositary, or cause to be
mailed (or delivered by electronic transmission in accordance with the applicable procedures of
the Depositary) notices of redemption of Notes not less than one Business Day before the
redemption date to each Holder whose Notes are to be redeemed pursuant to this Article at such
Holder’s registered address or otherwise in accordance with the applicable procedures of the
Depositary.  Notices of redemption may be conditional.
-14-
(b)          The notice shall identify the Notes to be redeemed (including CUSIP and ISIN number, if
applicable) and shall state:
(1)          the redemption date;
(2)          the redemption price, including the portion thereof representing any accrued and unpaid
interest;
(3)          if any Note is to be redeemed in part only, the portion of the principal amount of that Note
that is to be redeemed;
(4)          the name and address of the Paying Agent;
(5)          that Notes called for redemption must be surrendered to the Paying Agent to collect the
redemption price;
(6)          that, unless the Company defaults in making such redemption payment or the Paying
Agent is prohibited from making such payment pursuant to the terms of this Indenture, interest on
Notes called for redemption ceases to accrue on and after the redemption date;
(7)          the Section of this Indenture pursuant to which the Notes called for redemption are being
redeemed;
(8)          any condition to the redemption; and
(9)          that no representation is made as to the correctness or accuracy of the CUSIP or ISIN
number, if any, listed in such notice or printed on the Notes.
(c)          At the Company’s request, the Trustee shall give the notice of redemption in the
Company’s name and at the Company’s expense; provided that the Company shall have
delivered to the Trustee, at least two Business Days before notice of redemption is required to be
sent or caused to be sent to Holders pursuant to this Section 3.03 (unless a shorter notice shall
be agreed to by the Trustee), an Officer’s Certificate requesting that the Trustee give such notice
and setting forth the information to be stated in such notice as provided in Section 3.03(b).
Section 3.04          Effect of Notice of Redemption.Once notice of redemption is mailed in
accordance with Section 3.03, Notes called for redemption become irrevocably due and payable
(subject to the provisions of the next succeeding sentence) on the redemption date at the
redemption price.  Notice of any redemption may, at the Company’s discretion, be subject to one
or more conditions precedent. The notice, if mailed or delivered by electronic transmission in a
manner herein provided, shall be conclusively presumed to have been given, whether or not the
Holder receives such notice.  In any case, failure to give such notice or any defect in the notice to
the Holder of any Note designated for redemption in whole or in part shall not affect the validity of
the proceedings for the redemption of any other Note.  Subject to Section 3.05, on and after the
redemption date, interest ceases to accrue on Notes or portions of Notes called for redemption.
Section 3.05          Deposit of Redemption or Purchase Price.No later than 11:00 a.m. (New York
City time) on the redemption or purchase date (or such later time as such date to which the
Trustee may reasonably agree), the Company shall deposit with the Trustee or with the Paying
Agent money sufficient to pay the redemption or purchase price of and accrued and unpaid
interest on all Notes to be redeemed or purchased on that date.  If a Note is redeemed or
purchased on or after a Record Date but on or prior to the related Interest Payment Date, then
any accrued and unpaid interest shall be paid to the Holder of record on such Record Date.  The
Paying Agent shall promptly mail to each Holder whose Notes are to be redeemed or
repurchased the applicable redemption or purchase price thereof and accrued and unpaid
interest thereon.  The Trustee or the Paying Agent shall promptly return to the Company any
money deposited with the Trustee or the Paying Agent by the Company in excess of the amounts
necessary to pay the redemption or purchase price of, and accrued and unpaid interest on, all
Notes to be redeemed or purchased.
-15-
(b)          If the Company complies with the provisions of Section 3.05(a), on and after the
redemption or purchase date, interest shall cease to accrue on the Notes or the portions of Notes
called for redemption, whether or not such Notes are presented for payment, and the Holders of
such Notes shall have no further rights with respect to such Notes except for the right to receive
the redemption or purchase price of, and accrued interests, if any, on such Notes upon surrender
of such Notes.  If a Note is redeemed or purchased on or after a Record Date but on or prior to the
related Interest Payment Date, then any accrued and unpaid interest to the redemption or
purchase date in respect of such Note will be paid on such redemption or purchase date to the
Person in whose name such Note is registered at the close of business on such Record Date.  If
any Note called for redemption or purchase shall not be so paid upon surrender for redemption or
purchase because of the failure of the Company to comply with Section 3.05(a), interest shall be
paid on the unpaid principal, from the redemption or purchase date until such principal is paid,
and, to the extent lawful, on any interest accrued to the redemption or purchase date not paid on
such unpaid principal, in each case at the rate provided in the Notes and in Section 4.01.
Section 3.06          Notes Redeemed or Purchased in Part.Upon surrender of a Note that is
redeemed or purchased in part, the Company shall issue and, upon receipt of an Authentication
Order, the Trustee shall promptly authenticate and mail to the Holder (or cause to be transferred
by book entry) at the expense of the Company a new Note equal in principal amount to the
unredeemed or unpurchased portion of the Note surrendered representing the same
indebtedness to the extent not redeemed or purchased; provided that each new Note shall be in
a principal amount of $2,000 or an integral multiple of $1.00 in excess thereof.  It is understood
that, notwithstanding anything in this Indenture to the contrary, only an Authentication Order and
not an Opinion of Counsel or Officer’s Certificate is required for the Trustee to authenticate such
new Note.
Section 3.07          Optional Redemption.At any time, the Company may on any one or more
occasions redeem all or a part of the Notes, upon notice pursuant to Section 3.03, at a
redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof, and accrued and unpaid interest,
if any, to the date of redemption.
-16-
Section 3.08          Mandatory Redemption.The Company will not be required to make mandatory
redemption or sinking fund payments with respect to the Notes.
Section 3.09          Purchase of Notes.The Company or any Affiliate of the Company may, subject
to applicable law, at any time purchase or otherwise acquire Notes in the open market or by
private agreement.  Any such acquisition shall not operate as or be deemed for any purpose to
be a redemption of the indebtedness represented by such Notes.  Any Notes purchased or
acquired by the Company or an Affiliate may be delivered to the Trustee and, upon such delivery,
the indebtedness represented thereby shall be deemed to be satisfied.  Section 2.11 shall apply
to all Notes so delivered.
ARTICLE 4
COVENANTS
Section 4.01          Payment of Notes.The Company will pay, or cause to be paid, the principal,
and interest on the Notes on the dates and in the manner provided in the Notes.  Principal and
interest shall be considered paid on the date due if the Paying Agent, if other than the Company
or a Subsidiary, holds as of 11:00 a.m. (New York City) time, on the due date money deposited
by the Company in immediately available funds and designated for and sufficient to pay the
principal, premium, if any, and interest then due.
(b)          The Company shall pay interest (including post-petition interest in any proceeding under
any Bankruptcy Law) on overdue principal at the rate equal to the cash interest rate on the Notes
to the extent lawful; it shall pay interest (including post-petition interest in any proceeding under
any Bankruptcy Law) on overdue installments of interest (without regard to any applicable grace
period) at the same rate to the extent lawful.
Section 4.02          Maintenance of Office or Agency.The Company shall maintain an office or
agency (which may be an office of the Trustee or an Affiliate of the Trustee, Registrar or co-
registrar) where Notes may be surrendered for registration of transfer or for exchange and where
notices and demands to or upon the Company in respect of the Notes and this Indenture may be
served.  The Company shall give prompt written notice to the Trustee of the location, and any
change in the location, of such office or agency.  If at any time the Company shall fail to maintain
any such required office or agency or shall fail to furnish the Trustee with the address thereof,
such presentations, surrenders, notices and demands may be made or served at the Corporate
Trust Office of the Trustee.
The Company may also from time to time designate additional offices or agencies where the
Notes may be presented or surrendered for any or all such purposes and may from time to time
rescind such designations.  The Company shall give prompt written notice to the Trustee of any
such designation or rescission and of any change in the location of any such other office or
agency.
The Company hereby designates the Corporate Trust Office of the Trustee as one such office or
agency of the Company in accordance with Section 2.03.
Section 4.03Taxes
The Company shall pay prior to delinquency, all taxes, assessments and governmental levies
except (a) such as are being contested in good faith and by appropriate negotiations or
proceedings or (b) where the failure to effect such payment would not have a material adverse
effect upon the financial condition, business or results of operations of the Company and its
Subsidiaries taken as a whole.
-17-
Section 4.04          Stay, Extension and Usury Laws.The Company covenants (to the extent that it
may lawfully do so) that it shall not at any time insist upon, plead, or in any manner whatsoever
claim or take the benefit or advantage of, any stay, extension or usury law wherever enacted,
now or at any time hereafter in force, that may affect the covenants or the performance of this
Indenture; and the Company (to the extent that it may lawfully do so) hereby expressly waives all
benefit or advantage of any such law, and covenants that it shall not, by resort to any such law,
hinder, delay or impede the execution of any power herein granted to the Trustee, but shall suffer
and permit the execution of every such power as though no such law has been enacted.
Section 4.05          Corporate Existence.Subject to Article 5, the Company shall do or cause to be
done all things necessary to preserve and keep in full force and effect (1) its existence in
accordance with its organizational documents (as the same may be amended from time to time)
of the Company and (2) the material rights (charter and statutory), licenses and franchises of the
Company; provided that the Company shall not be required to preserve any such right, license or
franchise, or if the Company in good faith shall determine that the preservation thereof is no
longer desirable in the conduct of the business of the Company and its Subsidiaries, taken as a
whole.
Section 4.06          Compliance Certificate.The Company will deliver to the Trustee, within 120
days after the end of each fiscal year ending after the Issue Date, a certificate from the principal
executive officer, principal financial officer or principal accounting officer stating that a review of
the activities of the Company and its Subsidiaries during the preceding fiscal year has been
made under the supervision of the signing Officer with a view to determining whether the
Company has kept, observed, performed and fulfilled their obligations under this Indenture, and
further stating, as to such Officer signing such certificate, that to the best of his or her knowledge,
the Company has kept, observed, performed and fulfilled each and every condition and covenant
contained in this Indenture and is not in default in the performance or observance of any of the
terms, provisions, covenants and conditions of this Indenture (or, if a Default or Event of Default
shall have occurred, describing all such Defaults or Events of Default of which he or she may
have knowledge and what action the Company is taking or proposes to take with respect
thereto).
(b)          When any Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing under this
Indenture, the Company will promptly (which shall be within ten Business Days following the
date on which the Company becomes aware of such Default or Event of Default or receives
notice of such Default or Event of Default) send to the Trustee a notice specifying such Default or
Event of Default, its status and what action the Company is taking or proposes to take with
respect thereof.
Section 4.07Authorization of Shares.
If in the Company’s business judgment it is commercially reasonable to do so, on or before
January 1, 2019, the Company will propose appropriate resolutions to obtain shareholders’
approval to permit the issuance of a sufficient number of additional Parent Ordinary Shares to
pay three (3) years of interest payments in the form of Parent Ordinary Shares.
Section 4.08          Offer to Repurchase Upon Change of Control.If a Change of Control occurs,
each Holder will have the right to require the Company to repurchase all or any part (equal to
$2,000 or an integral multiple of $1,000 in excess thereof) of that Holder’s Notes pursuant to an
offer (a “Change of Control Offer”) on the terms set forth in this Indenture. In the Change of
Control Offer, the Company will offer a payment in cash (the “Change of Control Payment”) equal
to 100% of the aggregate principal amount of Notes repurchased, plus accrued and unpaid
interest, if any, on the Notes repurchased to the date of repurchase, which will be no earlier than
30 days nor later than 60 days from the date such notice is mailed or delivered, as applicable (the
“Change of Control Purchase Date”), subject to the rights of Holders on a Record Date to receive
interest due on the Change of Control Purchase Date. Within 30 days following any Change of
Control, the Company will send a notice of such Change of Control Offer to each Holder or
otherwise deliver notice in accordance with the applicable procedures of the Depositary, in each
case, with a copy to the Trustee, with the following information:
-18-
(1)          that a Change of Control Offer is being made pursuant to this Section 4.08, and that all
Notes properly tendered pursuant to such Change of Control Offer will be accepted by the
Company;
(2)          the purchase price and the Change of Control Purchase Date;
(3)          that any Note not properly tendered will remain outstanding and continue to accrue
interest;
(4)          that, unless the Company defaults in the payment of the Change of Control Payment, all
Notes accepted for payment pursuant to the Change of Control Offer will cease to accrue interest
on the Change of Control Purchase Date;
(5)          that Holders electing to have any Notes purchased pursuant to a Change of Control Offer
will be required to surrender such Notes, with the form entitled “Option of Holder to Elect
Purchase” on the reverse of the Notes completed, to the Paying Agent specified in the notice at
the address specified in the notice prior to the close of business on the third Business Day
preceding the Change of Control Purchase Date;
(6)          that Holders will be entitled to withdraw their tendered Notes and their election to require
the Company to purchase such Notes; provided that the Paying Agent receives, not later than the
expiration of the Change of Control Offer, a facsimile, transmission or letter setting forth the name
of the Holder, the principal amount of Notes tendered for purchase, and a statement that such
Holder is withdrawing its tendered Notes and its election to have such Notes purchased;
(7)          if such notice is delivered prior to the occurrence of a Change of Control, stating that the
Change of Control Offer is conditional upon the occurrence of such Change of Control; and
(8)          the other instructions, as determined by the Company, consistent with this Section 4.08,
that a Holder must follow.
The notice, if mailed or otherwise delivered in a manner herein provided, shall be conclusively
presumed to have been given, whether or not the Holder receives such notice.  If (A) the notice is
mailed in a manner herein provided and (B) any Holder fails to receive such notice or a Holder
receives such notice but it is defective, such Holder’s failure to receive such notice or such defect
shall not affect the validity of the purchase of the Notes from all other Holders that properly
received such notice without defect.
(b)          Promptly following the expiration of the Change of Control Offer on the Change of
Control Purchase Date, the Company will, to the extent lawful, (1) accept for payment all Notes or
portions of Notes (in integral multiples of $1,000) properly tendered and not withdrawn pursuant
to the Change of Control Offer, provided that if, following repurchase of a portion of a Note, the
remaining principal amount of such Note outstanding immediately after such repurchase would
be less than $2,000, then the portion of such Note so repurchased shall be reduced so that the
remaining principal amount of such Note outstanding immediately after such repurchase is
$2,000; (2) deposit with the Paying Agent an amount equal to the aggregate Change of Control
Payment in respect of all Notes or portions of Notes properly tendered and not withdrawn and (3)
deliver or cause to be delivered to the Trustee for cancellation the Notes properly accepted
together with an Officer’s Certificate stating the aggregate principal amount of Notes or portions
of Notes being purchased by the Company in accordance with this Section 4.08;
-19-
(c)          Payment of the Change of Control Payment for a Note properly tendered and not
withdrawn prior to the expiration of the Change of Control Offer is conditioned upon delivery of
such Note (together with necessary endorsements) to the Paying Agent (whether prior to, on or
after the Change of Control Purchase Date), which delivery may be in book-entry form in
accordance with the procedures of the Depositary for Global Notes. The Change of Control
Payment for such Note will be made promptly following the later of the Business Day following
the Change of Control Purchase Date or the time of delivery of such Note.
(d)          In the event that the Company makes a Change of Control Payment, the Paying Agent
will promptly mail (or otherwise deliver in accordance with the applicable procedures of the
Depositary) to each Holder of Notes properly tendered and not withdrawn the Change of Control
Payment for such Notes (or if all Notes are then in global form, make such payment through the
facilities of Depositary), and the Trustee will promptly authenticate and mail (or otherwise deliver
in accordance with the applicable procedures of the Depositary) (or cause to be transferred by
book entry) to each Holder a new Note of the applicable series equal in principal amount to any
unpurchased portion of the Notes of such series surrendered, if any; provided, however, that
each new Note of such series will be in a principal amount of $2,000 or an integral multiple of
$1,000 in excess of $2,000.
(e)          If the Change of Control Purchase Date is on or after a Record Date and on or before the
related Interest Payment Date, any accrued and unpaid interest to the Change of Control
Purchase Date will be paid on the Change of Control Purchase Date to the Person in whose
name a Note is registered at the close of business on such Record Date.
(f)          The Company will not be required to make a Change of Control Offer with respect to a
series of Notes upon a Change of Control if (1) a third party makes the Change of Control Offer
with respect to such series in the manner, at the times and otherwise in compliance with the
requirements set forth in this Indenture applicable to a Change of Control Offer made by the
Company and purchases all Notes properly tendered and not withdrawn under the Change of
Control Offer, (2) notice of redemption with respect to such series has been given pursuant to this
Indenture pursuant to Sections 3.03 and 3.07, unless and until there is a default in payment of the
applicable redemption price or (3) in connection with or in contemplation of any Change of
Control, the Company has made an offer to purchase (an “Alternate Offer”) any and all Notes of
such series validly tendered at a cash price equal to or higher than the Change of Control
Payment and has purchased all Notes properly tendered in accordance with the terms of the
Alternate Offer. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, a Change of Control
Offer may be made in advance of a Change of Control, conditioned upon the consummation of
such Change of Control, if a definitive agreement is in place for the Change of Control at the time
the Change of Control Offer is made.
(g)          In the event that not less than 90% of the aggregate principal amount of the Notes are
properly tendered and not withdrawn under a Change of Control Offer and the Company, or any
third party making a Change of Control Offer in lieu of the Company as described above,
purchases all of such Notes of such series, the Company will have the right, upon not less than
30 nor more than 60 days’ prior notice, given not more than 30 days following the Change of
Control Purchase Date to redeem all of the Notes that remain outstanding following such
purchase at a redemption price equal to the Change of Control Payment plus, to the extent not
included in the Change of Control Payment, accrued and unpaid interest on the Notes of such
series that remain outstanding, to the date of redemption.
-20-
(h)          The Company will comply with the requirements of Rule 14e-1 under the Exchange Act
and any other securities laws and regulations thereunder to the extent those requirements, laws
and regulations are applicable in connection with the repurchase of the Notes as a result of a
Change of Control.  To the extent that the provisions of any securities laws or regulations conflict
with the Change of Control provisions of this Indenture, the Company will comply with the
applicable securities laws and regulations and will not be deemed to have breached its
obligations under the Change of Control provisions of under this Indenture by virtue of such
compliance.
(i)          The Change of Control provisions described in this Section 4.08 that require the
Company to make a Change of Control Offer following a Change of Control may be waived,
amended or modified with respect to that series with the written consent of the Holders of a
majority in principal amount of the Notes of such series then outstanding.
(j)          Other than as specifically provided in this Section 4.08, any purchase pursuant to this
Section 4.08 shall be made pursuant to the provisions of Sections 3.05 and 3.06.
ARTICLE 5
SUCCESSORS
Section 5.01          Merger, Consolidation or Sale of All Assets.The Company will not: (1)
consolidate or merge with or into or wind up into another Person (whether or not the Company is
the surviving Person), or (2) directly or indirectly sell, assign, transfer, convey, lease or otherwise
dispose of all or substantially all of the properties or assets of the Company and its Subsidiaries,
taken as a whole, in one or more related transactions, to another Person, unless:
(1)          (a) in the case of a consolidation, merger or winding up, the Company is the resulting or
surviving Person or (b) the resulting or surviving Person (if other than the Company) of any such
consolidation, merger or winding up or the Person to which such sale, assignment, transfer,
conveyance, lease or other disposition has been made  (the “Successor Company”) is (i) an
entity organized or existing under the laws of the United States, any state of the United States or
the District of Columbia (and, if such entity is not a corporation, a co-obligor of the Notes is a
corporation organized or existing under any such laws) or (ii) an entity organized or existing
under the laws of a Permitted Foreign Jurisdiction;
(2)          the Successor Company (if other than the Company) expressly assumes all the
obligations of the Company under the Notes and this Indenture pursuant to a supplemental
indenture or other agreements in form reasonably satisfactory to the Trustee;
(3)          the Company shall have delivered to the Trustee an Officer’s Certificate and an Opinion
of Counsel, each stating that such consolidation, merger or disposition and such supplemental
indenture (if any) comply with this Indenture.
(b)          This Section 5.01 does not apply to any sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance, lease or
other disposition of properties or assets between or among the Company and its Subsidiaries.
Section 5.02          Successor Entity Substituted.Upon any consolidation or merger or any sale,
assignment, transfer, conveyance, lease or other disposition of all or substantially all of the
properties or assets of the Company in accordance with Section 5.01, the Successor Company
shall succeed to, and be substituted for, and may exercise every right and power of, the
Company under this Indenture and the Notes with the same effect as if such Successor Company
had been named as the Company in this Indenture, and thereafter, the Company will be relieved
of all obligations and covenants under this Indenture and the Notes; provided that, in the case of
a lease of all or substantially all of its assets, the Company will not be released from the
obligation to pay the principal of and interest on the Notes.
-21-
ARTICLE 6
DEFAULTS AND REMEDIES
Section 6.01          Events of Default and Remedies.Each of the following is an “Event of Default”
with respect to the Notes:
(1)          default for 30 days in the payment when due of interest on the applicable series of Notes;
(2)          default in the payment when due (at maturity, upon redemption or otherwise) of the
principal of the of Notes;
(3)          failure by the Company to comply with the provisions described under Section 5.01; or to
consummate a purchase of Notes when required pursuant to Section 4.08;
(4)          failure by the Company for 120 days after notice to the Company by the Trustee or the
Holders of 25% in aggregate principal amount of the applicable series of Notes then outstanding
voting as a single class to comply with the provisions described under Section 4.06;
(5)          failure by the Company for 60 days after notice to the Company by the Trustee or the
Holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the applicable series of Notes then
outstanding voting as a single class to comply with any of the other agreements in this Indenture;
(including the provisions described under Section 4.08 to the extent not described in clause (3) of
this Section 6.01(a);
(6)          default under any mortgage, indenture or instrument under which there is issued or by
which there is secured or evidenced any indebtedness for money borrowed by the Company,
whether such indebtedness now exists or is created after the Issue Date, if that default:
(A)          is caused by a failure to pay principal of, premium or interest, if any, on such
indebtedness after giving effect to the expiration of the grace period provided in such
indebtedness on the date of such default (a “Payment Default”); or
(B)          results in the acceleration of such indebtedness prior to its Stated Maturity;
and, in each case, the principal amount of any such indebtedness, together with the principal
amount of any other such indebtedness under which there has been a Payment Default or the
maturity of which has been so accelerated, aggregates $60.0 million or more; provided, however,
that if any such Payment Default is cured or waived or any such acceleration rescinded, or such
indebtedness is repaid and the Notes have not been accelerated, such Event of Default shall be
automatically rescinded, so long as such rescission does not conflict with any judgment or
decree; and
(7)          (i)          the Company pursuant to or within the meaning of any Bankruptcy Law:
(A)          commences proceedings to be adjudicated bankrupt or insolvent;
-22-
(B)          consents to the institution of bankruptcy or insolvency proceedings against it, or the filing
by it of a petition or answer or consent seeking an arrangement of debt, reorganization,
dissolution, winding up or relief under applicable Bankruptcy Law;
(C)          consents to the appointment of a receiver, interim receiver, receiver and manager,
liquidator, assignee, trustee, sequestrator or other similar official of it or for all or substantially all
of its property;
(D)          makes a general assignment for the benefit of its creditors; or
(E)          admits in writing that it generally is not paying its debts as they become due and
payable; or
(ii)          a court of competent jurisdiction enters an order or decree under any Bankruptcy Law
that:
(A)          is for relief against the Company, in a proceeding in which the Company is to be
adjudicated bankrupt or insolvent;
(B)          appoints a receiver, interim receiver, receiver and manager, liquidator, assignee, trustee,
sequestrator or other similar official of the Company for all or substantially all of the property of
the Company;
(C)          orders the liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company;
and the order or decree remains unstayed and in effect for 60 consecutive days.
Section 6.02          Acceleration.If an Event of Default (other than an Event of Default described in
clause (7) of Section 6.01) occurs and is continuing, the Trustee by written notice to the
Company, specifying the Event of Default, or the Holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal
amount of the then outstanding applicable series of Notes by notice to the Company and the
Trustee, may, and the Trustee at the request of such Holders shall, declare the principal and
accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on all the Notes to be due and payable.  Upon such
declaration, such principal and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, will be due and payable.
The Trustee shall have no obligation to accelerate the applicable series of Notes if and so long
as a committee of its Responsible Officers, in good faith, determines acceleration is not in the
best interest of the Holders.  The Trustee shall not be charged with knowledge of any Default or
Event of Default with respect to the applicable series of Notes unless a written notice of such
Default or Event of Default shall have been given to an officer of the Trustee with direct
responsibility for the administration of the Indenture and the applicable series of Notes, by the
Company or any Holder of the applicable series of Notes.
(b)          In case an Event of Default described in clause (7) of Section 6.01 occurs and is
continuing, the principal of, premium, if any, and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on all the
applicable series of Notes will become and be immediately due and payable without any
declaration or other act on the part of the Trustee or any Holders.
(c)          In the event of a declaration of acceleration of the applicable series of Notes because an
Event of Default described in clause (6) of Section 6.01 has occurred and is continuing, the
declaration of acceleration of the Notes shall be automatically annulled if:
-23-
(1)          the default triggering such Event of Default pursuant to clause (6) of Section 6.01 shall
be remedied or cured by the Company or a Subsidiary or waived by the holders of the relevant
indebtedness within 20 days after the declaration of acceleration with respect thereto; and
(2)          (A) the annulment of the acceleration of the applicable series of Notes would not conflict
with any judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction and (B) all existing Events of
Default, except nonpayment of principal, premium, if any, or interest on the Notes that became
due solely because of the acceleration of the applicable series of Notes, have been cured or
waived.
(d)          The Holders of a majority in principal amount of the outstanding applicable series of
Notes may waive all past Events of Default (except with respect to nonpayment of principal,
premium or interest) and rescind any acceleration with respect to the applicable series of Notes
and its consequences if (1) such rescission would not conflict with any judgment or decree of a
court of competent jurisdiction, (2) all existing Events of Default, other than the nonpayment of the
principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the applicable series of Notes that have become due
solely by such declaration of acceleration, have been cured or waived and (3) there had been
paid to or deposited with the Trustee a sum sufficient to pay all amounts due to the Trustee and to
reimburse the Trustee for any and all fees, expenses and disbursements advanced by the
Trustee, its agents and its counsel incurred in connection with such Default.
Section 6.03          Other Remedies.If an Event of Default occurs and is continuing, the Trustee
may pursue any available remedy to collect the payment of principal, premium, if any, and
interest on the applicable series of Notes or to enforce the performance of any provision of the
applicable series of Notes or this Indenture.
The Trustee may maintain a proceeding even if it does not possess any of the applicable series
of Notes or does not produce any of them in the proceeding.  A delay or omission by the Trustee
or any Holder of a Note in exercising any right or remedy accruing upon an Event of Default shall
not impair the right or remedy or constitute a waiver of or acquiescence in the Event of Default. 
All remedies are cumulative to the extent permitted by law.
Section 6.04          Waiver of Past Defaults.The Holders of a majority in aggregate principal
amount of the then outstanding applicable series of Notes by written notice to the Trustee may,
on behalf of the Holders of all of the applicable series of Notes, waive any existing Default and its
consequences hereunder, except:
(1)          a continuing Default in the payment of the principal, premium, if any, or interest on any
Note held by a non-consenting Holder; and
(2)          a Default with respect to a provision that under Section 9.02 cannot be amended without
the consent of each Holder affected,
provided that, subject to Section 6.02, the Holders of a majority in principal amount of the then
outstanding applicable series of Notes may rescind an acceleration and its consequences,
including any related payment default that resulted from such acceleration.  Upon any such
waiver, such Default shall cease to exist, and any Event of Default arising therefrom shall be
deemed to have been cured for every purpose of this Indenture, but no such waiver shall extend
to any subsequent or other Default or impair any right consequent thereon.
-24-
Section 6.05          Control by Majority.The Holders of a majority in principal amount of the
outstanding applicable series of Notes may direct the time, method and place of conducting any
proceeding for any remedy available to the Trustee or of exercising any trust or power conferred
on the Trustee.  However, the Trustee may refuse to follow any direction that conflicts with law,
this Indenture or the Notes or that the Trustee determines in good faith is unduly prejudicial to the
rights of any other Holder or that would involve the Trustee in personal liability.
Section 6.06          Limitation on Suits.Subject to Section 6.07, no Holder may pursue any remedy
with respect to this Indenture or the Notes unless:
(1)          such Holder has previously given the Trustee written notice that an Event of Default is
continuing;
(2)          Holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding applicable
series of Notes make a written request to the Trustee to pursue the remedy;
(3)          such Holder or Holders offer and, if requested, provide to the Trustee security or
indemnity satisfactory to the Trustee against any loss, liability or expense;
(4)          the Trustee does not comply with such request within 60 days after receipt of the request
and the offer of security or indemnity; and
(5)          during such 60-day period, the Holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount of the
then outstanding Notes do not give the Trustee a direction inconsistent with such request.
A Holder may not use this Indenture to prejudice the rights of another Holder or to obtain a
preference or priority over another Holder.
-25-
Section 6.07          Rights of Holders to Receive Payment.Notwithstanding any other provision of
this Indenture, the right of any Holder to receive payment of principal and interest on its Note, on
or after the respective due dates expressed or provided for in such Note, or to bring suit for the
enforcement of any such payment on or after such respective dates, shall not be impaired or
affected without the consent of such Holder.
Section 6.08          Collection Suit by Trustee.If an Event of Default specified in Section 6.01(1) or
(2) occurs and is continuing, the Trustee may recover judgment in its own name and as trustee of
an express trust against the Company and any other obligor on the Notes for the whole amount of
principal and interest remaining unpaid on the Notes, together with interest on overdue principal
and, to the extent lawful, interest and such further amount as shall be sufficient to cover the costs
and expenses of collection, including the reasonable compensation, expenses, disbursements
and advances of the Trustee and its agents and counsel.
Section 6.09          Restoration of Rights and Remedies.If the Trustee or any Holder has instituted
any proceeding to enforce any right or remedy under this Indenture and such proceeding has
been discontinued or abandoned for any reason, or has been determined adversely to the
Trustee or to such Holder, then and in every such case, subject to any determination in such
proceedings, the Company, the Trustee and the Holders shall be restored severally and
respectively to their former positions hereunder and thereafter all rights and remedies of the
Trustee and the Holders shall continue as though no such proceeding has been instituted.
Section 6.10          Trustee May File Proofs of Claim.The Trustee may file proofs of claim and
other papers or documents as may be necessary or advisable in order to have the claims of the
Trustee (including any claim for the reasonable compensation, expenses, disbursements and
advances of the Trustee, its agents and counsel) and the Holders of the Notes allowed in any
judicial proceedings relative to the Company (or any other obligor upon the Notes), its creditors
or its property and is entitled and empowered to participate as a member in any official committee
of creditors appointed in such matter and to collect, receive and distribute any money or other
property payable or deliverable on any such claims.  Any custodian in any such judicial
proceeding is hereby authorized by each Holder to make such payments to the Trustee, and in
the event that the Trustee shall consent to the making of such payments directly to the Holders, to
pay to the Trustee any amount due to it for the reasonable compensation, expenses,
disbursements and advances of the Trustee and its agents and counsel, and any other amounts
due the Trustee under Section 7.07.  To the extent that the payment of any such compensation,
expenses, disbursements and advances of the Trustee, its agents and counsel, and any other
amounts due the Trustee under Section 7.07 out of the estate in any such proceeding, shall be
denied for any reason, payment of the same shall be secured by a Lien on, and shall be paid out
of, any and all distributions, dividends, money, securities and other properties that the Holders
may be entitled to receive in such proceeding whether in liquidation or under any plan of
reorganization or arrangement or otherwise.  Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to
authorize the Trustee to authorize or consent to or accept or adopt on behalf of any Holder any
plan of reorganization, arrangement, adjustment or composition affecting the Notes or the rights
of any Holder, or to authorize the Trustee to vote in respect of the claim of any Holder in any such
proceeding.
Section 6.11          Priorities.If the Trustee collects any money or property pursuant to this Article
6, it shall pay out the money and property in the following order:
(1)          to the Trustee and its agents and attorneys for amounts due under Section 7.07,
including payment of all reasonable compensation, expenses and liabilities incurred, and all
advances made, by the Trustee and the costs and expenses of collection;
-26-
(2)          to Holders for amounts due and unpaid on the Notes for principal and interest ratably,
without preference or priority of any kind, according to the amounts due and payable on the
Notes for principal and interest, respectively; and
(3)          to the Company or to such party as a court of competent jurisdiction shall direct.
The Trustee may fix a record date and payment date for any payment to Holders pursuant to this
Section 6.11.  Promptly after any record date is set pursuant to this Section 6.11, the Trustee
shall cause notice of such record date and payment date to be given to the Company and to each
Holder in the manner set forth in Section 12.02.
Section 6.12          Undertaking for Costs.In any suit for the enforcement of any right or remedy
under this Indenture or in any suit against the Trustee for any action taken or omitted by it as a
Trustee, a court in its discretion may require the filing by any party litigant in such suit of an
undertaking to pay the costs of the suit, and the court in its discretion may assess reasonable
costs, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, against any party litigant in the suit, having due
regard to the merits and good faith of the claims or defenses made by the party litigant.  This
Section 6.12 does not apply to a suit by the Trustee, a suit by a Holder pursuant to Section 6.07,
or a suit by Holders of more than 10% in aggregate principal amount of the outstanding Notes.
ARTICLE 7
TRUSTEE
Section 7.01          Duties of Trustee.If an Event of Default has occurred and is continuing, the
Trustee will exercise such of the rights and powers vested in it by this Indenture, and use the
same degree of care in its exercise, as a prudent person would exercise or use under the
circumstances in the conduct of such person’s own affairs.
(b)          Except during the continuance of an Event of Default:
(1)          the duties of the Trustee shall be determined solely by the express provisions of this
Indenture and the Trustee need perform only those duties that are specifically set forth in this
Indenture and no others, and no implied covenants or obligations shall be read into this Indenture
against the Trustee; and
(2)          in the absence of bad faith on its part, the Trustee may conclusively rely, as to the truth of
the statements and the correctness of the opinions expressed therein, upon certificates or
opinions furnished to the Trustee and conforming to the requirements of this Indenture.  However,
in the case of any such certificates or opinions which by any provision hereof are specifically
required to be furnished to the Trustee, the Trustee shall examine the certificates and opinions to
determine whether or not they conform to the requirements of this Indenture (but need not confirm
or investigate the accuracy of mathematical calculations or other facts stated therein).
(c)          The Trustee may not be relieved from liabilities for its own negligent action, its own
negligent failure to act, or its own willful misconduct, except that:
(1)          this paragraph does not limit the effect of paragraph (b) of this Section 7.01;
(2)          the Trustee shall not be liable for any error of judgment made in good faith by a
Responsible Officer, unless it is proved in a court of competent jurisdiction that the Trustee was
negligent in ascertaining the pertinent facts; and
-27-
(3)          the Trustee shall not be liable with respect to any action it takes or omits to take in good
faith in accordance with a direction received by it pursuant to Section 6.05.
(d)          Whether or not therein expressly so provided, every provision of this Indenture that in
any way relates to the Trustee is subject to paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of this Section 7.01.
(e)          Subject to this Article 7, if an Event of Default occurs and is continuing, the Trustee will
be under no obligation to exercise any of the rights or powers under this Indenture and the Notes
at the request or direction of any of the Holders unless such Holders have offered to the Trustee
indemnity or security satisfactory to it in its sole discretion against any loss, liability or expense.
(f)          The Trustee shall not be liable for interest on any money received by it except as the
Trustee may agree in writing with the Company.  Money held in trust by the Trustee need not be
segregated from other funds except to the extent required by law.
Section 7.02          Rights of Trustee.The Trustee may conclusively rely upon any document
believed by it to be genuine and to have been signed or presented by the proper Person.  The
Trustee need not investigate any fact or matter stated in the document, but the Trustee, in its
discretion, may make such further inquiry or investigation into such facts or matters as it may see
fit, and, if the Trustee shall determine in good faith to make such further inquiry or investigation, it
shall be entitled to examine the books, records and premises of the Company, personally or by
agent or attorney at the sole cost of the Company and shall incur no liability or additional liability
of any kind by reason of such inquiry or investigation.
(b)          Before the Trustee acts or refrains from acting, it may require an Officer’s Certificate or an
Opinion of Counsel or both subject to the other provisions of this Indenture.  The Trustee shall not
be liable for any action it takes or omits to take in good faith in reliance on such Officer’s
Certificate or Opinion of Counsel.  The Trustee may consult with counsel of its selection and the
advice of such counsel or any Opinion of Counsel shall be full and complete authorization and
protection from liability in respect of any action taken, suffered or omitted by it hereunder in good
faith and in reliance thereon.
(c)          The Trustee may act through its attorneys and agents and shall not be responsible for
the misconduct or negligence of any agent or attorney appointed with due care.
(d)          The Trustee shall not be liable for any action it takes or omits to take in good faith that it
believes to be authorized or within the rights or powers conferred upon it by this Indenture.
(e)          Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Indenture, any demand, request, direction
or notice from the Company shall be sufficient if signed by an Officer of the Company.
(f)          None of the provisions of this Indenture shall require the Trustee to expend or risk its own
funds or otherwise to incur any liability, financial or otherwise, in the performance of any of its
duties hereunder, or in the exercise of any of its rights or powers if it shall have reasonable
grounds for believing that repayment of such funds or indemnity satisfactory in its sole discretion
to it against such risk or liability is not assured to it.
(g)          The Trustee shall not be deemed to have notice or knowledge of any Default or Event of
Default unless written notice of any event which is in fact such a Default is received by a
Responsible Officer of the Trustee at the Corporate Trust Office of the Trustee, and such notice
references the existence of a Default or Event of Default, the Notes and this Indenture.
-28-
(h)          In no event shall the Trustee be responsible or liable for special, indirect, punitive or
consequential loss or damage of any kind whatsoever (including, but not limited to, loss of profit)
irrespective of whether the Trustee has been advised of the likelihood of such loss or damage
and regardless of the form of action.
(i)          The rights, privileges, protections, immunities and benefits given to the Trustee,
including, without limitation, its right to be indemnified, are extended to, and shall be enforceable
by, the Trustee in each of its capacities hereunder, and each agent, custodian and other Person
employed to act hereunder.
(j)          The Trustee may request that the Company deliver an Officer’s Certificate setting forth the
names of individuals or titles of officers authorized at such time to take specified actions pursuant
to this Indenture, which Officer’s Certificate may be signed by any Person authorized to sign an
Officer’s Certificate, including any Person specified as so authorized in any such certificate
previously delivered and not superseded.
(k)          The Trustee shall not be required to give any bond or surety in respect of the
performance of its powers and duties hereunder.
(l)          The permissive rights of the Trustee enumerated herein shall not be construed as duties.
-29-
Section 7.03          Individual Rights of Trustee.The Trustee or any Agent in its individual or any
other capacity may become the owner or pledgee of Notes and may otherwise deal with the
Company or any Affiliate of the Company with the same rights it would have if it were not Trustee
or such Agent.  However, in the event that the Trustee acquires any conflicting interest within the
meaning of Trust Indenture Act Section 310(b) it must eliminate such conflict within 90 days,
apply to the SEC for permission to continue as trustee or resign.  Any Agent may do the same
with like rights and duties.  The Trustee is also subject to Sections 7.10 and 7.11.
Section 7.04          Trustee’s Disclaimer.The Trustee shall not be responsible for and makes no
representation as to the validity or adequacy of this Indenture or the Notes, it shall not be
accountable for the Company’s use of the proceeds from the Notes or any money paid to the
Company or upon the Company’s direction under any provision of this Indenture, it shall not be
responsible for the use or application of any money received by any Paying Agent other than the
Trustee, and it shall not be responsible for any statement or recital herein or any statement in the
Notes or any other document in connection with the sale of the Notes or pursuant to this
Indenture other than its certificate of authentication on the Notes.
Section 7.05          Notice of Defaults.If a Default occurs and is continuing and is known to the
Trustee, the Trustee will mail to each Holder a notice of the Default within 90 days after it occurs. 
Except in the case of an Event of Default specified in clauses (1) or (2) of Section 6.01, the
Trustee may withhold from the Holders notice of any continuing Default if the Trustee determines
in good faith that withholding the notice is in the interest of the Holders.
Section 7.06          Reports by Trustee to Holders of the Notes.Within 60 days after each May 15,
beginning with the first May 15 following the date of this Indenture, and for so long as Notes
remain outstanding, the Trustee shall mail to the Holders of the Notes a brief report dated as of
such reporting date that complies with Trust Indenture Act Section 313(a) (but if no event
described in Trust Indenture Act Section 313(a) has occurred within the twelve months preceding
the reporting date, no report need be transmitted).  The Trustee also shall comply with Trust
Indenture Act Section 313(b)(2).  The Trustee shall also transmit by mail all reports as required
by Trust Indenture Act Section 313(c).
(b)          A copy of each report at the time of its mailing to the Holders shall be mailed to the
Company and filed with each national securities exchange on which the Notes are listed in
accordance with Trust Indenture Act Section 313(d).  The Company shall promptly notify the
Trustee in writing in the event the Notes are listed on any national securities exchange or
delisted therefrom.
Section 7.07          Compensation and Indemnity.The Company shall pay to the Trustee from time
to time such compensation for its acceptance of this Indenture and services hereunder as the
parties shall agree in writing from time to time.  The Trustee’s compensation shall not be limited
by any law on compensation of a trustee of an express trust.  The Company shall reimburse the
Trustee promptly upon request for all reasonable disbursements, advances and expenses
incurred or made by it in addition to the compensation for its services.  Such expenses shall
include the reasonable compensation, disbursements and expenses of the Trustee’s agents and
counsel.  The Trustee shall provide the Company reasonable notice of any expenditure not in the
ordinary course of business.
(b)          The Company shall indemnify the Trustee for, and hold each of the Trustee and any
predecessor harmless against, any and all loss, damage, claims, liability or expense (including
reasonable attorneys’ fees and expenses) incurred by it in connection with the acceptance or
administration of this trust and the performance of its duties hereunder (including the costs and
expenses of enforcing this Indenture against the Company (including this Section 7.07)) or
defending itself against any claim whether asserted by any Holder or the Company, or liability in
connection with the acceptance, exercise or performance of any of its powers or duties
hereunder), except to the extent set forth in the last sentence of this clause (b).  The Trustee shall
notify the Company promptly of any claim for which it may seek indemnity.  Failure by the Trustee
to so notify the Company shall not relieve the Company of its obligations hereunder.  The
Company shall defend the claim and the Trustee may have separate counsel and the Company
shall pay the reasonable fees and expenses of such counsel.  The Company need not (i) pay for
any settlement made without the consent of the Company (which consent will not be
unreasonably withheld) or (ii) reimburse any expense or indemnify against any loss, liability or
expense incurred by the Trustee through the Trustee’s own willful misconduct, negligence or bad
faith.
-30-
(c)          The obligations of the Company under this Section 7.07 shall survive the satisfaction
and discharge of this Indenture or the earlier resignation or removal of the Trustee.
(d)          To secure payment obligations of the Company in this Section 7.07, the Trustee shall
have a Lien prior to the Notes on all money or property held or collected by the Trustee, except
that held in trust to pay principal and interest on the Notes. Such Lien shall survive the
satisfaction and discharge of this Indenture.
(e)          When the Trustee incurs expenses or renders services after an Event of Default
specified in Section 6.01(7) occurs, the expenses and the compensation for the services
(including the fees and expenses of its agents and counsel) are intended to constitute expenses
of administration under any Bankruptcy Law.
Section 7.08          Replacement of Trustee.A resignation or removal of the Trustee and
appointment of a successor Trustee shall become effective only upon the successor Trustee’s
acceptance of appointment as provided in this Section 7.08.  The Trustee may resign in writing at
any time by giving 30 days’ prior notice of such resignation to the Company and be discharged
from the trust hereby created by so notifying the Company.  The Holders of a majority in
aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding Notes may remove the Trustee by so
notifying the Trustee and the Company in writing.  The Company may remove the Trustee if:
(1)          the Trustee fails to comply with Section 7.10;
(2)          the Trustee is adjudged a bankrupt or an insolvent or an order for relief is entered with
respect to the Trustee under any Bankruptcy Law;
(3)          a receiver or public officer takes charge of the Trustee or its property; or
(4)          the Trustee becomes incapable of acting.
(b)          If the Trustee resigns or is removed or if a vacancy exists in the office of the Trustee for
any reason, the Company shall promptly appoint a successor Trustee.  Within one year after the
successor Trustee takes office, the Holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount of the
then outstanding Notes may remove the successor Trustee to replace it with another successor
Trustee appointed by the Company.
(c)          If a successor Trustee does not take office within 60 days after the retiring Trustee
resigns or is removed, the retiring Trustee (at the Company’s expense), the Company or the
Holders of at least 10% in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding Notes may petition
any court of competent jurisdiction for the appointment of a successor Trustee.
(d)          If the Trustee, after written request by any Holder who has been a Holder for at least six
months, fails to comply with Section 7.10, such Holder may petition any court of competent
jurisdiction for the removal of the Trustee and the appointment of a successor Trustee.
-31-
(e)          A successor Trustee shall deliver a written acceptance of its appointment to the retiring
Trustee and to the Company.  Thereupon, the resignation or removal of the retiring Trustee shall
become effective, and the successor Trustee shall have all the rights, powers and duties of the
Trustee under this Indenture.  The successor Trustee shall mail a notice of its succession to the
Holders.  The retiring Trustee shall promptly transfer all property held by it as Trustee to the
successor Trustee; provided that all sums owing to the Trustee hereunder have been paid and
such transfer shall be subject to the Lien provided for in Section 7.07.  Notwithstanding
replacement of the Trustee pursuant to this Section 7.08, the Company’s obligations under
Section 7.07 shall continue for the benefit of the retiring Trustee.
(f)          As used in this Section 7.08, the term “Trustee” shall also include each Agent.
Section 7.09Successor Trustee by Merger, etc.
If the Trustee consolidates, merges or converts into, or transfers all or substantially all of its
corporate trust business to, another corporation or national banking association, the successor
corporation or national banking association without any further act shall be the successor
Trustee, subject to Section 7.10.
Section 7.10          Eligibility; Disqualification.There shall at all times be a Trustee hereunder that
is a corporation or national banking association organized and doing business under the laws of
the United States or of any state thereof that is authorized under such laws to exercise corporate
trustee power, that is subject to supervision or examination by federal or state authorities and that
has a combined capital and surplus of at least $50.0 million as set forth in its most recent
published annual report of condition.
(b)          This Indenture shall always have a Trustee who satisfies the requirements of Trust
Indenture Act Sections 310(a)(1), (2) and (5).  The Trustee is subject to Trust Indenture Act
Section 310(b).
Section 7.11          Preferential Collection of Claims Against the Company.The Trustee is subject
to Trust Indenture Act Section 311(a), excluding any creditor relationship listed in Trust Indenture
Act Section 311(b).  A Trustee who has resigned or been removed shall be subject to Trust
Indenture Act Section 311(a) to the extent indicated therein.
ARTICLE 8
LEGAL DEFEASANCE AND COVENANT DEFEASANCE
Section 8.01Option to Effect Legal Defeasance or Covenant Defeasance.
The Company may, at any time, pursuant to a resolution of its Board of Directors set forth in an
Officers’ Certificate, elect to have either Section 8.02 or Section 8.03 applied to all outstanding
Notes upon compliance with the conditions set forth below in this Article 8.
Section 8.02Legal Defeasance and Discharge.
(a)          Upon the Company’s exercise under Section 8.01 of the option applicable to this Section
8.02, the Company shall, subject to the satisfaction of the conditions set forth in Section 8.04, be
deemed to have been discharged from their obligations with respect to the Indenture, all
outstanding Notes on the date the conditions set forth below are satisfied (“Legal Defeasance”). 
For this purpose, Legal Defeasance means that the Company shall be deemed to have paid and
discharged the entire Indebtedness represented by the Notes, which shall thereafter be deemed
to be “outstanding” only for the purposes of Section 8.05 and the other Sections of this Indenture
referred to in clauses (1) through (4) below, and to have satisfied all of its other obligations under
such Notes and this Indenture (and the Trustee, on demand of and at the expense of the
Company, shall execute proper instruments acknowledging the same), and this Indenture shall
cease to be of further effect as to all Notes, except for the following provisions which shall survive
until otherwise terminated or discharged hereunder:
-32-
(1)          the rights of Holders of outstanding Notes to receive payments in respect of the principal
of, and premium, interest or Additional Amounts, if any, on such Notes when such payments are
due from the trust created pursuant to this Indenture referred to in Section 8.04;
(2)          the Company’s obligations with respect to the Notes under Sections 2.03, 2.04, 2.06,
2.07, 2.10 and 4.02;
(3)          the rights, powers, trusts, duties and immunities of the Trustee under this Indenture, and
the Company’s obligations in connection therewith; and
(4)          this Section 8.02.
(b)          Following the Company’s exercise of its Legal Defeasance option, payment of the Notes
may not be accelerated because of an Event of Default.
(c)          Subject to compliance with this Article 8, the Company may exercise its option under this
Section 8.02 notwithstanding the prior exercise of its option under Section 8.03.
Section 8.03Covenant Defeasance.
Upon the Company’s exercise under Section 8.01 of the option applicable to this Section 8.03,
the Company shall, subject to the satisfaction of the conditions set forth in Section 8.04, be
released from their obligations under the covenants contained in Sections 3.09, 4.03 and 4.05,
shall be deemed to have been discharged from their obligations on and after the date the
conditions set forth in Section 8.04 are satisfied (“Covenant Defeasance”), and the Notes shall
thereafter be deemed not “outstanding” for the purposes of any direction, waiver, consent or
declaration or act of Holders (and the consequences of any thereof) in connection with such
covenants, but shall continue to be deemed “outstanding” for all other purposes hereunder (it
being understood that such Notes shall not be deemed outstanding for accounting purposes). 
For this purpose, Covenant Defeasance means that the Company or any of its Subsidiaries may
omit to comply with and shall have no liability in respect of any term, condition or limitation set
forth in any such covenant, whether directly or indirectly, by reason of any reference elsewhere
herein to any such covenant or by reason of any reference in any such covenant to any other
provision herein or in any other document and such omission to comply shall not constitute a
Default or an Event of Default under Section 6.01, but, except as specified above, the remainder
of this Indenture and such Notes shall be unaffected thereby.  In addition, upon the Company’s
exercise under Section 8.01 of the option applicable to this Section 8.03, subject to the
satisfaction of the conditions set forth in Section 8.04, an Event of Default specified in Section
6.01(a)(3) that resulted solely from the failure of the Company to comply with Sections 6.01(a)(4),
6.01(a)(5) (only with respect to covenants that are released as a result of such Covenant
Defeasance) and 6.01(a)(6), shall not constitute an Event of Default.
Section 8.04Conditions to Legal or Covenant Defeasance.
(a)          The following shall be the conditions to the exercise of either the Legal Defeasance
option under Section 8.02 or the Covenant Defeasance option under Section 8.03 with respect to
the Notes:
-33-
(1)          the Company must irrevocably deposit with the Trustee, in trust, for the benefit of the
Holders of the Notes, cash in U.S. dollars, non-callable Government Securities, or a combination
thereof, in amounts as will be sufficient, in the opinion (except in the case of cash) of a nationally
recognized investment bank, appraisal firm or firm of independent public accountants selected by
the Company, to pay the principal of any interest on the outstanding Notes on the stated date for
payment thereof or on the applicable redemption date, as the case may be, and the Company
must specify whether the Notes are being defeased to such stated date for payment or to a
particular redemption date;
(2)          in the case of Legal Defeasance, the Company must deliver to the Trustee an Opinion of
Counsel reasonably acceptable to the Trustee confirming that
(A)          the Company has received from, or there has been published by, the Internal Revenue
Service a ruling, or
(B)          since the Issue Date, there has been a change in the applicable federal income tax law,
in either case to the effect that, and based thereon such Opinion of Counsel will confirm that the
Holders of the outstanding Notes will not recognize income, gain or loss for federal income tax
purposes as a result of such Legal Defeasance and will be subject to federal income tax on the
same amounts, in the same manner and at the same times as would have been the case if such
Legal Defeasance had not occurred;
(3)          in the case of Covenant Defeasance, the Company must deliver to the Trustee an
Opinion of Counsel reasonably acceptable to the Trustee confirming that the Holders of the
outstanding Notes will not recognize income, gain or loss for federal income tax purposes as a
result of such Covenant Defeasance and will be subject to federal income tax on the same
amounts, in the same manner and at the same times as would have been the case if such
Covenant Defeasance had not occurred;
(4)          no Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing on the date of such deposit
or will occur as a result of such deposit (other than a Default or Event of Default resulting from the
borrowing of funds to be applied to such deposit (and any similar concurrent deposit relating to
other Indebtedness), and the granting of Liens to secure such borrowings);
(5)          such Legal Defeasance or Covenant Defeasance will not result in a breach or violation
of, or constitute a default under any material agreement or instrument (other than this Indenture
and the agreements governing any other Indebtedness being defeased, discharged or replaced)
to which the Company is a party or by which the Company is bound;
(6)          the Company must deliver to the Trustee an Officer’s Certificate stating that the deposit
was not made by the Company with the intent of preferring the Holders of Notes over the other
creditors of the Company or others, with the intent of defeating, hindering, delaying or defrauding
any creditors of the Company or others;
(7)          the Company must deliver to the Trustee an Officer’s Certificate and an Opinion of
Counsel, each stating that all conditions precedent relating to the Legal Defeasance or the
Covenant Defeasance have been complied with; and
(8)          the Company has delivered irrevocable instructions to the Trustee to apply the deposited
money toward the payment of the Notes at maturity or the redemption date, as the case may be
(which instructions may be contained in the Officers’ Certificate referred to in clause (7) above).
-34-
Section
8.05
Deposited Money and Government Securities to Be Held in Trust; Other
Miscellaneous Provisions.
(a)          Subject to Section 8.06, all money and Government Securities (including the proceeds
thereof) deposited with the Trustee  (or other qualifying trustee, collectively for purposes of this
Section 8.05 and Section 11.02, the “Trustee”) pursuant to Section 8.04 in respect of the
outstanding Notes shall be held in trust and applied by the Trustee, in accordance with the
provisions of such Notes and this Indenture, to the payment, either directly or through any Paying
Agent (including the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary acting as Paying Agent) as the
Trustee may determine, to the Holders of all sums due and to become due thereon in respect of
principal, premium, if any, and interest on the Notes, but such money need not be segregated
from other funds except to the extent required by law.
(b)          The Company will pay and indemnify the Trustee against any tax, fee or other charge
imposed on or assessed against the cash or Government Securities deposited pursuant to
Section 8.04 or the principal and interest received in respect thereof other than any such tax, fee
or other charge which by law is for the account of the Holders.
(c)          Anything in this Article 8 to the contrary notwithstanding, the Trustee will deliver or pay to
the Company from time to time upon the request of the Company any money or Government
Securities held by it as provided in Section 8.04 which, in the opinion of an nationally recognized
investment bank, appraisal firm or firm of independent public accountants expressed in a written
certification thereof delivered to the Trustee (which may be the opinion delivered under Section
8.04(a)(1)), are in excess of the amount thereof that would then be required to be deposited to
effect an equivalent Legal Defeasance or Covenant Defeasance.
Section 8.06Repayment to the Company.
Subject to any applicable abandoned property law, any money deposited with the Trustee or any
Paying Agent, or then held by the Company, in trust for the payment of the principal, premium, if
any, or interest on any Note and remaining unclaimed for two years after such principal, premium,
if any, or interest has become due and payable shall be paid to the Company on its request or (if
then held by the Company) shall be discharged from such trust; and the Holder of such Note
shall thereafter look only to the Company for payment thereof, and all liability of the Trustee or
such Paying Agent with respect to such trust money, and all liability of the Company as trustee
thereof, shall thereupon cease; provided, however, that the Trustee or such Paying Agent, before
being required to make any such repayment, may at the expense of the Company cause to be
published once, in The New York Times or The Wall Street Journal (national edition), notice that
such money remains unclaimed and that, after a date specified therein, which shall not be less
than 30 days from the date of such notification or publication, any unclaimed balance of such
money then remaining shall be repaid to the Company.
-35-
Section 8.07          Reinstatement.If the Trustee or Paying Agent is unable to apply any U.S.
dollars or Government Securities in accordance with Section 8.02 or Section 8.03, as the case
may be, by reason of any order or judgment of any court or governmental authority enjoining,
restraining or otherwise prohibiting such application, then the Company’s obligations under this
Indenture and the Notes shall be revived and reinstated as though no deposit had occurred
pursuant to Section 8.02 or Section 8.03 until such time as the Trustee or Paying Agent is
permitted to apply all such money in accordance with Section 8.02 or Section 8.03, as the case
may be; provided that, if the Company makes any payment of principal or interest on any Note
following the reinstatement of its obligations, the Company shall be subrogated to the rights of
the Holders to receive such payment from the money held by the Trustee or Paying Agent.
ARTICLE 9
AMENDMENT, SUPPLEMENT AND WAIVER
Section 9.01          Without Consent of Holders.Notwithstanding Section 9.02, without the consent
of any Holder, the Company, and the Trustee may amend or supplement this Indenture or the
Notes:
(1)          to cure any ambiguity, omission, defect, omission, mistake or inconsistency;
(2)          to provide for uncertificated Notes in addition to or in place of certificated Notes;
(3)          to provide for the assumption of the Company’s obligations to Holders of Notes in the
case of a merger or consolidation or sale of all or substantially all of the Company’s assets in
accordance with Article 5;
(4)          to make any change that would provide any additional rights or benefits to the Holders of
Notes of such series or that does not adversely affect the legal rights under this Indenture of any
Holder in any material respect;
(5)          to provide for the issuance of PIK Notes in accordance with this Indenture;
(6)          to evidence or provide for the acceptance of appointment under this Indenture of a
successor Trustee; provided that the successor Trustee is otherwise qualified and eligible to act
as such under the terms of this Indenture; or
(7)          to comply with the requirements of the SEC to effect or maintain the qualification of this
Indenture under the TIA.
(b)          Upon the request of the Company, and upon receipt by the Trustee of the documents
described in Section 12.04, the Trustee shall join with the Company in the execution of any
amended or supplemental indenture authorized or permitted by the terms of Section 9.01(a) and
to make any further appropriate agreements and stipulations that may be therein contained, but
the Trustee shall not be obligated to enter into such amended or supplemental indenture that
affects its own rights, duties or immunities under this Indenture or otherwise.
Section 9.02          With Consent of Holders.Except as provided in Section 9.01 and this Section
9.02, the Company and the Trustee may amend or supplement this Indenture or the Notes with
the consent of the Holders of at least a majority in aggregate principal amount of the applicable
series of Notes then outstanding (including, without limitation, PIK Notes, if any) voting as a
single class (including, without limitation, consents obtained in connection with a purchase of, or
tender offer or exchange offer for, the applicable series of Notes)and, subject to Section 6.04 and
Section 6.07, any existing Default or Event of Default or compliance with any provision of this
Indenture, or the Notes may be waived with the consent of the Holders of at least a majority in
aggregate principal amount of the applicable series of Notes then outstanding (including, without
limitation, PIK Notes, if any) voting as a single class (including, without limitation, consents
obtained in connection with a purchase of, or tender offer or exchange offer for, Notes).  Section
2.08 and Section 2.09 shall determine which Notes are considered to be “outstanding” for the
purposes of this Section 9.02.
-36-
(b)          Upon the request of the Company, and upon the filing with the Trustee of evidence
satisfactory to the Trustee of the consent of the Holders as aforesaid, and upon receipt by the
Trustee of the documents described in Section 12.04, the Trustee shall join with the Company in
the execution of such amended or supplemental indenture unless such amended or
supplemental indenture directly affects the Trustee’s own rights, duties or immunities under this
Indenture or otherwise, in which case the Trustee may in its discretion, but shall not be obligated
to, enter into such amended or supplemental indenture.
(c)          It shall not be necessary for the consent of the Holders under this Section 9.02 to
approve the particular form of any proposed amendment, supplement or waiver.  It shall be
sufficient if such consent approves the substance of such proposed amendment, supplement or
waiver.
(d)          After an amendment, supplement or waiver under this Section 9.02 becomes effective,
the Company will give to the Holders a notice briefly describing such amendment, supplement or
waiver.  However, the failure of the Company to give such notice to all the Holders, or any defect
in the notice, will not impair or affect the validity of any such amendment, supplement or waiver.
(e)          Without the consent of each affected Holder, an amendment, supplement or waiver
under this Section 9.02 may not:
(1)          reduce the percentage of principal amount of Notes of such series whose Holders must
consent to an amendment, supplement or waiver;
(2)          waive any payment with respect to the redemption of the Notes; provided, however, that,
solely for the avoidance of doubt, and without any other implication, any purchase or repurchase
of the Notes of such series (including pursuant to Section 4.08) shall not be deemed a
redemption of such Notes;
(3)          reduce the rate of or change the time for payment of interest, including default interest, on
any Note of such series;
(4)          waive a Default or Event of Default in the payment of principal of, interest on, the notes of
such series (except as described in Section 6.01 a rescission of acceleration of the Notes of such
series by the Holders of at least a majority in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding
Notes of such series and a waiver of the payment default that resulted from such acceleration);
(5)          make any Note of such series payable in money other than that stated in the Notes of
such series;
(6)          impair the right of any Holder to receive payment of principal of, or interest on, such
Holders’ Notes on or after the due dates therefrom or to institute suit for the enforcement of any
payment on, or with respect to, such Holders’ Notes;
-37-
(7)          make any change in the provisions of this Indenture relating to waivers of past Defaults
or the rights of Holders of Notes of such series to receive payments of principal of, interest on, the
Notes (other than waivers permitted by clause (8) below);
(8)          waive a redemption or repurchase payment with respect to any Note of such series
(other than a payment required by Section 4.08);
(9)          make any change in Sections 9.01 and 9.02; or
(10)          make any change to or modify any provision of this Indenture to affect the ranking of
any Note in a manner that would adversely affect Holders of the Notes.
A consent to any amendment, supplement or waiver of this Indenture or the Notes by any Holder
given in connection with a tender of such Holder’s Notes will not be rendered invalid by such
tender.
Section 9.03          Compliance with Trust Indenture Act.If this Indenture is qualified under the
Trust Indenture Act, every amendment or supplement to this Indenture or the Notes shall be set
forth in an amended or supplemental indenture that complies with the Trust Indenture Act as then
in effect.
Section 9.04          Revocation and Effect of Consents.(a)Until an amendment, supplement or
waiver becomes effective, a consent to it by a Holder of a Note is a continuing consent by the
Holder of a Note and every subsequent Holder of a Note or portion of a Note that evidences the
same debt as the consenting Holder’s Note, even if notation of the consent is not made on any
Note.  However, any such Holder of a Note or subsequent Holder of a Note may revoke the
consent as to its Note if the Trustee receives written notice of revocation before the date the
waiver, supplement or amendment becomes effective.  An amendment, supplement or waiver
becomes effective in accordance with its terms and thereafter binds every Holder.
(b)          The Company may, but shall not be obligated to, fix a record date pursuant to Section
1.05 for the purpose of determining the Holders entitled to consent to any amendment,
supplement or waiver.
Section 9.05          Notation on or Exchange of Notes.The Trustee may place an appropriate
notation about an amendment, supplement or waiver on any Note thereafter authenticated.  The
Company in exchange for all Notes may issue and the Trustee shall, upon receipt of an
Authentication Order, authenticate new Notes that reflect the amendment, supplement or waiver.
(b)          Failure to make the appropriate notation or issue a new Note shall not affect the validity
and effect of such amendment, supplement or waiver.
Section 9.06Trustee to Sign Amendments, etc.
The Trustee shall sign any amendment, supplement or waiver authorized pursuant to this Article
9 if the amendment, supplement or waiver does not adversely affect the rights, duties, liabilities or
immunities of the Trustee.  In executing any amendment, supplement or waiver, the Trustee shall
be entitled to receive and (subject to Section 7.01) shall be fully protected in relying upon, in
addition to the documents required by Section 12.04, an Officer’s Certificate and an Opinion of
Counsel, each stating that the execution of such amendment, supplement or waiver is authorized
or permitted by this Indenture and that such amendment, supplement or waiver is the legal, valid
and binding obligation of the Company, enforceable against them in accordance with its terms,
subject to customary exceptions.
-38-
ARTICLE 10
[Reserved.]
ARTICLE 11
SATISFACTION AND DISCHARGE
Section 11.01Satisfaction and Discharge.
(a)          This Indenture will be discharged and will cease to be of further effect as to all Notes
when:
(1)          either
Notes that have been authenticated, except lost, stolen or destroyed Notes that have been
replaced or paid and Notes for whose payment money has been deposited in trust and thereafter
repaid to the Company, have been delivered to the Trustee for cancellation; or
all Notes that have not been delivered to the Trustee for cancellation have become due and
payable by reason of the giving of a notice of redemption or otherwise, or will become due and
payable within one year or are to be called for redemption within one year under arrangements
satisfactory to the Trustee for the giving of notice of redemption by the Trustee in the name, and
at the expense, of the Company, and the Company has irrevocably deposited or caused to be
deposited with the Trustee as trust funds in trust solely for the benefit of the Holders, cash in U.S.
dollars, non-callable Government Securities, or a combination thereof, in amounts as will be
sufficient, without consideration of any reinvestment of interest, to pay and discharge the entire
Indebtedness on the Notes not delivered to the Trustee for cancellation for principal of, any
interest on the Notes, to the date of maturity or redemption, as the case may be;
(2)          in respect of subclause (B) of clause (1) of this Section 11.01, no Default or Event of
Default has occurred and is continuing with respect to the Notes on the date of the deposit or will
occur as a result of the deposit (other than a Default or Event of Default resulting from the
borrowing of funds to be applied to such deposit and any similar deposit relating to other
Indebtedness and, in each case, the granting of Liens to secure such borrowings) and the
deposit will not result in a breach or violation of, or constitute a default under, any instrument to
which the Company is a party or by which the Company is bound (other than with respect to the
borrowing of funds to be applied concurrently to make the deposit required to effect such
satisfaction and discharge and any similar concurrent deposit relating to other Indebtedness, and
in each case the granting of Liens to secure such borrowings);
(3)          the Company has paid or caused to be paid all sums payable by the Company under
this Indenture with respect to the Notes; and
(4)          the Company has delivered irrevocable instructions to the Trustee to apply the deposited
money toward the payment of the Notes at maturity or the redemption date, as the case may be.
(b)          In addition, the Company shall deliver to the Trustee an Officer’s Certificate and an
Opinion of Counsel (which Opinion of Counsel may be subject to customary assumptions and
exclusions) each stating that all conditions precedent to satisfaction and discharge have been
satisfied.  Notwithstanding the satisfaction and discharge of this Indenture, if money shall have
been deposited with the Trustee pursuant to subclause (B) of clause (1) of Section 11.01(a), the
provisions of Section 11.02 and Section 8.06 shall survive.
-39-
Section 11.02Application of Trust Money.
(a)          Subject to the provisions of Section 8.06, all money and Government Securities
deposited with the Trustee pursuant to Section 11.01 shall be held in trust and applied by it, in
accordance with the provisions of the Notes and this Indenture, to the payment, either directly or
through any Paying Agent (including the Company acting as its own Paying Agent) as the
Trustee may determine, to the Persons entitled thereto, of the principal, premium, if any, and
interest for whose payment such money or Government Securities has been deposited with the
Trustee, but such money or Government Securities need not be segregated from other funds
except to the extent required by law.
(b)          If the Trustee or Paying Agent is unable to apply any money or Government Securities in
accordance with Section 11.01 by reason of any legal proceeding or by reason of any order or
judgment of any court or governmental authority enjoining, restraining or otherwise prohibiting
such application, the Company’s obligations under this Indenture, the Notes shall be revived and
reinstated as though no deposit had occurred pursuant to Section 11.01; provided that if the
Company has made any payment of principal, premium, if any, or interest on any Notes because
of the reinstatement of its obligations, the Company shall be subrogated to the rights of the
Holders of such Notes to receive such payment from the money or Government Securities held
by the Trustee or Paying Agent, as the case may be.
ARTICLE 12
MISCELLANEOUS
Section 12.01        [Reserved]
 
Section 12.02        Notices.
 
(a)           Any notice or communication to the Company or the Trustee is duly given if in writing
and (1) delivered in person, (2) mailed by first-class mail (certified or registered, return receipt
requested), postage prepaid, or overnight air courier guaranteeing next day delivery or (3) sent by
facsimile or electronic transmission, to its address:
if to the Company:
c/o Paragon Offshore plc
3151 Briarpark Drive, Suite 700, Houston, Texas 77042
Fax No.: (832) 201-7433
Email: sdonley@Paragonoffshore.com
Attention: Legal Department
with a copy to:
Weil, Gotshal & Manges LLP
767 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10153
Fax No: (212) 310-8007
Email:  todd.chandler@weil.com
Attention:  Todd R. Chandler
if to the Trustee:
U.S. Bank National Association
60 Livingston Avenue, St. Paul, MN 55107
Fax No: (651) 466-7429
Email:  raymond.haverstock@usbank.com
Attention:  administrator of the Paragon Indenture
-40-
The Company or the Trustee, by like notice, may designate additional or different addresses for
subsequent notices or communications.
(b)          All notices and communications (other than those sent to Holders) shall be deemed to
have been duly given: at the time delivered by hand, if personally delivered; on the first date of
which publication is made, if by publication; five calendar days after being deposited in the mail,
postage prepaid, if mailed by first-class mail; the next Business Day after timely delivery to the
courier, if mailed by overnight air courier guaranteeing next day delivery; when receipt
acknowledged, if sent by facsimile or electronic transmission; provided that any notice or
communication delivered to the Trustee shall be deemed effective upon actual receipt thereof.
(c)          Any notice or communication to a Holder shall be mailed by first-class mail (certified or
registered, return receipt requested) or by overnight air courier guaranteeing next day delivery to
its address shown on the Note Register or by such other delivery system as the Trustee agrees to
accept.  Any notice or communication shall also be so mailed to any Person described in Trust
Indenture Act Section 313(c), to the extent required by the Trust Indenture Act.  Failure to mail a
notice or communication to a Holder or any defect in it shall not affect its sufficiency with respect
to other Holders.
(d)          Where this Indenture provides for notice in any manner, such notice may be waived in
writing by the Person entitled to receive such notice, either before or after the event, and such
waiver shall be the equivalent of such notice.  Waivers of notice by Holders shall be filed with the
Trustee, but such filing shall not be a condition precedent to the validity of any action taken in
reliance upon such waiver.
(e)          Notwithstanding any other provision herein, where this Indenture provides for notice of
any event to any Holder of an interest in a Global Note (whether by mail or otherwise), such
notice shall be sufficiently given if given to the Depositary for such Note (or its designee),
according to the applicable procedures of such Depositary, if any, prescribed for the giving of
such notice.
(f)          The Trustee agrees to accept and act upon notice, instructions or directions pursuant to
this Indenture sent by unsecured facsimile or electronic transmission; provided, however, that (1)
the party providing such written notice, instructions or directions, subsequent to such
transmission of written instructions, shall provide the originally executed instructions or directions
to the Trustee in a timely manner, and (2) such originally executed notice, instructions or
directions shall be signed by an authorized representative of the party providing such notice,
instructions or directions.  The Trustee shall not be liable for any losses, costs or expenses
arising directly or indirectly from the Trustee’s reasonable reliance upon and compliance with
such notice, instructions or directions notwithstanding such notice, instructions or directions
conflict or are inconsistent with a subsequent notice, instructions or directions.
(g)          If a notice or communication is sent in the manner provided above within the time
prescribed, it is duly given, whether or not the addressee receives it.
-41-
(h)          If the Company mails a notice or communication to Holders, it shall mail a copy to the
Trustee and each Agent at the same time.
Section 12.03          Communication by Holders with Other Holders.Holders may communicate
pursuant to Trust Indenture Act Section 312(b) with other Holders with respect to their rights
under this Indenture or the Notes.  The Company, the Trustee, the Registrar and anyone else
shall have the protection of Trust Indenture Act Section 312(c).
Section 12.04          Certificate and Opinion as to Conditions Precedent.Upon any request or
application by the Company to the Trustee to take any action under this Indenture, the Company
shall furnish to the Trustee:
(1)          an Officer’s Certificate in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the Trustee
(which shall include the statements set forth in Section 12.05) stating that, in the opinion of the
signer(s), all conditions precedent and covenants, if any, provided for in this Indenture relating to
the proposed action have been complied with; and
(2)          an Opinion of Counsel in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the Trustee
(which shall include the statements set forth in Section 12.05) stating that, in the opinion of such
counsel, all such conditions precedent and covenants have been complied with; provided that no
Opinion of Counsel pursuant to this Section shall be required in connection with the issuance of
Notes on the Issue Date.
Section 12.05          Statements Required in Certificate or Opinion.Each certificate or opinion with
respect to compliance with a condition or covenant provided for in this Indenture (other than a
certificate provided pursuant to Section 4.06 or Trust Indenture Act Section 314(a)(4)) shall
include:
(1)          a statement that the Person making such certificate or opinion has read such covenant or
condition;
(2)          a brief statement as to the nature and scope of the examination or investigation upon
which the statements or opinions contained in such certificate or opinion are based;
(3)          a statement that, in the opinion of such Person, he or she has made such examination or
investigation as is necessary to enable him or her to express an informed opinion as to whether
or not such covenant or condition has been complied with (and, in the case of an Opinion of
Counsel, may be limited to reliance on an Officer’s Certificate as to matters of fact); and
(4)          a statement as to whether or not, in the opinion of such Person, such condition or
covenant has been complied with.
-42-
Section 12.06          Rules by Trustee and Agents.The Trustee may make reasonable rules for
action by or at a meeting of Holders.  The Registrar or Paying Agent may make reasonable rules
and set reasonable requirements for its functions.
Section 12.07          No Personal Liability of Directors, Officers, Employees and Shareholders.No
past, present or future director, officer, employee, incorporator or shareholder of the Company, as
such, shall have any liability for any obligations of the Company under the Notes or this Indenture
or for any claim based on, in respect of, or by reason of, such obligations or their creation.
Each Holder by accepting a Note waives and releases all such liability.  The waiver and release
are part of the consideration for issuance of the Notes.
Section 12.08          Governing Law.THIS INDENTURE, THE NOTES AND WILL BE
GOVERNED BY, AND CONSTRUED IN ACCORDANCE WITH, THE LAWS OF THE STATE
OF NEW YORK.
Section 12.09          Waiver of Jury Trial.EACH OF THE COMPANY AND THE TRUSTEE
HEREBY IRREVOCABLY WAIVES, TO THE FULLEST EXTENT PERMITTED BY
APPLICABLE LAW, ANY AND ALL RIGHT TO TRIAL BY JURY IN ANY LEGAL PROCEEDING
ARISING OUT OF OR RELATING TO THIS INDENTURE, THE NOTES OR THE
TRANSACTIONS CONTEMPLATED HEREBY.
Section 12.10          Force Majeure.In no event shall the Trustee be responsible or liable for any
failure or delay in the performance of its obligations under this Indenture arising out of or caused
by, directly or indirectly, forces beyond its reasonable control, including without limitation strikes,
work stoppages, accidents, acts of war or terrorism, civil or military disturbances, nuclear or
natural catastrophes or acts of God, and interruptions, loss or malfunctions of utilities,
communications or computer (software or hardware) services; it being understood that the
Trustee shall use reasonable efforts which are consistent with accepted practices in the banking
industry to resume performance as soon as practicable under the circumstances.
Section 12.11          No Adverse Interpretation of Other Agreements.This Indenture may not be
used to interpret any other indenture, loan or debt agreement of the Company or its Subsidiaries
or of any other Person.  Any such indenture, loan or debt agreement may not be used to interpret
this Indenture.
Section 12.12          Successors.All agreements of the Company in this Indenture and the Notes
shall bind its successors and assigns.  All agreements of the Trustee in this Indenture shall bind
its successors and assigns.
Section 12.13          Severability.In case any provision in this Indenture or in the Notes shall be
invalid, illegal or unenforceable, the validity, legality and enforceability of the remaining
provisions shall not in any way be affected or impaired thereby.
Section 12.14          Counterpart Originals.The parties may sign any number of copies of this
Indenture.  Each signed copy shall be an original, but all of them together represent the same
agreement.
Section 12.15Table of Contents, Headings, etc.
The Table of Contents, Cross-Reference Table and headings of the Articles and Sections of this
Indenture have been inserted for convenience of reference only, are not to be considered a part
of this Indenture and shall in no way modify or restrict any of the terms or provisions hereof.
-43-
Section 12.16          Facsimile and PDF Delivery of Signature Pages.The exchange of copies of
this Indenture and of signature pages by facsimile or portable document format (“PDF”)
transmission shall constitute effective execution and delivery of this Indenture as to the parties
hereto and may be used in lieu of the original Indenture for all purposes.  Signatures of the
parties hereto transmitted by facsimile or PDF shall be deemed to be their original signatures for
all purposes.
Section 12.17          U.S.A. PATRIOT Act.The parties hereto acknowledge that in accordance with
Section 326 of the U.S.A. PATRIOT Act, the Trustee is required to obtain, verify, and record
information that identifies each person or legal entity that establishes a relationship or opens an
account with the Trustee.  The parties to this Indenture agree that they will provide the Trustee
with such information as it may request in order for the Trustee to satisfy the requirements of the
U.S.A. PATRIOT Act.
Section 12.18          Payments Due on Non-Business Days.In any case where any Interest
Payment Date, redemption date or repurchase date or the Stated Maturity of the Notes shall not
be a Business Day, then (notwithstanding any other provision of this Indenture or of the Notes)
payment of principal of, premium, if any, on or interest on the Notes need not be made on such
date, but may be made on the next succeeding Business Day with the same force and effect as if
made on the Interest Payment Date, redemption date or repurchase date, or at the Stated Maturity
of the Notes, provided that no interest will accrue for the period from and after such Interest
Payment Date, redemption date, repurchase date or Stated Maturity, as the case may be.
Section 12.19          Consent to Jurisdiction and Service. The Company hereby irrevocably
designates and appoints CT Corporation System as its agent for service of process in any suit,
action or proceeding with respect to the Notes and for actions brought under the U.S. federal or
state securities laws brought in any U.S. federal or state court located in the Borough of
Manhattan in the City of New York. In relation to any legal action or proceedings arising out of or
in connection with this Indenture and the Notes, the Company hereby irrevocably submits to the
non-exclusive jurisdiction of the U.S. federal and state courts in the Borough of Manhattan in the
City of New York, County and State of New York, United States of America.
To the extent that the Company has or hereafter may acquire any immunity from jurisdiction of
any court or from any legal process with respect to itself or its property, to the extent permitted by
applicable law, it hereby irrevocably waives such immunity in respect of its obligations under
each of this Indenture and the Notes.  In addition, to the extent permitted by applicable law, the
Company irrevocably waives and agrees not to assert, by way of motion, as a defense, or
otherwise in any such suit, action or proceeding, any claim that it is not personally subject to the
jurisdiction of the above-mentioned courts for any reason whatsoever, that such suit, action or
proceeding is brought in an inconvenient forum or that the venue for such suit is improper, or that
this Indenture and the Notes or the subject matter hereof or thereof may not be enforced in such
courts.
The Company agrees that a final judgment in any such suit, action or proceeding shall be
conclusive and may be enforced in other jurisdictions by suit on the judgment or in any other
manner provided by law.  Nothing in this Section 12.19 shall affect the right of the Trustee to
serve legal process in any other manner permitted by law or affect the right of the Trustee to bring
any action or proceeding against the Company or its property in the courts of any other
jurisdictions.
Section 12.20          Accounting Provisions.Except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Indenture, all terms of an accounting or financial nature shall be construed in accordance with
GAAP, as in effect from time to time; provided that in the event that any Accounting Change
occurs and such change would result in a change in the method of calculation of covenants,
standards or terms as determined in good faith by the Company, then at the Company’s election,
upon written notice of the Company to the Trustee, such covenants, standards or terms shall be
calculated prior to giving effect to such Accounting Change as if such Accounting Change had
not occurred.
[Signatures on following page]
PARAGON OFFSHORE PLC,
 
as the Company
  
  
  
 By:
Name:
Title:
-44-
EXHIBIT B
 
 U.S. BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, as Trustee
  
  
 By:
Name:
Title:
C-2
APPENDIX A
 
 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO INITIAL NOTES AND
PIK NOTES
Section 1.1          Definitions.
(a)  Capitalized Terms.
Capitalized terms used but not defined in this Appendix A have the meanings given to them in
this Indenture.  The following capitalized terms have the following meanings:
“Clearstream” means Clearstream Banking, Société Anonyme, or any successor securities
clearing agency.
“Euroclear” means Euroclear Bank S.A./N.Y., as operator of Euroclear systems Clearance
System or any successor securities clearing agency.
(b) Other Definitions.
Defined in Section:
Term:
 
 
2.1(c)
“Agent Members”
“Global Note”
2.1(b)
“Global Notes Legend”2.2(e)
“Initial Global Notes” 2.1(b)
2.1(b)
“PIK Global Notes”
Section 2.1          Form and Dating.
(a)  The Initial Notes issued on the date hereof shall be issued under the Plan pursuant to
Section 1145 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.
(b)  Global Notes.  in each case without interest coupons and bearing the Global Notes Legend,
which shall be deposited on behalf of the purchasers of the Notes represented thereby with the
Custodian, and registered in the name of the Depositary or a nominee of the Depositary, duly
executed by the Company and authenticated by the Trustee as provided in the Indenture (the
“Initial Global Notes”).  One or more global Notes in definitive, fully registered form without
interest coupons and bearing the Global Notes Legend may also be issued in connection with
payment of PIK Interest (“PIK Global Notes”) and registered in the name of the Depositary or a
nominee of the Depositary, duly executed by the Company and authenticated by the Trustee as
provided in this Indenture.  The Initial Global Noe and PIK Global Notes are each referred to
herein as a “Global Note” and are collectively referred to herein as “Global Notes.”  Each Global
Note shall represent such of the outstanding Notes as shall be specified in the “Schedule of
Exchanges of Interests in the Global Note” attached thereto and each shall provide that it shall
represent the aggregate principal amount of Notes from time to time endorsed thereon and that
the aggregate principal amount of outstanding Notes represented thereby may from time to time
be reduced or increased, as applicable, to reflect exchanges and redemptions.  Any
endorsement of a Global Note to reflect the amount of any increase or decrease in the aggregate
principal amount of outstanding Notes represented thereby shall be made by the Trustee or the
Custodian, at the direction of the Trustee, in accordance with instructions given by the Holder
thereof as required by Section 2.06 of this Indenture and Section 2.2(c) of this Appendix A.
(c)  Book-Entry Provisions.  This Section 2.1(c) shall apply only to a Global Note deposited with
or on behalf of the Depositary.
The Company shall execute and the Trustee shall, in accordance with this Section 2.1(c) and
Section 2.02 of this Indenture and pursuant to an order of the Company signed by one Officer of
the Company, authenticate and deliver initially one or more Global Notes that (i) shall be
registered in the name of the Depositary for such Global Note or Global Notes or the nominee of
such Depositary and (ii) shall be delivered by the Trustee to such Depositary or pursuant to such
Depositary’s instructions or held by the Trustee as Custodian.
Members of, or participants in, the Depositary (“Agent Members”) shall have no rights under the
Indenture with respect to any Global Note held on their behalf by the Depositary or by the Trustee
as Custodian or under such Global Note, and the Depositary may be treated by the Company,
the Trustee and any agent of the Company or the Trustee as the absolute owner of such Global
Note for all purposes whatsoever.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing herein shall prevent
the Company, the Trustee or any agent of the Company or the Trustee from giving effect to any
written certification, proxy or other authorization furnished by the Depositary or impair, as
between the Depositary and its Agent Members, the operation of customary practices of such
Depositary governing the exercise of the rights of a holder of a beneficial interest in any Global
Note.
(d)  Definitive Notes.  Except as provided in Section 2.2 or Section 2.3 of this Appendix A, owners
of beneficial interests in Global Notes shall not be entitled to receive physical delivery of
Definitive Notes.
Section 2.2          Transfer and Exchange.
(a)  Transfer and Exchange of Definitive Notes for Definitive Notes.  When Definitive Notes are
presented to the Registrar with a request:
(i)  to register the transfer of such Definitive Notes; or
(ii)  to exchange such Definitive Notes for an equal principal amount of Definitive Notes of other
authorized denominations,
the Registrar shall register the transfer or make the exchange as requested if its reasonable
requirements for such transaction are met; provided, however, that the Definitive Notes
surrendered for transfer or exchange:
shall be duly endorsed or accompanied by a written instrument of transfer in form reasonably
satisfactory to the Company and the Registrar, duly executed by the Holder thereof or his
attorney duly authorized in writing.
(b)  [Reserved.]
(c)  Transfer and Exchange of Global Notes.
(i)  The transfer and exchange of Global Notes or beneficial interests therein shall be effected
through the Depositary, in accordance with the Indenture (including applicable restrictions on
transfer set forth in Section 2.2(d) of this Appendix A, if any) and the procedures of the Depositary
therefor.  A transferor of a beneficial interest in a Global Note shall deliver to the Registrar a
written order given in accordance with the Depositary’s procedures containing information
regarding the participant account of the Depositary to be credited with a beneficial interest in
such Global Note or another Global Note and such account shall be credited in accordance with
such order with a beneficial interest in the applicable Global Note and the account of the Person
making the transfer shall be debited by an amount equal to the beneficial interest in the Global
Note being transferred.
2
(ii)  If the proposed transfer is a transfer of a beneficial interest in one Global Note to a beneficial
interest in another Global Note, the Registrar shall reflect on its books and records the date and
an increase in the principal amount of the Global Note to which such interest is being transferred
in an amount equal to the principal amount of the interest to be so transferred, and the Registrar
shall reflect on its books and records the date and a corresponding decrease in the principal
amount of the Global Note from which such interest is being transferred.
(iii)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Appendix A (other than the provisions set forth
in Section 2.3 of this Appendix A), a Global Note may not be transferred except as a whole and
not in part if the transfer is by the Depositary to a nominee of the Depositary or by a nominee of
the Depositary to the Depositary or another nominee of the Depositary or by the Depositary or
any such nominee to a successor Depositary or a nominee of such successor Depositary.
(d)  [Reserved.]
(e)  Legends.
Each Global Note shall bear the following legend (“Global Notes Legend”):
UNLESS THIS CERTIFICATE IS PRESENTED BY AN AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF
THE DEPOSITORY TRUST COMPANY, A NEW YORK CORPORATION (“DTC”), NEW YORK,
NEW YORK, TO THE COMPANY OR ITS AGENT FOR REGISTRATION OF TRANSFER,
EXCHANGE OR PAYMENT, AND ANY CERTIFICATE ISSUED IS REGISTERED IN THE
NAME OF CEDE & CO. OR SUCH OTHER NAME AS IS REQUESTED BY AN AUTHORIZED
REPRESENTATIVE OF DTC (AND ANY PAYMENT IS MADE TO CEDE & CO., OR TO SUCH
OTHER ENTITY AS IS REQUESTED BY AN AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF DTC),
ANY TRANSFER, PLEDGE OR OTHER USE HEREOF FOR VALUE OR OTHERWISE BY OR
TO ANY PERSON IS WRONGFUL INASMUCH AS THE REGISTERED OWNER HEREOF,
CEDE & CO., HAS AN INTEREST HEREIN.
TRANSFERS OF THIS GLOBAL SECURITY SHALL BE LIMITED TO TRANSFERS IN
WHOLE, BUT NOT IN PART, TO DTC, TO NOMINEES OF DTC OR TO A SUCCESSOR
THEREOF OR SUCH SUCCESSOR'S NOMINEE AND TRANSFERS OF PORTIONS OF THIS
GLOBAL SECURITY SHALL BE LIMITED TO TRANSFERS MADE IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THE RESTRICTIONS SET FORTH IN THE INDENTURE REFERRED TO ON THE REVERSE
HEREOF.
(f)  Cancellation or Adjustment of Global Note.  At such time as all beneficial interests in a Global
Note have either been exchanged for Definitive Notes, transferred in exchange for an interest in
another Global Note, redeemed, repurchased or canceled, such Global Note shall be returned by
the Depositary to the Trustee for cancellation or retained and canceled by the Trustee.  At any
time prior to such cancellation, if any beneficial interest in a Global Note is exchanged for
Definitive Notes, transferred in exchange for an interest in another Global Note, redeemed,
repurchased or canceled, the principal amount of Notes represented by such Global Note shall
be reduced and an adjustment shall be made on the books and records of the Registrar (if it is
then the Custodian for such Global Note) with respect to such Global Note, by the Registrar or
the Custodian, to reflect such reduction.
3
(g)  Obligations with Respect to Transfers and Exchanges of Notes.
(i)  To permit registrations of transfers and exchanges, the Company shall execute and the
Trustee shall authenticate, Definitive Notes and Global Notes at the Registrar’s request.
(ii) No service charge shall be imposed in connection with any registration of transfer or
exchange, but the Company may require payment of a sum sufficient to cover any transfer tax,
assessments, or similar governmental charge payable in connection therewith (other than any
such transfer taxes, assessments or similar governmental charge payable upon exchanges
pursuant to Sections 2.10, 3.06, 3.09 and 9.05 of this Indenture).
(iii)  Prior to the due presentation for registration of transfer of any Note, the Company, the
Trustee, the Paying Agent or the Registrar may deem and treat the person in whose name a Note
is registered as the absolute owner of such Note for the purpose of receiving payment of
principal, premium, if any, and interest on such Note and for all other purposes whatsoever,
whether or not such Note is overdue, and none of the Company, the Trustee, the Paying Agent or
the Registrar  shall be affected by notice to the contrary.
(iv)  All Notes issued upon any transfer or exchange pursuant to the terms of this Indenture shall
evidence the same debt and shall be entitled to the same benefits under this Indenture as the
Notes surrendered upon such transfer or exchange.
(h)  No Obligation of the Trustee.
(i)  The Trustee shall have no responsibility or obligation to any beneficial owner of a Global
Note, a member of, or a participant in the Depositary or any other Person with respect to the
accuracy of the records of the Depositary or its nominee or of any participant or member thereof,
with respect to any ownership interest in the Notes or with respect to the delivery to any
participant, member, beneficial owner or other Person (other than the Depositary) of any notice
(including any notice of redemption or repurchase) or the payment of any amount, under or with
respect to such Notes.  All notices and communications to be given to the Holders and all
payments to be made to Holders under the Notes shall be given or made only to the registered
Holders (which shall be the Depositary or its nominee in the case of a Global Note).  The rights of
beneficial owners in any Global Note shall be exercised only through the Depositary subject to
the applicable rules and procedures of the Depositary.  The Trustee may rely and shall be fully
protected in relying upon information furnished by the Depositary with respect to its members,
participants and any beneficial owners.
(ii)  The Trustee shall have no obligation or duty to monitor, determine or inquire as to
compliance with any restrictions on transfer imposed under this Indenture or under applicable
law with respect to any transfer of any interest in any Note (including any transfers between or
among Depositary participants, members or beneficial owners in any Global Note) other than to
require delivery of such certificates and other documentation or evidence as are expressly
required by, and to do so if and when expressly required by, the terms of this Indenture, and to
examine the same to determine substantial compliance as to form with the express requirements
hereof.
Section 2.3Definitive Notes.
(a)  A Global Note deposited with the Depositary or with the Trustee as Custodian pursuant to
Section 2.1 may be transferred to the beneficial owners thereof in the form of Definitive Notes in
an aggregate principal amount equal to the principal amount of such Global Note, in exchange
for such Global Note, only if such transfer complies with Section 2.2 of this Appendix A and (i) the
Depositary notifies the Company that it is unwilling or unable to continue as a Depositary for
such Global Note or if at any time the Depositary ceases to be a “clearing agency” registered
under the Exchange Act and, in each case, a successor depositary is not appointed by the
Company within 90 days of such notice or after the Company becomes aware of such cessation
or (ii) an Event of Default has occurred and is continuing and the Registrar has received a
request from the Depositary.  In addition, any Affiliate of the Company that is a beneficial owner
of all or part of a Global Note may have such Affiliate’s beneficial interest transferred to such
Affiliate in the form of a Definitive Note by providing a written request to the Company and the
Trustee and such Opinions of Counsel, certificates or other information as may be required by
this Indenture or the Company, the Trustee or the Depositary.
4
(b)  Any Global Note that is transferable to the beneficial owners thereof pursuant to this Section
2.3 shall be surrendered by the Depositary to the Trustee, to be so transferred, in whole or from
time to time in part, without charge, and the Trustee shall authenticate and deliver, upon such
transfer of each portion of such Global Note, an equal aggregate principal amount of Definitive
Notes of authorized denominations.  Any portion of a Global Note transferred pursuant to this
Section 2.3 shall be executed, authenticated and delivered only in denominations of $1.00 and
integral multiples of $1.00 in excess thereof and registered in such names as the Depositary
shall direct.
(c)  The registered Holder of a Global Note may grant proxies and otherwise authorize any
Person, including Agent Members and Persons that may hold interests through Agent Members,
to take any action which a Holder is entitled to take under this Indenture or the Notes.
(d)  In the event of the occurrence of any of the events specified in Section 2.3(a) of this Appendix
A, the Company shall promptly make available to the Trustee a reasonable supply of Definitive
Notes in fully registered form without interest coupons.
5
Exhibit A
[FORM OF FACE OF NOTE]
[Insert the Global Notes Legend, if applicable, pursuant to the provisions of the Indenture]
CUSIP [                     ]
ISIN [                     ]
[GLOBAL] NOTE
Senior Notes due 2021
No.          [Up to]1 [$______________]
PARAGON OFFSHORE PLC
promises to pay to [CEDE & CO.]2 [_______________] or registered assigns the principal sum
[set forth on the Schedule of Exchanges of Interests in the Global Note attached hereto]3 [of
$_______ (_______ Dollars)]4 on May 31, 2021.
Interest Payment Dates:  June 30 and December 31
Record Dates:  June 15 and December 15
1Include in Global Notes.
2Include in Global Notes
3Include in Global Notes
4Include in Definitive Notes
A-2
IN WITNESS HEREOF, the Company has caused this instrument to be duly executed.
Dated:
 PARAGON OFFSHORE PLC
By:
A-3
Name:
Title:
CERTIFICATE OF AUTHENTICATION
This is one of the Notes referred to in the within-mentioned Indenture:
Authorized Signatory
U.S. BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, as Trustee
  
 By:
  
 
Dated:
A-4
[Reverse Side of Note]
Senior Notes due 2021
Capitalized terms used herein shall have the meanings assigned to them in the Indenture
referred to below unless otherwise indicated.
1.          INTEREST.  Paragon Offshore plc, a public limited company incorporated under the laws
of England and Wales (the “Company”), promises to pay interest on the principal amount of this
Note at the rate per annum set forth below until but excluding maturity.  The Company shall pay
interest semi-annually in arrears on June 30 and December 31 of each year, or if any such day is
not a Business Day, on the next succeeding Business Day (each, an “Interest Payment Date”). 
Interest on the Notes shall accrue from the most recent date to which interest has been paid or, if
no interest has been paid, from and including [____________]5; [provided that the first Interest
Payment Date shall be December 31, 2016]6.  The Company shall pay interest (including post-
petition interest in any proceeding under any Bankruptcy Law) on overdue principal and
premium, if any, from time to time on demand at the cash interest rate on the Notes to the extent
lawful; it shall pay interest (including post-petition interest in any proceeding under any
Bankruptcy Law) on overdue installments of interest (without regard to any applicable grace
periods) from time to time on demand at the cash interest rate on the Notes to the extent lawful. 
Interest shall be computed on the basis of a 360-day year comprised of twelve 30-day months.
With respect to Interest Payment Dates on or prior to December 31, 2018, the Company, may, at
its option, elect to pay interest on this Note (i) entirely in cash (“Cash Interest”), (ii) entirely by
increasing the principal amount of this Note or by issuing PIK Notes (“PIK Interest”), (iii) in part as
Cash Interest and in part as PIK Interest (“Partial PIK Interest”), in which case it shall designate
the percentage of the aggregate principal amount of the outstanding Notes to be paid in Cash
Interest (the “Cash Designated Percentage”) and the percentage of the aggregate principal
amount of the outstanding Notes to be in Partial PIK Interest (the “Partial PIK Designated
Percentage”) (it being understood that the sum of such percentages shall equal 100%), or (iv)
entirely in Parent Ordinary Shares (“POS Interest”); provided no election to pay POS Interest
shall be permitted or effective if the applicable POS Trading Price would be below the Baseline
Price.  The Company must elect the form of interest payment, including any designated
percentages of Cash Interest and Partial PIK Interest, with respect to each interest period by
delivering a notice to the Trustee, no later than 30 days prior to the Interest Payment Date.  The
Trustee shall promptly deliver a corresponding notice to the Holder of this Note.  In the absence
of such an election for any interest period, interest on this Note will be payable in the form of
interest payment for the prior interest period unless such payment would be in POS Interest with
respect to a period in which a payment in POS Interest would not be permitted in which case
such payment shall be entirely in PIK Interest. With respect Interest Payment Dates after
December 31, 2018, interest on the Notes shall be paid (1) in cash to the extent permitted by the 
Amended and Restated Senior Secured Credit Agreement, dated as of [____], among Paragon
Offshore PLC, as Parent Borrower, Paragon International Finance Company, as Cayman
Borrower, the lenders from time to time party thereto and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as
administrative agent  (the “Revolving Credit Agreement”), (2) to the extent not so permitted to be
paid in cash by the Revolving Credit Agreement, as POS Interest provided the applicable POS
Trading Price would be equal to or greater than the Baseline Price and  the Company has
sufficient authorized shares under it charter to make such payment in accordance with applicable
corporate law and (3) to the extent not payable in accordance with the foregoing clauses (1) and
(2) of this sentence, as PIK Interest. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the payment of
accrued interest in connection with any redemption of Notes pursuant to Article 3 of the Indenture
or in connection with any Change of Control Offer shall be made solely in cash.
5 Insert issue date of Notes.
6 Include in Initial Notes only.
A-5
Cash Interest and POS Interest on this Note will accrue at the rate of 12.0% per annum.  PIK
Interest on this Note will accrue at the rate of 15.0% per annum and be payable by increasing the
principal amount of this Note by an amount equal to the amount of PIK Interest for the applicable
interest period (rounded up to the nearest whole dollar) (or, if necessary, pursuant to the
requirements of the depositary or otherwise, to authenticate new Global Notes executed by the
issuer with such increased principal amounts).  In the event the Company elects to pay Partial
PIK Interest for any interest period, each Holder will be entitled to receive Cash Interest in respect
of the Cash Designated Percentage of the principal amount of the Notes held by such Holder on
the relevant record date and PIK Interest in respect of Partial PIK Designated Percentage of the
principal amount of the Notes held by such Holder on the relevant record date.  Following an
increase in the principal amount of this Note as a result of a payment of PIK Interest, this Note will
bear interest on such increased principal amount from and after the date of such payment of PIK
Interest.  POS Interest will paid in a number of Parent Ordinary Shares equal to (A) the amount of
Cash Interest that would have been payable had the Company elected to make a full Cash
Interest payment for such Interest Payment Date divided by (B) the POS Trading Price, provided
no fractional shares shall be issued and any fractional shares will be rounded up to the nearest
whole share.
2.          METHOD OF PAYMENT.  The Company shall pay interest on the Notes to the Persons
who are registered holders of Notes at the close of business on the June 15 or December 15
(whether or not a Business Day), as the case may be, immediately preceding the related Interest
Payment Date, even if such Notes are canceled after such Record Date and on or before such
Interest Payment Date, except as provided in Section 2.12 of the Indenture with respect to
defaulted interest.  Principal and Cash Interest on the Notes shall be payable at the office or
agency of the Company maintained for such purpose or, at the option of the Company, payment
of Cash Interest may be made by check mailed to the Holders at their respective addresses set
forth in the Note Register; provided that payment by wire transfer of immediately available funds
shall be required with respect to principal and Cash Interest on all Global Notes.  Such payment
shall be in such coin or currency of the United States as at the time of payment is legal tender for
payment of public and private debts.
If the Company shall pay POS Interest, it shall cause the relevant number of shares to be issued
to the Holder entitled to such payment on the Interest Payment Date.
3.          PAYING AGENT AND REGISTRAR.  Initially, U.S. Bank National Association Americas,
the Trustee under the Indenture, shall act as Paying Agent and Registrar.  The Company may
change any Paying Agent or Registrar without notice to the Holders.  The Company may act in
any such capacity.
4.          INDENTURE.  The Company issued the Notes under an Indenture, dated as of [—], 2016
(as amended or supplemented from time to time, the “Indenture”) between Paragon Offshore plc,
and the Trustee.  This Note is one of a duly authorized issue of Notes of the Company
designated as its Senior Notes due 2021.  The Notes and any PIK Notes issued under the
Indenture shall be treated as a single class of securities as the applicable series of Notes under
the Indenture.  The terms of the Notes include those stated in the Indenture and those made part
of the Indenture by reference to the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as amended.  The Notes are
subject to all such terms, and Holders are referred to the Indenture and the Trust Indenture Act for
a statement of such terms.  Any term used in this Note that is defined in the Indenture shall have
the meaning assigned to it in the Indenture.  To the extent any provision of this Note conflicts with
the express provisions of the Indenture, the provisions of the Indenture shall govern and be
controlling.
A-6
5.          REDEMPTION AND REPURCHASE.  The Notes are subject to optional redemption as
further described in the Indenture.  The Company shall not be required to make mandatory
redemption or sinking fund payments with respect to the Notes.
6.          DENOMINATIONS, TRANSFER, EXCHANGE.  The Notes are in registered form without
coupons in denominations of $1.00 and integral multiples of $1.00 in excess thereof.  The
transfer of Notes may be registered and Notes may be exchanged as provided in the Indenture. 
The Registrar and the Trustee may require a Holder, among other things, to furnish appropriate
endorsements and transfer documents, and Holders shall be required to pay any taxes and fees
required by law or by the Indenture.  The Company need not exchange or register the transfer of
any Note or portion of a Note selected for redemption or tendered for repurchase in connection
with a Change of Control Offer, except for the unredeemed portion of any Note being redeemed
or repurchased in part.
7.          PERSONS DEEMED OWNERS.  The registered Holder of a Note may be treated as its
owner for all purposes.
8.          AMENDMENT, SUPPLEMENT AND WAIVER.  The Indenture or the Notes may be
amended or supplemented as provided in the Indenture.
9.          DEFAULTS AND REMEDIES.  The Events of Default relating to the Notes are defined in
Section 6.01 of the Indenture.  Upon the occurrence of an Event of Default, the rights and
obligations of the Company, the Trustee and the Holders shall be as set forth in the applicable
provisions of the Indenture.
10.          AUTHENTICATION.  This Note shall not be entitled to any benefit under the Indenture
or be valid or obligatory for any purpose until authenticated by the manual signature of the
Trustee.
11.          GOVERNING LAW.  THIS NOTE WILL BE GOVERNED BY, AND CONSTRUED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH, THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK.
12.          CUSIP AND ISIN NUMBERS.  Pursuant to a recommendation promulgated by the
Committee on Uniform Security Identification Procedures, the Company has caused CUSIP and
ISIN numbers to be printed on the Notes, and the Trustee may use CUSIP and ISIN numbers in
notices of redemption as a convenience to Holders.  No representation is made as to the
accuracy of such numbers either as printed on the Notes or as contained in any notice of
redemption and reliance may be placed only on the other identification numbers placed thereon.
The Company shall furnish to any Holder upon written request and without charge a copy of the
Indenture.  Requests may be made to the Company at the following address:
c/o Paragon Offshore plc
3151 Briarpark Drive, Suite 700
Houston, Texas 77042
Fax No.: (832) 201-7433
Email: sdonley@Paragonoffshore.com
Attention: Legal Department
A-7
ASSIGNMENT FORM
To assign this Note, fill in the form below:
(I) or (we) assign and transfer this Note to: (Insert assignee’s legal name)
(Insert assignee’s soc. sec. or tax I.D. no.)
 
 
 
(Print or type assignee’s name, address and zip code) 
and irrevocably appoint 
to transfer this Note on the books of the Company.  The agent may substitute another to act for
him.
 
Date:  _____________________
 
Your Signature: 
 
 
Signature Guarantee*:  __________________________________
(Sign exactly as your name appears on the face of this Note)
* Participant in a recognized Signature Guarantee Medallion Program (or other signature
guarantor acceptable to the Trustee).
A-8
OPTION OF HOLDER TO ELECT PURCHASE
If you want to elect to have this Note purchased by the Company pursuant to Section 4.08 of the
Indenture, check the appropriate box below:
[   ] Section 4.08
If you want to elect to have only part of this Note purchased by the Company pursuant to Section
4.08 of the Indenture, state the amount you elect to have purchased:
$_______________
(integral multiples of $1,000,
provided that the unpurchased
portion must be in a minimum
principal amount of $2,000)
Date:  _____________________
 
Your Signature:
 
Tax Identification No.: 
 
Signature Guarantee*:  __________________________________
(Sign exactly as your name appears on the face of this Note)
* Participant in a recognized Signature Guarantee Medallion Program (or other signature
guarantor acceptable to the Trustee).
A-9
SCHEDULE OF EXCHANGES OF INTERESTS IN THE GLOBAL NOTE*
The initial outstanding principal amount of this Global Note is $__________.  The following
exchanges of a part of this Global Note for an interest in another Global Note or for a Definitive
Note, or exchanges of a part of another Global Note or Definitive Note for an interest in this
Global Note, have been made:
Date of
Exchange
Amount of decrease
in Principal Amount
 
of
this Global Note
Amount of
increase
 
in Principal
Amount of this
Global Note
Principal Amount of
this Global Note
 
following such
decrease or
increase
Signature of
authorized
signatory 
 
of Trustee,
Depositary or
Custodian
__________________
*This schedule should be included only if the Note is issued in global form.
 
A-10