
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 20-F
REGISTRATION  STATEMENT  PURSUANT  TO  SECTION  12(b)  OR  (g)  OF  THE  SECURITIES 
EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
ANNUAL  REPORT  PURSUANT  TO  SECTION  13  OR  15(d)  OF  THE  SECURITIES  EXCHANGE  ACT  OF 
1934 for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2014
OR    
  
   
[X] 
  
     
  
OR      
  
     
[  ]
OR      
  
     
[  ]
[  ]
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE  ACT 
OF 1934
SHELL COMPANY REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE 
ACT OF 1934
Commission file number: 000-31076
Teryl Resources Corp.
(Exact name of Registrant as specified in its charter)
British Columbia, Canada
(Jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
240-11780 Hammersmith Way, Richmond, British Columbia V7A 5E9, Canada
(Address of principal executive offices)
240-11780 Hammersmith Way, Richmond, British Columbia V7A 5E9, Canada
John Robertson, President, jr@ihiway.com
Phone: 604-278-5996; Fax 604-278-3409
(Name, Telephone, E-Mail and/or Facsimile number and Address of Company Contact Person)
Securities registered or to be registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act.
Title of each class
None
Name of each exchange on which registered
None
Securities registered or to be registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act. Common Shares, no par value 
  
Securities for which there is a reporting obligation pursuant to Section 15(d) of the Act. None 
  
Indicate the number of outstanding shares of each of the issuer’s classes of capital or common shares as of the close of 
the period covered by the annual report: 70,118,605 common shares outstanding at May 31, 2014 
 
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer. [  ] Yes [X] No 
 If this report is an annual or transition report, indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports 
pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. [  ] Yes [X] No 
  
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the 
Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934  during  the  preceding  12  months  (or  for  such  shorter  period  that  the  registrant  was 
required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. [X] Yes [  ] No
Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate web site, if any, 
every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of 
this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and 
post such files). [  ] Yes [X] No 
  
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated filer.
[  ] Large accelerated filer [  ] Accelerated filer [X] Non-accelerated filer
Indicate by check mark which basis of accounting the registrant has used to prepare the financial statements included in 
this filing: 
  
U.S. GAAP  [   ]
Other  [  ]
International Financial Reporting Standards as 
issued by the International Accounting Standards 
Board
[X]
If “Other” has been checked in response to previous questions, indicate by check mark which financial statement item 
the registrant has elected to follow. [  ] Item 17 [  ] Item 18 
  
If this is an annual report, indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company as defined in Rule 12b-2 of 
the Exchange Act. [  ] Yes [X] No 
  
Unless otherwise indicated, all references herein are expressed in Canadian dollars and United States currency is stated 
as “US$” 
  
THIS SUBMISSION SHOULD BE CONSIDERED IN CONJUNCTION WITH PREVIOUSLY FILED FORMS 20-F 
AND  6-K.  THE  AUDITED  FINANCIAL  STATEMENTS  AND  NOTES  THERETO  ATTACHED  ARE  AN 
INTEGRAL PART OF THIS SUBMISSION.
BCBCA 
Board  
Exchange Act 
GAAP 
IFRS  
OTC BB 
SEC 
TSX.V
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Business Corporations Act (British Columbia) 
Board of Directors of our company 
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 
Canadian Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 
International Financial Reporting Standards 
Over-the-Counter Bulletin Board in the United States 
Securities and Exchange Commission 
TSX Venture Exchange
GLOSSARY OF MINING TERMS
Alluvial
Amphibolite
Felsic
Fracture
rocks
that
fall
then  experience
A  term  used  to  identify  particular  types  of,  or  minerals  found  associated  with, 
deposits made by flowing water, such as alluvial gold. 
  
Crystalloblastic rock consisting mainly of amphibole and plagioclase with little or 
no  quartz.  As  the  content  of  quartz  increases,  the  rock  grades  into  hornblende 
plagioclase gneiss. 
  
A precise and accurate analysis of the metal contents in an ore or rock sample. 
  
Gold
Assay 
  
Au 
  
Dynamothermal metamorphism  A  form  of  regional  metamorphism  that  acts  on  rocks  caught  between  two 
converging  plates  and  is  initially  caused  by  directed  pressure  from  the  plates, 
which  causes  some  of  the  rocks  to  rise  and  others  to  sink,  sometimes  by  tens  of 
kilometers.  The 
further  dynamothermal 
metamorphism,  this  time  caused  by  heat  from  the  Earth’s  interior  and  lithostatic 
pressure  from  overlying  rocks  Eclogite:  A  coarse-grained,  deep-seated  ultramafic 
rock,  consisting  essentially  of  garnet 
(almandine-pyrope)  and  pyroxene 
(omphacite). Rutile, kyanite, and quartz are typically present. 
  
A mnemonic adjective derived from (fe) for feldspar, (l) for lenad or feldspathoid, 
and (s) for silica, and applied to light-colored rocks containing an abundance of one 
or all of these constituents. 
  
The general term to include any kind of discontinuity in a body of rock if produced 
by mechanical process such as shear stress or tensile stress. 
  
Grams per metric tonne. 
  
Means a mineral deposit mineralized with gold. 
  
Pertaining to or composed of granite. 
  
Schistose  metamorphic rock  whose  green color is due to the presence of chlorite, 
epidote, or actinolite. 
  
Cuts across (is intrusive into). 
  
Consisting of or resembling limonite. 
  
The  character  of  a  rock  described  in  terms  of  its  structure,  color,  mineral 
composition,  grain  size,  and  arrangement  of  its  component  parts;  all  those  visible 
features that in the aggregate impart individuality to the rock. 
  
Said  of  an  element  that  is  concentrated  in  the  silicate  rather  than  in  the  metal  or 
sulfide phases of meteorites. Such elements concentrate in the Earth’s silicate crust 
in Goldschmidt’s tripartite division of elements in the solid Earth. 
  
Pertaining  to  or  composed  dominantly  of  the  ferromagnesian  rock-forming 
silicates; said of some igneous rocks and their constituent minerals. 
  
The portion of mining ground held under law by a claimant 
  
That  part  of  a  mineral  resource  for  which  quantity,  grade  or  quality,  densities, 
shape,  physical  characteristics  are  so  well  established  that  they  can  be  estimated 
with  confidence  sufficient  to  allow  the  appropriate  application  of  technical  and 
economic  parameters,  to  support  production  planning  and  evaluation  of  the 
economic  viability  of  the  deposit.  The  estimate  is  based  on  detailed  and  reliable 
exploration,  sampling  and  testing  information  gathered  through  appropriate
Mineral claim or mining claim 
  
Measured resource
Gpt 
  
Gold deposit 
  
Granitic 
  
Greenschis
Intrusive 
  
Limonitically 
  
Lithologies
Lithophile
Mafic
Mineralization
opt 
  
Ore
Ounce or oz 
  
Petrographic
techniques from locations such as outcrops, trenches, pits, workings and drill holes 
that are spaced closely enough to confirm both geological and grade continuity. 
  
Implication that the rocks contain sulphide minerals and that these could be related 
to ore. 
  
Troy ounces per short ton. 
  
A  naturally  occurring  rock  or  material  from  which  economic  minerals  can  be 
extracted at a profit. 
  
A troy ounce or 20 pennyweights or 480 grains or 31.103 grams. 
  
Pertaining to the study of rocks.
Placer
Pluton
Prospect
Protoliths 
  
Proven reserve
Reserve
Reverse circulation or RC drill
Ton 
  
Tonne 
  
Trenching 
  
Vein
A place where gold is obtained by washing; an alluvial or glacial deposit, as of 
sand or gravel, containing particles of gold or other valuable minerals including 
gemstones. 
  
A body of medium - to coarse-grained igneous rock that formed beneath the 
surface by crystallization of a magma. 
  
An area prospective for economic minerals based on geological, geophysical, 
geochemical and other criteria. 
  
Refers to the precursor rock of a given lithology. 
  
The economically mineable part of a measured resource demonstrated by at least a 
preliminary feasibility study. This study must include adequate information on 
mining, processing, metallurgical, economic, and other relevant factors that 
demonstrate, at the time of reporting, that economic extraction is justified. 
  
That part of a mineral deposit which could be economically and legally extracted 
or produced at the time of the reserve determination. 
  
A large machine that produces a continuous chip sample of the rock or material 
being drilled. 
  
Short ton (2,000 pounds). 
  
Metric tonne (2,204.6 pounds). 
  
The surface excavation of a linear trench to expose mineralization for sampling. 
  
A tabular body of rock typically of narrow thickness and often mineralized 
occupying a fault, shear, fissure or fracture crosscutting another pre-existing rock.
For ease of reference, the following conversion factors are provided:
1 mile 
1 yard 
1 acre
= 1.609 kilometers 
= 0.9144 meter 
= 0.405 hectare
= 1 tonne
2,204 pounds 
2,000 pounds/1 short ton = 0.907 tonne 
1 troy ounce
= 31.103 grams
PART I
Selected Financial Data
KEY INFORMATION
OFFER STATISTICS AND EXPECTED TIMETABLE
IDENTITY OF DIRECTORS, SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND ADVISERS
ITEM 1. 
  
Not applicable. 
  
ITEM 2. 
  
Not applicable. 
  
ITEM 3. 
  
A. 
  
This  data  has  been  derived  from  our  audited  financial  statements,  which  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with 
International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (“IFRS”)  for  the  years  ended  May  31,  2014,  2013  2012  and  2011,  and 
accounting  principles  generally  accepted  in  Canadian  GAAP  and  reconciled  for  material  measurement  differences  to 
U.S. GAAP for the year ended May 31, 2010. Set forth in the following table are selected financial data with respect to 
our financial condition and results of operation for the years ended May 31, 2014, 2013, 2012, 2011 and 2010. 
  
The  selected  financial  and  operating  information  as  at  May  31,  2014,  2013,  2012,  2011  and  2010  should  be  read  in 
conjunction  with  the  audited  consolidated  financial  statements  and  notes  thereto  included  elsewhere  herein  and  in 
conjunction with Item 5 - “Operating and Financial Review and Prospects”. The selected financial data as at and for 
these periods have been extracted from, and are qualified by reference to the audited consolidated financial statements 
included herein at Item 17.
Fiscal Years ended May 31,
2014
(IFRS)
2013
(IFRS)
2012
(IFRS)
2011
(IFRS)
2010
(GAAP)
Revenues 
Total Assets 
Net Assets 
Net Loss 
Net Loss per Share 
Share capital 
Weighted average number of shares 
outstanding
Cash used in operating activities 
Cash provided by (used in) financing 
activities 
Cash provided by (used in) investing 
activities
–
–
–
$
$
$
–   
     
      1,352,624         1,879,535         2,548,094         2,256,177         3,270,104   
      1,290,862         1,735,678         2,430,319         2,140,515         3,078,492   
(534,184 )       (1,419,726 ) 
     
     
(0.02 ) 
     13,550,994        13,620,108        14,045,753        14,004,922        13,456,263
(608,659 )      
(0.01 )
(460,909 )      
(0.01 )
(766,330 )      
(0.01 )
(0.01 )
–
$
$
70,241,843        71,761,356        72,486,938        69,973,962        60,736,673
Fiscal Years ended May 31,
2014
(IFRS)
2013
(IFRS)
2012
(IFRS)
2011
(IFRS)
$
$
$
$
(467,915 )
(587,482 )
(426,696 )
(401,943 )
2010
(GAAP)
$
(950,964 )
(3,200 )
(145,065 )
52,647
512,555         1,422,285
(106,546 )
(507,706 )       2,468,924
(218,846 )
(358,812 )
Exchange Rates 
  
Unless otherwise indicated, all monetary references herein are denominated in Canadian Dollars. References to “$” or 
“Dollars” are to Canadian Dollars and references to “US$” are to United States Dollars. 
  
The  following  table  sets  forth,  for  the  periods  indicated,  the  exchange  rates  based  on  the  daily  bid  rates  quoted  on 
OANDA.  Such rates are the number of Canadian dollars per one (1) U.S. Dollar.
$
Average for Period 
  
The high and low exchange rates for each month during the previous six months are as follows:
1.0045      $
0.9997      $
1.0655      $
Year Ended May 31, 
2014
2013
2012
2011
1.0072      $
2010
1.0629
2014
Month Ended
Risk Factors
July 
2014
June 
2014
May 
     
2014
April 
     
2014
March 
     
2014
Capitalization and Indebtedness
Reasons for the Offer and Use of Proceeds
1.075      $  1.0905      $  1.0911      $  1.1026      $
August       
  
  
     
1.157   
   $  1.0936      $ 
   $  1.0908      $  1.0673      $  1.0715      $  1.0882      $  1.0948      $  1.1059
High for Period 
Low for Period 
  
On  May  31,  2014,  the  exchange  rate  was  $1.0882  for  US$1.00.  As  of  September  30,  2014  the  exchange  rate  was 
CAD$1.159 for US$1.00. 
  
B. 
  
Not applicable. 
  
C. 
  
Not applicable. 
  
D. 
  
The following risk factors should be carefully considered in evaluating our business because such factors currently may 
have a significant impact on our business, operating results and financial condition. 
  
Risk Factors Related to Our Business 
  
An  investment  in  our  securities  is  highly  speculative  and  involves  a high  degree of  risk  and  should  only  be  made  by 
investors who can afford to lose their entire investment. 
  
Prior  to  making  an  investment  decision,  investors  should  consider  the  investment  risks  set  forth  below,  which  are  in 
addition to the usual risks associated with an investment in a business at an early stage of development. Our directors 
consider  the  risks  set  forth  below  to  be  the  most  significant  to  potential  investors  in  our  company,  but  not  all  of  the 
risks associated with an investment in securities of our company. If any of these risks materialize into actual events or 
circumstances or other possible additional risks and uncertainties of which the directors are currently unaware or which 
they  consider  not  to  be  material  in  connection  with  our  business,  actually  occur,  our  assets,  liabilities,  financial 
condition, results of operations (including future results of operations), business and business prospects, are likely to be 
materially  and  adversely  affected.  In  such  circumstances,  the  price  of  our  securities  could  decline  and  investors  may 
lose all or part of their investment. 
  
Additional Capital Requirements 
  
We have and may continue to have capital requirements in excess of our currently available resources. In the event our 
plans change, our assumptions change or prove inaccurate or our capital resources in addition to projected cash flow, if 
any, prove to be insufficient to fund operations, we could be required to seek additional financing sooner than currently 
anticipated.  To  the  extent  that  any  such  financing  involves  the  sale  of  our  equity  securities,  the  interests  of  our  then 
existing shareholders could be substantially diluted. There can be no assurance that such financing will be available to 
us on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
We may not be able to secure the financing necessary to explore, develop and produce our mineral properties. 
  
The  development  of  our  properties  depends  on  our  ability  to  obtain  additional  required  financing  or  obtaining  joint 
venture partners. As noted in our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended May 31, 2014, we have 
incurred operating losses of $460,909 for the year ended May 31, 2014 and have an accumulated deficit of $12,957,173 
at May 31, 2014. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on the attainment of profitable operations to 
meet our liabilities as they become payable and satisfy working capital and operating needs. 
  
Issuance of additional shares would dilute the interests of existing shareholders. 
  
Effective  June  12,  2013,  we  amended  our  Article  and  increased  our  authorized  common  shares  from  100,000,000  to 
unlimited  and  preferred  shares  from  5,000,000  to  unlimited.  On  September  30,  2014,  we  had  70,118,605  common 
shares issued and outstanding and no preferred shares issued. Our Board has the power to issue additional shares and 
may  in  the  future  issue  shares  to  acquire  products,  equipment  or  properties,  or  for  other  corporate  purposes.  Any 
additional issuance by us from our authorized but unissued share capital would have the effect of diluting the interest 
of existing shareholders. 
  
We expect to incur losses for the foreseeable future. 
  
We  expect  to  incur  losses  for  the  foreseeable  future  and  cannot  be  certain  when  or  if  we  will  achieve  profitability. 
Failure to become and remain profitable will adversely affect the value of our Common Shares and our ability to raise 
capital and continue operations. 
  
Our  business  may  be  affected  by  such  matters  as  changes  in  general  economic  conditions,  changes  in  laws, 
regulations, and other factors. 
  
From time to time, our business may be affected by such matters as changes in general economic conditions, changes 
in  laws  and  regulations,  taxes,  tax  laws,  prices  and  costs,  and  other  factors  of  a  general  nature  which  may  have  an 
adverse effect on our business. 
  
Certain of our directors and  officers are also directors and/or officers and/or shareholders of potential competitors, 
giving rise to potential conflicts of interest. 
  
Several of our directors and officers are also directors, officers or shareholders of other companies. In particular, Mr. 
Robertson, Ms. El-Khatib, Ms. Robertson and Ms. Jane He are directors and/or officers of Linux Gold Corp., a public 
natural resource exploration company that shares office space and administrative staff with our company. We entered 
into an agreement with Linux Gold Corp. whereby we purchased 50% of the Fish Creek mineral claims. Some  of our 
directors and officers are engaged and will continue to be engaged in the search for additional business opportunities 
on behalf of other corporations, and situations may arise where these directors and officers will be in direct competition 
with us. Such associations may give rise to conflicts of interest from time to time. Such a conflict poses the risk that we 
may enter into a transaction on terms which could place us in a worse position than if no conflict existed. Conflicts, if 
any,  will  be  dealt  with  in  accordance  with  the  relevant  provisions  of  the  BCBCA.  Our  Board  has  resolved  that  any 
transaction involving a related party is required to be reviewed and approved by our Audit Committee. Our directors 
are required by law to act honestly and in good faith with a view to our best interests and to disclose any interest which 
they may have in any project or opportunity in respect of which we are proposing to enter into a transaction. 
  
Loss of any directors or officers. 
  
The loss of any directors or officers would adversely affect our results. We are wholly dependent at present upon the 
personal efforts and abilities of our officers and directors, who exercise control over our day-to-day affairs. The loss of 
any  director  or  officer  could  cause  significant  delays  in  our  carrying  on  business  or  hinder  our  ability  to  continue 
carrying on our business. 
  
Officers and directors may be indemnified against certain securities liabilities.  
  
Under the  BCBCA  we can indemnify any director, officer, agent and/or employee as to  those liabilities and on those 
terms and conditions as are specified in the BCBCA. Further, we may purchase and maintain insurance on behalf of any 
such persons whether or not we have the power to indemnify such person against the liability insured. The foregoing 
could  result  in  substantial  expenditures  by  us  and  prevent  any  recovery  from  such  officers,  directors,  agents  and 
employees for losses incurred by us as a result of their actions. We have been advised that in the opinion of the SEC,  
indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the U.S. Securities Act, and is, therefore, unenforceable.
Enforcement of Civil Liabilities 
  
As Canadian citizens and residents, our directors and officers may not be subject to U.S. legal proceedings, a result of 
which  is  that  recovery  on  judgments  issued  by  U.S.  courts  may  be  difficult  or  impossible.  While  reciprocal 
enforcement of judgment legislation exists between Canada and the U.S., our insiders may have defenses available to 
avoid, in Canada, the effect of U.S. judgments under Canadian law, making enforcement difficult or impossible. Our 
management may not have any personal assets available in the U.S. to satisfy judgments of U.S. courts. Therefore, our 
shareholders in the United States  may  have to avail themselves of remedies  under  Canadian corporate and securities 
laws for perceived oppression, breach of fiduciary duty and like legal complaints. Canadian law  may not provide for 
remedies equivalent  to those  available  under U.S. law.  A judgment of a U.S. court predicated solely upon such civil 
liabilities would probably be enforceable in Canada by a Canadian court if the U.S. court in which the judgment was 
obtained  had  jurisdiction,  as  determined  by  the  Canadian  court,  in  the  matter.  There  is  substantial  doubt  whether  an 
original action could be brought successfully in Canada against any of such persons or our company predicated solely 
upon such civil liabilities based on U.S. federal securities laws. 
  
Our mineral resources competitors have greater financial and technical measures and we may not be able to acquire 
additional attractive mineral properties on acceptable terms. 
  
Significant  and  increasing  competition  exists  for  mineral  opportunities  in  Canada  and  the  United  States.  There  are  a 
number  of  large  established  mineral  companies  with  substantial  capabilities  and  greater  financial  and  technical 
resources  than  us.  We  may  be  unable  to  acquire  additional  attractive  mineral  properties  on  terms  we  consider 
acceptable. Accordingly, our exploration programs may not yield any new reserves or result in any commercial mineral 
operations. 
  
We face strong competition from larger oil and gas companies, which could harm our business and ability to operate 
profitably. 
  
The oil and gas exploration and production business is highly competitive. Many of our competitors have substantially 
larger financial resources, staffs and facilities. Our competitors in the United States include numerous major oil and gas 
exploration  and  production  companies,  especially  major  oil  and  gas  companies  such  as  BP  Amoco,  Exxon/Mobil, 
Texaco/Shell and Conoco/Phillips. These major oil and gas companies are often better positioned to obtain the rights to 
exploratory acreage for which we may compete. If we are unable to adequately address our competition, including, but 
not  limited  to,  finding  ways  to  secure  profitable  oil  and  gas  producing  properties,  our  ability  to  earn  revenues  will 
suffer. 
  
As a “foreign issuer”, we are exempt from the Section 14 proxy rules and Section 16 of the Securities Act, which may 
result in shareholders having less complete and timely data. 
 
The submission of proxy and annual meeting of shareholder information (prepared to Canadian standards) on Form 6-
K  may  result  in  shareholders  having  less  complete  and  timely  data.  The  exemption  from  Section  16  rules  regarding 
sales of common shares by insiders may result in shareholders having less data. 
  
Recent  Disruptions  in  International  Credit  Markets  and  Other  Financial  Systems  and  Deterioration  of  Global 
Economic Conditions  
  
Since 2007, the U.S. credit markets experienced serious disruption due to a deterioration in residential property values, 
defaults and delinquencies in the residential mortgage market and a decline in the value and credit quality of mortgage-
backed securities. Other adverse events include delinquencies in non-mortgage consumer credit and a general decline 
in consumer confidence. These conditions worsened in 2008 and continued in 2009, contributing to reduced confidence 
in credit and financial markets around the world and the collapse of, and governmental intervention in, major financial 
institutions. Asset price volatility and solvency concerns have increased, and there has been less liquidity, a widening 
of  credit  spreads,  a  lack  of  price  transparency,  increased  credit  losses  and  tighter  credit  conditions.  Notwithstanding 
various  government  actions,  concerns  about  the  general  condition  of  the  capital  markets,  financial  instruments  and 
financial institutions persist, and stock markets have declined substantially. 
  
These market disruptions have had a significant material adverse impact on companies in many sectors of the economy 
and have limited access to capital and credit. These disruptions could, among other things, make it more difficult for us 
to  obtain,  or  increase  our  cost  of  obtaining,  financing  for  our  operations.  Failure  to  raise  capital  when  needed  or  on 
reasonable terms may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Additionally, these factors, as well as other related factors, may cause decreases in asset values that are deemed to be 
other  than  temporary,  which  may  result  in  impairment  losses.  If  these  factors  continue,  our  operations  could  be 
adversely impacted and the trading price of our common shares may be adversely affected. 
  
We are also exposed to liquidity risks in meeting our operating and capital expenditure requirements in instances where 
cash positions are unable to be maintained or appropriate financing is unavailable. These factors may impact our ability 
to obtain loans and other credit facilities  in the future and on  favourable terms. If  these increased levels of volatility 
and market turmoil continue, our operations could be adversely impacted and the trading price of the common shares 
could be adversely affected. 
  
Risk Factors Related to the Natural Resource Industry 
  
We face risks related to the exploration and potential development of our properties. 
  
The  exploration  and  development  of  mineral  deposits  involves  significant  risks.  It  is  impossible  to  ensure  that  the 
current  and  future  exploration  programs  and/or  feasibility  studies  on  our  existing  mineral  properties  will  establish 
reserves,  or  whether  any  of  our  exploration  stage  properties  can  be  brought  into  production.  Few  properties  that  are 
explored  are  ultimately  developed  into  producing  mines.  At  present,  none  of  our  properties  have  defined  ore  bodies 
with reserves and resources, and our proposed exploration programs are an exploratory search for ore. Whether an ore 
body will become commercially viable depends on many factors, including: the characteristics of the deposit, such as 
size,  grade  and  proximity  to  infrastructure;  metal  prices,  which  cannot  be  predicted  and  which  have  been  highly 
volatile in the past; mining, processing and transportation costs; and the willingness of lenders and investors to provide 
project financing; labour costs and possible labour strikes; and governmental regulations, including, without limitation, 
regulations  relating  to  prices,  taxes,  royalties,  land  tenure,  land  use,  importing  and  exporting  materials,  foreign 
exchange,  environmental  protection,  employment,  worker  safety,  transportation,  and  reclamation  and  closure 
obligations. 
  
We  are  also  subject  to  the  risks  normally  encountered  in  the  mining  industry,  such  as:  unusual  or  unexpected 
geological  formations;  natural  disasters;  power  outages  and  water  shortages;  cave-ins,  land  slides,  and  other  similar 
mining  hazards;  inability  to  obtain  suitable  or  adequate  machinery,  equipment,  or  labour;  and  other  known  and 
unknown risks involved in the operation of mines and the conduct of exploration. 
  
Substantial  expenditures  are  required  to  establish  reserves  through  drilling,  to  develop  metallurgical  processes  to 
extract  metal  from  ore  and  to  develop  the  mining  and  processing  facilities  and  infrastructure  at  any  site  chosen  for 
mining. Depending on the price of minerals, we may determine that it is impractical to commence, or, if commenced, 
continue exploration into commercial production. Such a decision would negatively affect our profits and may affect 
the value of our equity securities. 
  
We have no current mining operations and if we ever commence mining operations we face certain risks, any of which 
could result in our ceasing operations. 
  
We  have  no  current  mining  operations  and  no  revenue  from  mining  operations.  If  we  ever  commence  actual  mining 
operations,  such  operations  would  face  the  risk  of  changing  circumstances,  including  but  not  limited  to:  failure  of 
production  to  achieve  metal  recovery  levels  indicated  by  pre-production  testing  of  drill  core  and  bulk  samples; 
estimates  of  reserves  being  adversely  affected  by  encountering  unexpected  or  unusual  geological  formations; 
production costs being adversely affected by unforeseen factors such as substantial adverse changes in exchange rates 
or  changes  in  environmental  protection  requirements,  breakdowns  and  other  technical  difficulties,  slides,  cave-ins  or 
other  natural  disasters,  work  interruptions  or  labor  strikes;  the  grade  of  ore  actually  mined  being  lower  than  that 
indicated by drilling results; persistently lower  market prices of the products  mined than those used to determine the 
feasibility  of  mining  a  mineral  occurrence;  adverse  changes  in  interest  rates  that  may  apply  to  project  development 
debt. In addition, we have no experience in developing mining properties into production and its ability to do so will be 
dependent  upon  securing  the  services  of  appropriately  experienced  personnel  or  entering  into  agreements  with  other 
major mining companies which can provide such expertise. 
  
Our estimates of any mineral deposits on our properties may not change. 
  
Our estimates of any mineral deposits on our properties may not change. We have prepared all figures with respect to 
the  size  and  grade  of  mineralized  deposits  included  herein,  or,  in  some  instances  have  been  prepared,  reviewed  or 
verified by independent mining experts, these amounts are estimates only and any identified mineralized deposit may 
not ever qualify as a commercially viable mineable ore body that can be legally and economically exploited.
The prices of precious and base minerals and metals fluctuate widely and may not produce enough revenue to cover 
our costs. 
  
Even if commercial quantities of mineral deposits are discovered, a profitable market may not exist for the sale of the 
metals produced. Our long-term viability and profitability depend, in large part, upon the market price of metals which 
have experienced significant  movement over short periods of time,  and are affected by numerous  factors beyond our 
control,  including  international  economic  and  political  trends,  expectations  of  inflation,  currency  exchange 
fluctuations, interest rates and global or regional consumption patterns, speculative activities and increased production 
due  to  improved  mining  and  production  methods.  The  supply  and  demand  for  metals  is  affected  by  various  factors, 
including  political  events,  economic  conditions  and  production  costs  in  major  producing  regions.  The  price  of  any 
minerals produced from our properties may not be sufficient such that any such deposits can be mined at a profit. 
  
The seasonality in Alaska can be extreme and can cause interruptions or delays in our activities. 
  
Certain of our properties are located in Alaska. The  weather during the colder seasons in these areas can be extreme 
and can cause interruptions or delays in our activities. As a result, our activities in these regions are seasonal and the 
preferred  time  for  work  is  limited  to  the  spring  and  summer  when  costs  are  more  reasonable  and  access  to  the 
properties is easier. 
 
Our properties may be subject to unregistered agreements, transfers, or claims and title may be adversely affected. 
  
Our title opinions do not validate that we have good and marketable title to all of our properties. We follow the usual 
industry practice in obtaining title opinions with respect to our lands. No examination has been made of the ground to 
determine if any of our mineral claims have been staked or assessment work carried out. Our properties may be subject 
to unregistered agreements, transfers or claims and title and may be adversely affected by such undetected defects. If 
title is disputed, we may have to defend our ownership through the courts, and we cannot guarantee that a favourable 
judgment will be obtained. In the event of an adverse judgment with respect to any of our mineral properties, we could 
lose our property rights and may be required to cease our exploration and development activities on that property. 
  
Mineral operations are subject to government and regulatory approvals. 
  
Our operations require the procurement of numerous permits and compliance with an extensive number of codes and 
regulations. Mining, exploration and exploitation permits are required. Failure to comply with regulatory requirements 
could  result  in  permits  being  withdrawn  or  suspended  which  could  significantly  delay  our  mineral  exploration 
activities. 
  
We are subject to extensive and changing environmental legislation, regulation and actions. 
  
We  are  subject  to  extensive  and  changing  environmental  legislation,  regulation  and  actions  in  connection  with  our 
operations  and  properties.  We  cannot  predict  what  environmental  legislation,  regulation  or  policy  will  be  enacted  or 
adopted  in  the  future  or  how  future  laws  and  regulations  will  be  administered  or  interpreted.  The  recent  trend  in 
environmental legislation and regulation, generally, is toward stricter standards and this trend is likely to continue in 
the future. This recent trend includes,  without limitation, laws and regulations relating  to air and  water quality,  mine 
reclamation, waste handling and disposal, the protection of certain species and the preservation of certain lands. These 
regulations  may  require  the  acquisition  of  permits  or  other  authorizations  for  certain  activities.  These  laws  and 
regulations may also limit or prohibit activities on certain lands. Compliance with more stringent laws and regulations, 
as  well  as  potentially  more  vigorous  enforcement  policies  or  stricter  interpretation  of  existing  laws,  may  necessitate 
significant capital outlays, may materially affect our results of operations and business, or may cause material changes 
or delays in our intended activities. 
  
Our  operations  may  require  additional  analysis  in  the  future  including  environmental  and  social  impact  and  other 
related studies. We may  not be able to obtain or maintain  all necessary permits that  may be required to continue our 
operation or our exploration of our properties or, if feasible, to commence  development, construction or operation of 
mining facilities at such properties on terms which enable operations to be conducted at economically justifiable costs. 
  
Uncertainties and Risks Relating to Our Common Shares 
  
The Market Price of our Common Shares May Be Subject to Wide Price Fluctuations 
  
The  market  price  of  our  common  shares  may  be  subject  to  wide  fluctuations  in  response  to  many  factors,  including 
variations  in  our  operating  results,  divergence  in  financial  results  from  analysts’  expectations,  changes  in  earnings 
estimates by stock market analysts, changes in our business prospects, general economic conditions, changes in mineral
reserve or resource estimates, results of exploration, changes in results of  mining operations, legislative changes and 
other events and factors outside of our control. In addition, stock markets from time to time have experienced extreme 
price and volume fluctuations, which, as well as general economic and political conditions, could adversely affect the 
market price for our common shares. 
  
We are unable to predict whether substantial amounts of common shares will be sold in the open market. Any sales of 
substantial  amounts  of  common  shares  in  the  public  market  or  the  perception  that  such  sales  might  occur,  could 
materially and adversely affect the market price of our common shares. 
  
We  may  be  a  Passive  Foreign  Investment  Company,  which  may  result  in  material  adverse  US  federal  income  tax 
consequences to US investors.  
  
Investors in our common shares that are U.S. taxpayers should be aware that we may be a passive foreign investment 
company under Section 1297(a) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (a “PFIC”). If we are or become a PFIC, generally 
any  gain recognized on the  sale of our common shares and any excess distributions (as specifically defined) paid on 
our common shares must be ratably allocated to each day in a U.S. taxpayer’s holding period for our common shares. 
The amount of any such gain or excess distribution allocated to prior years of such U.S. taxpayer’s holding period for 
our  common  shares  generally  will  be  subject  to  U.S.  federal  income  tax  at  the  highest  tax  applicable  to  ordinary 
income in each such prior year, and the U.S. taxpayer will be required to pay interest on the resulting tax liability for 
each such prior year, calculated as if such tax liability had been due in each such prior year. 
  
Alternatively, a U.S. taxpayer that makes a qualified electing fund (a “QEF”) election with respect to their investment 
generally will be subject to U.S. federal income tax on such U.S. taxpayer’s pro rata share of our net capital gain and 
ordinary earnings, (as specifically defined and calculated under U.S. federal income tax  rules), regardless of  whether 
such amounts are actually distributed by us. U.S. taxpayers should be aware, however, that there can be no assurance 
that  we  will  satisfy  record  keeping  requirements  under  the  QEF  rules  or  that  we  will  supply  U.S.  taxpayers  with 
required information under the QEF rules, in the event that we are a PFIC and a U.S. taxpayer wishes to make a QEF 
election.  As  a  second  alternative,  a  U.S.  taxpayer  may  make  a  .market-to-market  election.  if  we  are  a  PFIC  and  our 
common shares are .marketable stock (as specifically defined). A U.S. taxpayer that makes a market-to-market election 
generally will include in gross income, for each taxable year in which we are a PFIC, an amount equal to the excess, if 
any,  of  (a)  the  fair  market  value  of  our  common  shares  as  of  the  close  of  such  taxable  year  over  (b)  such  U.S. 
taxpayer’s adjusted tax basis in our common shares. 
  
Our common shares are considered penny stocks and are subject to the Penny Stock Rules 
  
Since  our  common  shares  are  not  listed  on  a  national  stock  exchange  or  quoted  on  the  NASDAQ  Market  within  the 
United  States,  trading  in  common  shares  on  the  OTCBB  is  subject,  to  the  extent  the  market  price  for  the  common 
shares is less than $5.00 per share, to a number of regulations known as the “penny stock rules”. The penny stock rules 
require  a  broker-dealer  to  deliver  a  standardized  risk  disclosure  document  prepared  by  the  SEC,  to  provide  the 
customer with additional information including current bid and offer quotations for the penny stock, the compensation 
of  the  broker-dealer  and  its  salesperson  in  the  transaction,  monthly  account  statements  showing  the  market  value  of 
each penny stock held in the customer’s account, and to make a special written determination that the penny stock is a 
suitable  investment  for  the  purchaser  and  receive  the  purchaser’s  written  agreement  to  the  transaction.  To  the  extent 
these  requirements  may  be  applicable  they  will  reduce  the  level  of  trading  activity  in  the  secondary  market  for  our 
common shares and may severely and adversely affect the ability of broker-dealers to sell our common shares. 
  
Our directors, officers and their related companies collectively own approximately 13.76% of our common shares and, 
if they act together, may have the ability to act, or prevent corporate actions, to the detriment of other shareholders. 
  
A limited number of shareholders collectively own a majority of our common shares and may act, or prevent corporate 
actions,  to  the  detriment  of  other  shareholders.  These  principal  shareholders,  including  members  of  our  board  of 
directors, officers and entities affiliated with members of our directors and officers, will own more than 13.76% of our 
outstanding  common  shares  on  a  diluted  basis.  Accordingly,  these  shareholders  may,  if  they  act  together,  exercise 
significant  influence  over  all  matters  requiring  shareholder  approval,  including  the  election  of  a  majority  of  the 
directors  and  the  determination  of  significant  corporate  actions.  This  concentration  could  also  have  the  effect  of 
delaying or preventing a change in control that could be otherwise beneficial to our shareholders. 
  
No Dividends 
  
The payment of dividends on our common shares is within the discretion of the Board and will depend upon our future 
earnings,  our  capital  requirements,  our  financial  condition,  and  other  relevant  factors.  We  do  not  currently  intend  to 
declare any dividends on our shares for the foreseeable future.
INFORMATION ON THE COMPANY
History and Development of the Company
Business Overview
ITEM 4. 
  
A. 
  
Our company was incorporated in British Columbia, Canada, by registration of our memorandum and articles under the 
British Columbia Company Act (since replaced by the BCBCA) on May 23, 1980, under the name “Candy Mountain 
Gold Corporation”. We changed our name to “Teryl Resources Corp.” effective February 28, 1984. 
  
Our  corporate  offices  and  our  registered  and  records  offices  are  located  at  Suite  240  -  11780  Hammersmith  Way, 
Richmond, BC V7A 5E9, Canada. Our telephone  number is 604-278-5996. Since our inception and during the three 
fiscal  years  ending  May  31,  2014,  our  principal  business  has  been  the  acquisition,  exploration  and  development  of 
natural  resource  properties,  and  the  acquisition,  drilling  and  development  of  oil  and  gas  property  interests.  We 
currently  have  mineral  property  interests  in  Alaska  and  British  Columbia.  All  of  our  mineral  properties  are  in  the 
exploration stage. We are in the exploration stage and equity financing is required to continue exploration work on our 
mineral claims and oil and gas interests. As a result of the uncertainty that is typical for an explorative company there 
is doubt about our ability to continue as going concern as ultimate success will be based on securing adequate equity 
financing  and/or  the  determination  of  economically  recoverable  mineral  reserves  on  its  mineral  property  claims  or 
recoveries on our oil and gas interests. 
  
B. 
  
Mineral and Exploration Properties 
  
We are an exploration stage company and there is no assurance that a commercially  viable mineral deposit exists on 
any  of  our  properties.  Further  exploration  will  be  required  before  a  final  evaluation  as  to  the  economic  and  legal 
feasibility is determined. 
  
If we complete our current exploration programs and if we are successful in identifying a mineral deposit, we will have 
to spend substantial funds on further drilling and engineering studies before we will know if we have a commercially 
viable mineral deposit or reserve on any of our properties. 
  
Gil Venture Claims, Fairbanks Mining District, Alaska 
  
We owned a 20% interest in 237 claims located in the Gilmore dome area of Fairbanks district of Alaska, known as the 
Gil  Venture  mineral  property.  Effective  December  21,  2011  we  executed  the  Asset  Sale  and  Purchase  Agreement  to 
sell all of our 20% interest in the Gil Venture property to Fairbanks Gold Mining, Inc. (“Fairbanks”). Fairbanks granted 
to  the  Company  a  production  royalty  equal  to  1%  of  net  smelter  returns  on  all  production  from  the  property  up  to 
US$15,000,000, after which the royalty is equal to 0.5% of the net smelter returns on all production from the property. 
On December 19, 2011 Fairbanks paid the Company US$2,500,000 as an advance payment of the production royalty. 
An  additional  advance  payment  of  royalty  of  US$1,500,000  will  be  paid  to  the  Company  upon  commencement  of 
commercial production from a mine constructed on the property. 
  
West Ridge Claims, Fairbanks Mining District, Alaska 
  
We own a 100% in the West Ridge mineral claims subject to a 1% net smelter return to the State of Alaska. 
  
Fish Creek Claims, Fairbanks Mining District, Alaska 
  
In  March  2002,  we  acquired  from  Linux  Gold  Corp.,  a  company  with  common  directors,  an  option  to  earn  a  50% 
interest in the thirty Fish Creek claims, located in the Fairbanks Mining District in Alaska, by expending $500,000 US 
within  three  years  and  the  issuance  of  200,000  common  shares,  which  shares  were  issued  in  December  2002.  An 
additional 100,000 shares were issued in February 2007 in payment for an extension of the date on which expenditures 
were  required  to  be  completed  to  March  5,  2007,  which  date  was  further  extended  with  amended  agreements.  On 
December 1, 2011 the Company and Linux further amended the agreement to include the following terms:
●  Linux  applies  $75,000  owed  by  the  Linux  to  the  Company  towards  the  above  stated  minimum  exploration
budget of US$500,000;
●  The  Company  has  an  option  to  pay  the  expenditures  for  the  Fish  Creek  property  in  cash  in  lieu  of  the
exploration costs to the Company; and
●  The term of the agreement is extended to March 5, 2013.
Effective March 5, 2013, we completed the expenditure of $500,000 on exploration on Fish Creek property and cash 
payments made in lieu of exploration and the purchase of its interest in the Fish Creek property in accordance with the 
option agreement. 
  
Silverknife Claims, Liard Mining Division, British Columbia  
  
Pursuant to agreements between Reg Technologies Inc. (“Reg”), SMR Investments Ltd. (“SMR”), Rapitan Resources 
Inc.  (“Rapitan”),  and  Chevron  Minerals  Ltd.  (“Chevron”),  the  Company  acquired  a  30%  working  interest  in  the 
Silverknife mineral claims, situated in the Liard Mining Division in the Province of British Columbia, subject to a 10% 
Net Profit Royalty (“NPR”) to Rapitan and a 1% Net Smelter Returns to SMR. On December 21, 2010 the Company 
purchased the 10% NPR in the Silverknife property from Rapitan for consideration of 200,000 common shares of the 
Company issued at a fair value of $32,000 on January 25, 2011. 
  
Oil and Gas Properties 
  
Fayette and Burleson Counties, Texas 
  
The Company owns a 6.5% working interest in the Peters No. 1 Well, in Fayette County, Texas, a 4.992380% interest 
in  the  C-S  #1  wells,  a  0.131510%  interest  in  Jancik  #2  wells  and  a  7.5%  interest  in  Herrmann  #4  wells,  located  in 
Burleson County, Texas.  The carrying cost of these wells has been completely depleted. During the fiscal year ended 
May 31, 2014 revenue of US$8,668 were recorded from the Texas properties compared to revenues of US$15,168 for 
the fiscal year ended May 31, 2013. 
  
Knox and Laurel Counties, Kentucky 
  
We  entered  into  agreements  with  IAS  Energy,  Inc.,  a  company  with  common  directors,  to  purchase  40%  interests 
(subject to 40% net revenue interests to others), in the Ken Lee #1 natural gas well for $103,045 ($92,500 US), in the 
Elvis Farris #2 natural gas well for $104,461 ($92,500 US), and in the Clarence Bright #1 natural gas well for $104,673 
($92,500  US).  All  three  wells  are  located  in  Knox  and  Laurel  Counties,  Kentucky.  During  the  year  ended  May  31, 
2009 we wrote off the carrying costs of the wells to $Nil since the wells have no proven economic reserves. 
  
Description of the Markets in Which We Compete 
  
We do not have a market in which we compete, as we operate in an extractive industry. However, the mining industry 
in which we operate is highly competitive due to significant and increasing competition for exploration opportunities. 
Many of our oil and gas exploration and production competitors business have substantially larger financial resources, 
staffs and facilities. 
  
Competition 
  
Significant  and  increasing  competition  exists  for  mining  exploration  opportunities  available  in  North  America  and 
elsewhere  in  the  world.  Competitors  include  well-capitalized  mining  companies,  independent  mining  companies  and 
other companies having financial and other resources far greater than ours. 
  
We compete with a number of other companies, including major oil companies and other independent operators which 
are  more  experienced  and  which  have  greater  financial  resources.  Such  companies  may  be  able  to  pay  more  for 
prospective  oil  and  gas  properties.  Additionally,  such  companies  may  be  able  to  evaluate,  bid  for  and  purchase  a 
greater number of properties and prospects than our financial and human resources permit. We do not hold a significant 
competitive position in the mining or oil and gas industries. 
  
Seasonality 
  
Due to the northern climate, exploration work in some areas of Alaska can be limited due to excessive snow cover and 
cold temperatures. In general, surface sampling  work is limited to May through  September and surface drilling  from 
March through November. 
  
Sources and Availability of Raw Materials 
  
We do not have a reliance on raw materials, as we operate in an extractive industry. 
  
Marketing Strategy
We do not have any plans for a marketing strategy at this time. 
  
Dependency upon Patents/Licenses/Contracts/Processes 
  
Not applicable. 
  
Material Effects of Government Regulation 
  
Mineral Exploration  
  
Exploration  and  development  activities  require  permits  from  various  foreign,  federal,  state  and  local  governmental 
authorities.  To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  we  are  operating  in  compliance  with  all  applicable  environmental 
regulations. 
  
Our  current  and  anticipated  future  operations,  including  further  exploration  activities,  require  permits  from  various 
state and other governmental agencies. Such operations are subject to various laws governing land use, the protection 
of the environment, production, exports, taxes, labor standards, occupational health, waste disposal, toxic substances, 
well safety and other matters. Unfavorable amendments to current laws, regulations and permits governing operations 
and activities of oil and gas and resource exploration companies, or more stringent implementation thereof, could have 
a  materially  adverse  impact  on  us  and  cause  increases  in  capital  expenditures  which  could  result  in  our  ceasing 
operations.  We  have  had  no  material  costs  related  to  compliance  and/or  permits  in  recent  years,  and  anticipate  no 
material costs in the next year. 
  
Oil and Gas Exploration 
  
Our  oil  and  gas  operations  are  subject  to  various  types  of  regulation  at  the  federal,  state  and  local  levels.  Such 
regulation includes the requirement for permits for the drilling of wells; maintaining bonding requirements in order to 
drill or operate wells; implementing spill prevention plans; submitting notification and receiving permits relating to the 
presence, use and release of certain materials incidental to oil and gas operations; and regulating the location of wells, 
the  method  of  drilling  and  casing  wells,  the  use,  transportation,  storage  and  disposal  of  fluids  and  materials  used  in 
connection  with  drilling  and  production  activities,  surface  usage  and  the  restoration  of  properties  upon  which  wells 
have  been  drilled,  the  plugging  and  abandoning  of  wells  and  the  transporting  of  production.  Our  operations  are  also 
subject to various conservation matters, including the regulation of the size of drilling and spacing units or pro-ration 
units, the number of wells which may be drilled in a unit, and the unitization or pooling of oil and gas properties. In 
this regard, some states allow the forced pooling or integration of tracts to facilitate exploration while other states rely 
on  voluntary  pooling  of  lands  and  leases,  which  may  make  it  more  difficult  to  develop  oil  and  gas  properties.  In 
addition,  state  conservation  laws  establish  maximum  rates  of  production  from  oil  and  gas  wells,  generally  limit  the 
venting or flaring of gas, and impose certain requirements regarding the ratable purchase of production. 
  
We  believe  that  our  operations  comply  in  all  material  respects  with  applicable  laws  and  regulations  and  that  the 
existence and enforcement of such laws and regulations have no  more restrictive an effect on our operations than on 
other similar companies in the energy industry. We do not anticipate any material capital expenditures to comply with 
federal and state environmental requirements. 
 Plan of Operations 
  
Source of Funds for Fiscal 2015 
  
We had a working capital of $224,771 at May 31, 2014, compared to working capital of $709,573 at May 31, 2013. 
  
Our  primary  source  of  funds  since  incorporation  has  been  through  the  issuance  of  equity  securities.  We  have  been 
successful in the past in acquiring capital through the issuance of shares of our common stock and through advances 
from  related  parties.  Although  we  intend  to  continue  utilizing  these  sources,  there  is  no  assurance  that  these  sources 
and methods would continue to be available in the future. 
  
In accordance with the Asset Purchase and Sale Agreement effective December 21, 2011 the Company sold all of its 
20% interest in the Gil Venture property to Fairbanks. Fairbanks granted to the Company a production royalty equal to 
1% of net smelter returns on all production from the property up to US$15,000,000, after which the royalty is equal to 
0.5%  of  the  net  smelter  returns  on  all  production  from  the  property.  On  December  19,  2011  Fairbanks  paid  the 
Company US$2,500,000 as an advance payment of the production royalty. An additional advance payment of royalty 
of  US$1,500,000  will  be  paid  to  the  Company  upon  commencement  of  commercial  production  from  a  mine 
constructed on the property.  The timing and amounts of additional royalty payments are not certain as at the date of 
this report.
Organizational Structure
Property, Plants and Equipment
In  our  present  circumstances,  there  exists  doubt  as  to  our  ability  to  continue  as  a  going  concern,  since  there  is  no 
ongoing  source  of  revenues  and  profits  capable  of  sustaining  our  operating  overhead.  Over  the  longer  term,  we  will 
need to either begin to derive revenues from our existing resource-based assets, or find and enter into a business which 
holds the prospects of ensuring that we can continue as a going concern. Management is aware of such need and is both 
researching new business opportunities and assessing potential financing possibilities for funding our existing resource 
property obligations and also any new business which may be entered into or acquired. 
  
Anticipated Changes to Facilities/Employees 
  
We anticipate there will not be any changes to either facilities or employees in the near future. 
  
C. 
  
We  hold  a  100%  interest  in  Teryl,  Inc.,  a  private  Delaware  corporation,  incorporated  on  November  17,  1988,  and 
registered to do business in the USA. Teryl, Inc. holds the Alaska mineral property interests and Texas and Kentucky 
oil and gas well interests. 
  
D. 
  
Our properties are in the exploration stage and a substantial amount of capital will have to be spent on each property 
before  we  will  know  if  they  contain  commercially  viable  mineral  deposits.  Our  material  properties  are  located  in 
Alaska. Our properties are without known reserves and the work being done by us is exploratory in nature. 
  
Our  executive  offices  are  located  in  rented  premises  in  a  commercial  business  park  located  in  Richmond,  British 
Columbia,  Canada,  a  suburb  of  Vancouver.  The  space  is  shared  with  several  other  companies  which  share  common 
management. The annual rent and utilities for our portion of this 2,200 square foot space paid during 2014 was $34,507 
(2013  -  $32,984).  We  have  occupied  these  facilities  since  November  1,  2006.  These  facilities  are  believed  to  be 
adequate  for  meeting  our  needs  for  the  immediate  future.  If  required  in  the  future,  we  do  not  anticipate  that  we  will 
have any difficulty in obtaining additional space at favorable rates. There are no current plans to purchase or otherwise 
acquire any properties in the near future. 
  
Mineral Properties 
  
The following are descriptions of our material mineral properties. 
  
Fish Creek Claims 
  
The  Fish  Creek  Claims  are  30  mining  claims  comprising  1,032  acres,  known  as  the  Fish  Creek  Prospect,  located  25 
miles north of Fairbanks in the Fairbanks Mining District in Alaska. The claims are legally maintained by recording an 
affidavit of annual labor for a minimum expenditure of $100 per claim ($3,000 total) and by paying annual rental to the 
State of Alaska in the amount of $130 per claim ($3,900 total). All mechanized exploration activity must be permitted 
by the Alaska Division of Mining, Alaska Department of Fish and Game, and the U.S. Corps of Engineers. Water can 
be  withdrawn  from  Fish  Creek  to  support  exploration  activities  with  oversight  from  the  Alaska  Department  of 
Conservation.  Currently,  we  are  permitted  to  conduct  exploration  by  drilling.  To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  we  are 
operating in compliance with all applicable environmental regulations. There currently are no unusual social, political 
or environmental encumbrances to mining on the project. We currently hold a valid exploration permit on the project. 
Additional  permits  for  future  work  will  be  acquired  from  the  Division  of  Mining,  Alaska  Department  of  Fish  and 
Game, and the U.S. Corps of Engineers on an as-needed basis. 
  
The Fish Creek project is located in an important mining district with permissive land status and excellent road access 
to the property. Currently, there are only primitive trails developed within the property to access exploration sites. The 
project is located within metamorphic and plutonic host rocks that are similar in composition and age to rock units that 
contain commercially viable mineralization elsewhere in the Fairbanks Mining District. The property is also located on 
a drainage that  was  mined extensively  for alluvial  gold in  the past both upstream and downstream of the  Fish  Creek 
project.  Limited  exploration  conducted  between  1992  and  2003  did  not  reveal  significant  bedrock  exposures  of 
mineralization,  however,  very  widely  spaced  placer  drilling  over  a  large  area  of  the  property  conducted  in  1996 
indicated  the  presence  of  placer  gold  in  the  alluvial  deposits.  More  extensive  and  closer  spaced  placer  gold  drilling 
conducted in 2004 confirmed the presence of significant concentrations of placer gold on the claims. 
  
The following map shows the location of and access to the property.
There  currently  are  no  resources  or  reserves  on  the  Fish  Creek  property  that  comply  with  the  Canadian  Institute  of 
Mining  and  Metallurgy  (CIM)  Standards  on  Mineral  Resources  and  Reserves  Definitions  and  Guidelines  adopted by 
CIM Council on August 20, 2000. 
  
Additional  work  on  the  Fish  Creek  property  will  be  based  on  results  from  the  previous  drilling  programs.  Each 
successive phase of exploration is dependent on generation of encouraging results from the previous programs and the 
increasing potential for delineation of commercially viable resources on the project. 
  
As we announced on March 6, 2013, we received the budget for a reverse circulation drill program from Metallogeny, 
Inc., general contractor in Fairbanks, Alaska, consisting of placer and lode drilling to identify targets, on the Fish Creek 
property  this  spring.  On  April  10,  2013,  we  appointed  Pete  Rutledge,  Geologist,  as  an  independent  contractor  to 
supervise the drilling on the Fish Creek property. 
  
On May 14, 2013, we announced that a contract was signed with Metallogeny, Inc., to drill six holes to test an intrusive 
target,  on  the  Fish  Creek  property.  Paul  D.  Gray,  P.Geo.,  is  the  qualified  person  as  defined  in  NI  43-101  and  also 
qualified under the rules stated by the SEC. 
  
On January 22, 2014, we provided an update on the 2013 gold exploration drilling program on our Fish Creek project.  
 
The Fish Creek Claim Block consists of 35 State of Alaska Mining Claims located adjacent to the operating Fort Knox 
Gold Mine claim block and the Gil hardrock gold deposit claim block. 
 
The  purpose  of  the  exploration  drilling  program  conducted  the  2013  season  on  the  Fish  Creek  Claim  Block  was 
twofold;  (1)  to  verify  and  identify  a  placer  gold  deposit  in  the  deepest  reaches  of  the  Fish  Creek  Valley  and  (2)  to 
verify  and  identify  hardrock  intrusive  hosted  gold  deposits  from  information  performed  by  previous  explorationists 
who worked on the property. The program managed by Pete Rutledge Project Manager and overseen by Paul D. Gray, 
P.Geo.,  the  Company’s  Qualified  Person  and  was  supported  by  two  contract  drilling  entities  that  were  logistically 
supported  by  Metallogeny  Inc.,  of  Fox,  Alaska.  The  drilling  contractors  were  CNC  Drilling  led  by  Forrest  Cooper 
using  a  track  mounted  Prospector  1  drill rig,  and  an  independent  contractor  using  a  Boyle  Brothers  System  Model  1 
(BBS1)  drill  rig  mounted  on  a  flatbed  transported  by  a  low  pressure  tracked  vehicle  called  a  Bombardier  J-5.  Both 
drilling contractors were under time constraints to operate due to weather and ground conditions because the activity 
had  to  be  completed  before  winter  break-up  as  a  condition  of  the  access  permit  issued  by  the  Alaska  Department  of 
Natural  Resources.  Drilling  results  under  strict  chain  of  custody  procedures  reveal  minor  visible  placer  gold  in  the 
placer drilling and the hard rock drilling indicated the presence of disseminated anomalous silver and base metal values
in a stockwork quartz  veining system in  silicified rocks at  continuous intervals over several holes. Further drilling  is 
warranted  to  define  the  empirical  data  obtained  that  indicates  conditions  of  precious  metal  lode  deposits.  The  gold 
placer potential is recommended to be evaluated by conventional bulk sampling techniques standard to the industry. 
 
The placer drilling completed three holes two of which were completed to bedrock. The first hole identified as UFL-
L1- H1 encountered decomposed Fairbanks Schist bedrock at the bottom of the hole at 57 feet. The second hole UFL- 
L1-  H2  bottomed  out  at  62  feet  and  material  recovered  consisted  of  decomposed  Fairbanks  Schist  and  possibly 
decomposed granodiorite (intrusive rock) that was bleached out. The samples collected consisted of organic peat, fine 
sands,  mud,  loess,  sub  angular  to  sub  rounded  rock  fragments,  decomposed  schist  and  minor  decomposed  intrusive 
rock that may have been stream transported cobbles or silicified schist. The third hole UFL-L1-H3 was abandoned at a 
shallow  depth  due  to  winter  break-up  conditions.  The  material  recovered  consisted  of  organic  peat  moss,  loess  and 
muds. The organics, loess and mud were not sampled for assay but the entire holes were screened and concentrated and 
hand  panned  by  the  project manager.  The  assay  results  from  Acme  Labs  revealed  no  precious  or  base  metals  except 
two small minor flakes of gold in the first hole were visibly identified by the project manager and were undetected in 
the  assay  certificate  by  Acme  Labs.  Heavy  minerals  in  the  pan  concentrates  were  garnet  and  very  minor  amounts  of 
magnetite. 
 
The hard rock drilling completed four holes named UFL-2, UFC Forrest H-2, UFC Forrest H-3 and UFC Forrest H-4 
all drilled by Forrest Cooper of CNC Drilling under independent contract (Forrest). The first hole UFL-2 twins (located 
immediately adjacent) to a reverse circulation hole drilled by a previous contractor in  2004 labeled on-site as UFL-1- 
H-3. Observations of the aluminum tag placed at the hole indicated that intrusive rocks were encountered at 57 feet but 
the 2013 diamond core drilling by Forrest did not reveal anything but non-silicified Fairbanks Schist at 96.5 feet to 109 
feet (29.1 metres to 33.22 metres). 
 
The second hole drilled by Forrest was targeted on a geophysical anomaly suggesting shallow intrusive rocks and was 
named  UFC  Forrest  H-2.  Silicified  granodiorite  (?)  with  disseminated  sulfides  in  stockwork  quartz  veining  was 
encountered  at  68.5  feet  (20.88  metres)  and  continued  to  the  bottom  of  the  hole  at  100  feet  (30.48  metres).  No 
significant precious or base metal anomalies were identified in the assay reports (samples 1920116 to 1920126). 
 
The third hole drilled was stepped out approximately 100 feet (30.48 metres) southeast of UFC Forrest H-2 and  was 
named UFC Forrest H-3. Black gouge appearing rock containing visible sponging copper sulfides were observed at 50 
feet to 56 feet (15.24 metres to 17.07 metres) with elevated silver at 50 to 51.5 feet (15.24 metres to 15.70 
metres) assaying at 0.6 opt Silver (21 g/t Ag) (sample # 1920128). At the 56 foot to 63.5 foot (15.70 to 19.35 metre) 
interval decomposed Fairbanks Schist (?) with quartz stockwork veining with an elevated silver sample assaying out as 
0.16  opt  (5.75  ppm)  was  identified  (Sample  #  1920131).  Minor  Calc-Silicate  in  decomposed  Fairbanks  Schist  was 
encountered at the 77.5 foot to 88 foot (23.47 to 26.82 metre) interval. 
 
The  fourth  and  final  hole  drilled  for  this  project  was  stepped  out  approximately  another  100  feet  (30.48  metres) 
southeast of UFC Forrest H-3 and was named UFC Forrest H-4. Recovered core samples encountered suspect bleached 
granodiorite with insignificant mineralization (samples 1920137-1920138). The hole was terminated at 61 feet (18.59 
metres) due to winter break-up requiring mobilizing out of equipment and personnel due to thawing ground conditions. 
See table 1 below for a complete log of the drill hole results 
 
Recommendations  for  future  work  suggest  expand  scout  drilling  on  geophysical  anomalies  for  lode  potential  and 
conventional placer gold exploration involving either sonic drilling or trenching and bulk sampling. 
 
Additional drilling on known geophysical anomalies for lode potential is recommended on the Fish Creek property.
Table (1)  Drill Logs and Assay Results For Fish Creek Alaska Drilling Project for Teryl Resources 
Sample no. 
opt
Drill Core Descriptions
ppm
ppb
Pathfinder 
elements
From  
(in Feet)
to
Diamond Drill Core Hole Name: UFL-2 
1920101
43.5
48
Decomposed Fairbanks Schist, 
hereafter “DFS.”
1920102
48
55
As Above, hereafter “AA.”
1920103
55
60
AA
1920104
60
65
AA
1920105
66
76.5.  AA
1920106
76.5
87
AA
1920107
87
96.5  AA
1920108
96.5
101
Silicified  FS
1920109
101
109
DFS, minor silicification
1920110
109
118
DFS some FeOx grus 
Bottom of hole
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu
17.1 
564
40.2 
496
3.9 
206
<0.2 
42
2.7 
75
2.8 
141
2.4 
73
1.1 
43
6 
152
8.8 
162
.56 
5.2 
8.08 
63.8 
22.6
.50 
6.9 
8.72 
52.1 
23.4
3.9 
7.35 
79.6 
18.0
0.5 
14.3 
85.4 
35.6
0.6 
8.94 
102 
37
0.7 
11.6 
95.1 
51.6
2.7 
10 
92.1 
36.5
1.8 
10.5 
88.9 
33
5.9 
13.4 
74.8 
27
4
9.6 
34 
14.9
gpt
Diamond Drill Core Hole Name: UFC Forrest H2 
1920111
30.5  Mixed FS & grav
21
1920112
0
0
Brown’s Hill Quarry 
BLANK Basalt
1920113
30.5
42
Random hand selections of 
DFS
1920114
42
58
AA
1920115
58
66
Crumpled/crushed fine grained, 
bleached different from above
1920116
66
68.5  AA, more fine grained bleached
1920117
68.5
69
Silicified granodiorite 
stockwork quartz veining with 
visible sulfides.
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
C
u 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu
1.7 
27
0
<0.2 
10
1.5 
69
1.5 
69
0.9 
1220
0.6 
65
2.6 
7.62 
27.5 
11.0 
0
1.7
4.61 
30 
14.9
3.8 
14 
56.3 
28.1
3.8 
14.4 
56.3 
28.1
1.22 
10.2 
24.8 
77.9 
20.7
12 
2.49 
50.7 
27.9
1920118
69
72
AA
1920119
72
74
AA
1920120
74
76
AA
1920121
76
84
AA
1920122
84
86
AA
1920123
86
92
AA
1920124
92
96
AA with altered stockwork 
quartz veining
1920125
96
98
AA
1920126
98
100
AA
Bottom of hole
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu
<0.2 
76
<0.2 
113
<0.2 
141
<0.2 
69
<0.2 
264
<0.2 
386
<0.2 
240
<0.2 
35
0.5 
31
18 
13.7 
66.2 
3.7
4.3 
15.9 
68.5 
31.6
0.6 
24.7 
97.7 
50.7
3.6 
14.8 
90.7 
23.9
0.6 
9.1 
92 
23.9
0.1 
9.46 
49.9 
45.9
1.1
10.8 
69.3 
31.2
0.2 
11.3 
63.2 
18.1
0.5
5.3 
54.4 
27.3
Diamond Drill Core Hole Name: UFC Forrest H3 
1920127
DFS
46
50
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
51.5  Black gouge with visible spongy  Au 
Ag 
As
copper sulfides: see photo of 
hand specimen
1920128
50
1920129
51.5
54
AA
1920130
54
56
AA
1920131
56
63.5  DFS  with stockwork quartz
veining
1920132
63.5
67
AA
1920133
67
77.5  AA
1920134
77.5
88
Some minor calc-silicate mostly 
DFS
1920135
88
94.5  DFS
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu
0.6
0.16
0.5 
31
0.4 
21018
<0.2 
127
<0.2 
174
0.5 
5750
0.8 
168
0.6 
74
<0.2 
174
0.5 
5.32 
54.4 
27.3
21 
10.2
14.1 
68.7 
110
7.5 
18.6 
74.4 
39.6
1 
12 
61.3 
20.3
5.75 
4.9 
14.3 
64 
38.5
0.7 
16.5 
54 
19.5
0.3 
12.8 
60.8 
26.2
1.8
12 
59 
22.7
0.5 
5750
1920136
94.5
100
DFS to bottom of hole
Diamond Drill Core Hole Name: UFC Forrest H4
1920137
43
51.5  mixed up poorly sorted sub
angular DFS
1920138
51.5
61
fine grained suspect intrusive 
bleached granodiorite.
Bottom of hole due winter 
break-up
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu 
Au 
Ag 
As 
Pb 
Zn 
Cu
0.8 
168
0.9 
36
0.3 
46
0.5 
15.8 
45 
14.6
0.5
6.2 
25.3 
13
2.1 
3.16 
69.2 
72.3
All  technical  information  related  to  drill  and  surface  samples  for  the  project  has  been  reviewed  and  approved  by 
Paul D. Gray, P.Geo,  who is a Qualified Person  under the definitions  established by Canadian National Instrument 
43-101.  Drill core is boxed and stored at a secure location. 
 
All collected samples were split by the project geologist at the Company’s Fairbanks processing facility, with half 
core  sent  to  Acme  Analytical  Laboratories  preparation  facility  in  Fairbanks,  Alaska  where  samples  were 
sorted  and  crushed  to  appropriate  particle  size  (pulp)  and  representatively  split  to  a  smaller  size  for 
shipment  to  Acme's  Vancouver  analysis  facility  for  final  assay  via  ACME  Group  1F01-37element  ICP-MS 
analysis  with  an  aqua  regia  digestion. 
 
Teryl’  quality  assurance/quality  control  (QA/QC)  procedures  include  the  regular  use  of  blanks,  standards,  and 
duplicate samples. 
 
West Ridge Claims 
  
The West Ridge Property of 48 mineral claims comprises approximately 5,200 acres and is a road accessible gold 
prospect located in the Fairbanks Mining District of Alaska. Creeks in the area such as Dome, Fox, Steamboat, and 
Flume creeks have been mined extensively for placer gold in  the past. Limited past gold exploration in the 1990’s 
through  2003  indicate  shear  and  intrusive  hosted  gold  mineralization  at  the  Old  Glory  Prospect,  Black  Dome 
Prospect, East Anomaly, West Anomaly and the Moose Creek Anomaly within the West Ridge Property. The True 
North  Mine  of  Fairbanks,  a  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of  Kinross  Gold  Corporation  via  a  100%  ownership  of  the 
True  North  Venture,  is  located  approximately  3.5  kilometers  (two  miles)  to  the  northeast  of  the  West  Ridge 
Property. 
  
The 48 West Ridge mineral claims are located in the Dome Creek area of the Fairbanks district of Alaska. The West 
Ridge property adjoins Kinross Gold Corp.’s True North gold deposit and lies approximately eight miles northwest 
of the producing Fort Knox gold mine. 
  
As  we  announced  on  March  2,  2012,  we  applied  for  an  exploration  program  permit  to  drill  five  targets  on  the 
Westridge property. The 2012 Westridge Exploration Program was designed to test both the placer and lode targets 
located within the claim block. Previous lode exploration has identified 5 targets within the Westridge Area. Lode 
targets included:
1.  Old  Glory  Prospect  -  This  prospect  is  a  shear  and  intrusive  hosted  anomaly  located  along  a  northeast-
southwest  fault.  The  >50ppb  gold-in-soil  anomaly  is  90  meters  x  90  meters  punctuated  by  a  1,155  ppb
gold-in-soil  sample.  Three  trenches  and  two  drill  holes  have  tested  the  prospect.  The  best  drill  intercept 
consisted of 10 meters of 1.6 g/t Au from 121 to 131 meters. The anomaly remains open in all directions 
and had not been thoroughly tested.
2.  Black Dome Prospect - This prospect is located along the same fault that forms the southern boundary of 
the True North Deposit. Gold mineralization consists of carbon-rich, Fe-stained schist and eclogite similar 
to the True North Deposit. Past exploration was limited.
3.  West Anomaly - The West anomaly covers an area of approximately 1,220 meters (4,000 feet) NW-SE by 
914  meters  (3,000  feet)  NE–SW  and  is  defined  by  coincident  gold  and  arsenic-in-soils  results.  Drilling 
consisted of 5 drill holes totaling 1,650 feet  with gold intersections reported at values  up to 6 meters (20 
feet) of gold grading 0.93 g/t Au.
4.  East Anomaly - The East anomaly extends along a general northeast trend for 2,230 meters (7,000 feet) and 
represents values from trace up to 1.64 ppm Au in soil Drill results from 5 holes are not currently available.
5.  Moose Creek Anomaly - This anomaly is on trend with the West Anomaly and has not been drill tested.
Mineral exploration consisted of up to 610 meters (2,000 feet) of shallow core drilling utilizing a narrow diameter 
AQ core drill to initially test lode targets on the Old Glory Prospect and Moose Creek Anomaly. On positive results, 
a larger scale reverse circulation drill program will be conducted. 
  
The total cost to complete all two phases of exploration (610 meters lode and 180 meters placer) was estimated to be 
$200,000. 
  
We  announced  on  March  11,  2013  that  the  additional  exploration  and  drilling  on  the  Westridge  property  was 
recommended as follows:
1.  Drilling:  Additional  drilling  is  recommended  for  the  Old  Glory  Prospect  area.  The  drilling  should  be 
designed  to  intersect  northeast-trending,  northwest-dipping  intrusive  dikes  and  structural  zones  by 
completing  a  series  of  drill  holes  along  northeast  fences,  with  each  drill  hole  drilled  to  a  depth  of 
approximately  500ft.  Angle  drill  holes,  dipping  -60  degrees  and  oriented  towards  the  southeast,  are 
suggested  at  each  of  the  proposed  drill  collar  locations.  In  addition  to  these  proposed  angle  drill  holes,  a 
drill  fan  consisting  of  both  angle  and  vertical  drill  holes  is  suggested  for  several  key  drill  sites  to  help 
delineate strike and dip of mineralized zones and other geological features. In addition to these drill fences, 
at least one deep vertical hole (approximately 2,000ft) is suggested to test the possibility of a deeply buried 
mineralized stock similar to the Dolphin stock. Although diamond core drilling is preferred, RVC drilling, 
or  a  combination  of  both,  could  be  used  for  the  drill  fences,  however,  diamond  core  drilling  would  be 
required for deep drilling.
2.  Auger  soil  sampling:  Additional  auger  soil  sampling  is  recommended  to  expand  the  existing  soil  grid 
centered on the Old Glory Prospect. Specifically, additional sampling should be completed to the west, east 
and north of the existing soil grid.
3.  Trenching:  Additional  trenches  are  recommended  in  the  Old  Glory  Prospect.  These  trenches  will  help 
delineate  the  postulated  northeast-trending  dike  complex  and  associated  gold  mineralization.  Detailed 
mapping  and  sampling  of  trench  floors  will  help  identify  and  project  structural  zones  which  possibly 
influence  structurally  controlled  gold  mineralization  in  this  area.  Several  short  “scoop”  trenches  are 
recommended at some of the significant gold-anomalous soil sample sites on the west side of the soil grid. 
Chip  channel  sampling  of  trench  floors  should  be  completed  at  five  foot  intervals,  as  well  as  select  rock 
grab sampling, for all trench excavations.
4.  Reconnaissance  rock  sampling  and  geologic  mapping:  Additional  rock  grab  sampling  and  geologic 
mapping  traverses  are  recommended  for  the  entire  property.  This  work  should  be  designed  to  fulfill  the 
need  for  basic  prospecting  and  creating  a  basic  geologic  map  for  the  property,  which  is  an  essential 
component of creating a predictive model for gold mineralization on the property.
5.  Geophysical  surveys:  Geophysical  surveys  could  potentially  be  used  to  map  structural  features  and 
magnetic rocks, but are considered a lower priory at this time. Induced polarization methods could be used 
to  identify  water-saturated  fault  zones  and  zones  containing  fine  grained  disseminated  sulfides.  These 
methods are relatively expensive, and thus additional surface sampling and mapping is  needed beforehand 
to better target the geophysical surveys.
On April 10, 2013, we appointed Pete Rutledge, Geologist, as an independent contractor to evaluate the Westridge 
claims. 
  
The Silverknife Property 
  
The Silverknife Property lies in a well mineralized and historically important precious and base metals exploration 
intensive region. The Silverknife Property hosts a known  historic prospect (the  Silverknife Prospect)  with defined 
Ag-Pb-Zn  mineralization  within  2km  of  Silvercorp’s  active  Silvertip  Ag-Pb-Zn  deposit.  The  Silverknife  Property 
represents  a  prospective  target  for  precious  and  base  metals  mineralization  genetically  related  to  the  Silvertip 
deposit. 
  
The  silver-zinc-lead  mineralization  defined  to  date  on  the  Silverknife  Property  is  interpreted  to  be  a  distal, 
stratigrpahically lower zone than the Silvertip deposit and more proximate to the Cassiar Batholith (heatsource). The 
most  relevant  targets  for  mineral  exploration  on  the  Property  are  associated  chimney-type  feeder  systems  and 
mantos related to the Silvertip mineralizing event. 
  
On  March  22,  2012  we  announced  that  a  one  year  exploration  extension  had  been  submitted  to  the  Ministry  of 
Energy and Mines of BC. The original permit was granted on June 21, 2011. 
  
On April 20, 2012 the Company and Minewest Silver and Gold Inc. (“Minewest”), a former 100% owned subsidiary 
of Reg Tech to which Reg Tech spun off 100% of its interest in the Silverknife claims, entered into an Exploration, 
Development  and  Mine  Operating  Agreement  (the  “Exploration  Agreement”)  until  the  completion  of  mining  and 
environmental restoration on the Property with initial participation interests of 70% and 30% for Minewest and the 
Company respectively. The Exploration Agreement was approved by the TSX.V on September 7, 2012. 
  
Under the terms of the Exploration Agreement, the initial participating interest (a “Participating Interest”) of each of 
Minewest and the Company in the Joint Venture will be equal to their respective current interests. The operations of 
the Joint Venture will be managed by a manager (the “Manager”) with Minewest acting as the initial Manager of the 
Joint  Venture  and  remaining  as  such  for  as  long  as  its  Participating  Interest  is  50%  or  more.  The  Exploration 
Agreement also provides for a management committee (the “Management Committee”) comprised of one member 
from the minority interest, currently Teryl, and two members from the majority interest holder, currently Minewest, 
the purpose of which will be to determine the overall policies, objectives, procedures, methods and actions under the 
Agreement. 
  
The  Exploration  Agreement  provides  for  an  initial  2012  exploration  program  in  the  amount  of  approximately 
$360,000. Future exploration programs are subject to approval by the Management Committee. Participants of the 
Joint  Venture  must  fund  all  exploration  programs  in  amounts  proportionate  with  their  Participating  Interest  and 
failure  to  do  so  will  decrease  a  participant’s  Participating  Interest  on  a  pro-rata  basis.  If  a  Participating  Interest 
decreases to less than 10%, the relevant participant will be deemed to have assigned and conveyed its Participating 
Interest to the other participant. 
  
The Agreement also contains a customary pre-emptive right pursuant to which a participant intending to transfer all 
or  part  of  its  Participating  Interest  must  provide  the  other  participant  with  notice  and  the  option  to  purchase  such 
interest. 
  
On October 3, 2012, the Company and Minewest announced that the first phase of exploration on the silver, lead, 
zinc prospect in the Liard Mining District in B.C. had been completed.
The  exploration  crew  re-boxed  the  core  from  the  diamond  drilling  completed  in  1985  through  1987.  101  core 
samples were collected, split and/or quartered (where applicable) and submitted for chemical analysis by Multielemt 
ICP. 
  
The  critical  high  grade  silver/lead/zinc  sections  were  re-logged  and  submitted  for  assays.  Where  practicable  and 
possible,  additional  core  on  either  side  of  the  mineralized  zones  were  sent  for  analysis  to  determine  if  Ag-Zn-Pb 
mineralization extends beyond original sampling boundaries. 
  
A detailed on-the-ground survey of all locatable historic drill collars was completed which will greatly aid a modern 
3D  geological  modeling  the  Company  intends  to  conduct  after  all  2012  confirmation  analyses  are  received.  Such 
studies will be utilized by the management to target potential mineralization extensions on the Silverknife Property 
for testing by diamond drilling in 2013. 
  
The  Property  boundary  between  Silverknife  property  and  Silvercorp  Metals  Inc.  immediately  adjacent  Silvertip 
Property was located, surveyed and flagged in. 
  
The 1,000 metre drilling program initially planned for summer 2012 was delayed due to a washout of the Silvertip 
Mine access road (and the Silverknife Property) in early June, 2012. 
  
On November 14, 2012 the Company and Minewest announced that analytical results from the 2012 Silverknife Ag-
Zn-Pb  core  re-sampling  project  in  north  central  B.C.  have  been  received  and  compiled  by  the  Company  and 
confirmed historically reported mineralization. Additionally, the 2012 program had defined high priority drill targets 
for a fully permitted 2013 diamond drilling program targeting extension to the known Ag-Zn-Pb mineralization. 
  
During the course of the 2012 Silverknife program, the Project was accessed and the 25+ year old core storage site 
was  re-established  with  all  recoverable  core  re-boxed,  re-logged,  and  where  practicable  mineralized  intervals  and 
proximal area were re-sampled. It is estimated that 85% of the historic core was resurrected and restored. Specific 
representative  intervals  of  Ag-Zn-Pb  mineralization  were  selected  for  detailed  Inspection  and  any  germane 
previously sampled intersections of core were quartered and previously un-sampled core intervals were halved. Due 
to core loss and degradation  over the intervening  years, exact duplication of previously  sampled intervals  was not 
always possible, where practicable however, the 2012 sampling was conducted on systematic 1 metre intervals. 
  
The  2012  core  re-Iogging  and  re-sampling  program  confirmed  the  grade  and  tenor  of  mineralization  previously 
identified on the Silverknife Project with grades from trace to 21.19 ounces/ton (726.8 ppm) Ag with an average of 
1.79  ounces/ton  (61.36  ppm)  Ag;  trace  to  16.48%  Zn  with  an  average  of  1.99%  Zn;  trace  to  10.98%  Pb  with  an 
average  of  0.87%  Pb;  and  from  trace  to  1.1  ppm  Au.  A  comparison  of  the  historic  analytical  results  to  the  2012 
analytical  results  do  not  show  an  exact  1:1  ration,  however  owing  to  the  style  of  mineralization  (coarse  grained 
sphalerite and galena) and the disparate analytical techniques and sampling intervals, this variation Is expected. 
  
It was noticed by Company geologists during the re-Iogging of the core that where visible Ag-Zn-Pb mineralization 
was identified, a corresponding drop in core recovery was common. This observation is exceedingly valuable, as this 
rack of core recovery within mineralized sections is indicative of a potential understatement of grade. The Company 
is confident that armed with this information, more care can be taken when drill testing these areas, and potentially 
with such care reported grades will increase. 
  
In total 101 core samples  were collected and submitted for assay to Inspectorate Exploration and Mining Services 
Inc., of Richmond. BC, an ISO 9001:2008 certified laboratory. Samples  were shipped by Company consultants to 
Inspectorate’s  Whitehorse,  YT  preparation  facility  where  samples  were  sorted  and  crushed  to  appropriate  particle 
size  (pulp)  and  representatively  split  to  a  smaller  size  for  shipment  to  Inspectorate’s,  Richmond,  B.C.  analysis 
facility.  Assay procedures consisted of 30 element Inductively  Coupled Spectrophotometry (ICP) following  multi-
acid  digestion  as  well  as  standard  fire  assay  for  gold,  with  atomic  adsorption  (AA.)  finish.  When  overlimits  were 
reported,  Inspectorate’s  Ore-Grade  analyses  for  Ag,  Pb,  and  Zn;  respectively,  was  utilized.  Assay  standards  were 
inserted into the sample stream as part of the Silverknife OA/OC program. 
  
A  detailed  GPS  survey  of  the  historic  Silverknife  “Discovery”  drill  out  was  conducted  during  the  2012  program 
coincident with an updated Silverknife mineral claim Boundary survey. With the data collected and compiled from
OPERATING AND FINANCIAL REVIEW AND PROSPECTS
the  2012  program,  the  Company  will  now  intends  to  digitize  the  historic  drilling  data  and  model  the  Silverknife 
mineralization with the help of 3D geological modeling software. This work will allow the Company to define the 
extent  of  the  defined  mineralization,  target  2013  drill  holes  and  focus  exploration  efforts  on  extending  and 
expanding the Silverknife Ag-Zn-Pb mineralization through diamond drilling. 
  
An updated 43-101 report on Silverknife property is being prepared by Paul Gray our qualified geologist. 
 
ITEM 4A.    UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS 
  
Not applicable. 
  
ITEM 5. 
  
The  following  discussion  of  our  financial  condition,  changes  in  financial  condition  and  results  of  operations  as  at 
May 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and 
related notes included herein. Unless expressly stated otherwise, all references to dollar amounts in this section are 
Canadian dollars. 
  
A. 
  
A comparison of the results of operations for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 are as follows: 
  
Year Ended May 31, 2014 as compared to Year Ended May 31, 2013 
  
We incurred a net loss of $460,909 during the year ended May 31, 2014, compared to a net loss of $608,659 during 
the  year  ended  May  31,  2013.  The  decrease  in  loss  from  2013  was  due  primarily  to  managements’  efforts  to 
streamline operations by reducing consulting, management and promotion fees as well as a reducing office expenses 
and employee costs.   
  
Operating expenses that significantly changed from 2013 to 2014 are as follows:
In 2013, we recorded stock based compensation costs of $ 47,757 for options granted and vested during the 
year; in 2014 we did not grant options or have options vested so recorded $Nil stock based compensation 
cost.
Operating Results
●
●  Consulting,  management and directors’ fees  were  reduced in 2014 to $209,402, compared to $220,706 in
2013 as we strived to save costs in 2014.
●  Secretarial  and  employee  benefits  decreased  from  $60,223  in  2013  to  $47,119  in  2014  along  with  a
reduction in office expenses from $38,680 in 2013 to $31,990 as we strive to save costs in 2014.
●  Publicity, promotion and investor relations costs decreased significantly from $104,023 in 2013 to $48,552
in 2014 as we continued to utilize more cost effective communication and in-house services in 2014.
During 2014 we recorded interest income of $8,856 compared to $17,133 in 2013 as our interest earning short-term 
investment  decreased  from  2013  to  2014;  our  net  proceeds  from  the  oil  and  gas  well  production  decreased  from 
$8,976 in 2013 to $3,619 in 2014.  
 
During 2013 we recorded equipment write-off of $3,916 as some of our old office equipment was no longer in use. 
We  did  not  record  equipment  write-off  in  2014.  During  2013  we  recorded  reclamation  bond  write-off  of  $2,978, 
which did not incur in 2014. 
 
Year Ended May 31, 2013 as compared to Year Ended May 31, 2012 
  
We incurred a net loss of $608,659 during the year ended May 31, 2013, compared to a net loss of $766,330 during 
the  year  ended  May  31,  2012.  The  decrease  in  loss  from  2012  was  due  to  loss  on  sale  of  mineral  property  of 
$376,928 recorded in 2012. 
  
Operating expenses that significantly changed from 2012 to 2013 are as follows:
●
In 2013, we incurred geological consulting fees of $5,212 that were not applicable to any specific property; 
in 2012 we did not incur such geological consulting fees;
●  Consulting,  management and directors’ fees  were recorded at $220,706 in 2013 compared to $139,899 in
2012, as we increased our exploration activities and related administrative support.
●  Professional fees decreased from $52,908 in 2012 to $42,729 in 2013, as we incurred higher legal fees on
mineral property exploration contracts in 2012;
●  Secretarial and employee benefits increased from $33,852 in 2012 to $60,223 in 2013 due to our increased
administrative support in 2013;
●  Publicity,  promotion  and  investor  relations  costs  decreased  significantly  from  $127,511  in  2012  to
$104,023 as we continue to utilize more cost effective communication services;
●  Travel,  auto  and  entertainment  increased  from  $8,789  in  2012  to  $17,674  in  2013,  due  to  our  increased
activities in exploration and related support.
●  Stock-based compensation increased significantly  from $1,897 in 2012 to $47,757 in 2013 as  we  granted
more stock options in 2013.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
During 2013 we recorded interest income of $17,133 compared to $3,286 in 2012, and net proceeds from the oil and 
gas well production of $8,976 compared to $19,232 in 2012. 
   
B. 
  
As of May 31, 2014, we had a cash position of $243,154, compared to $822,119 as at May 31, 2013, representing a 
decrease of $578,965. As of May 31, 2014, we had a working capital of $224,771, compared to a working capital of 
$709,573 as at May 31, 2013. 
  
During the year ended May 31, 2014 we used $467,915 in operations compared to $426,696 during the year ended 
May 31, 2013. 
 
During the year ended May 31, 2014 we used $106,546 in our investing activities compared to $507,706 in 2013. 
  
On July 4, 2012 we received the approval from the TSX-V on a normal course issuer bid (“NCIB”) to purchase up 
to 10% of the issued and outstanding common shares of the Company on the open market. During the year ended 
May 31, 2013 we used $145,065 to purchase 2,427,000 common shares; during the year ended May 31, 2014, we 
used $3,200 to purchase 427,000 common shares.  
  
All of our mineral properties are at the early exploration stages. We do not expect to generate significant revenues in 
the near future and may continue to rely upon the sale of equity securities to raise capital at reasonable share prices. 
Fluctuations in our share price may affect our ability to obtain future financing and the rate of dilution to existing 
shareholders. 
  
We  have  no  funding  commitments  or  arrangements  for  additional  financing  at  this  time  and  there  is  no  assurance 
that  we  will  be  able  to  obtain  any  additional  financing  on  terms  acceptable  to  us,  if  at  all.  Any  additional  funds 
raised  will  be  used  for  general  and  administrative  expenses,  to  carry  out  exploration  programs  on  our  mineral 
properties, and for the acquisition of a property or properties, as applicable. The quantity of funds to be raised and 
the terms of any equity financing that may be undertaken will be negotiated by management as opportunities to raise 
funds arise. 
  
C. 
  
Not applicable. 
  
D. 
  
Not applicable. 
  
E.
Research and Development, Patents and Licenses, Etc.
Trend Information
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
Safe Harbor
Tabular Disclosure of Contractual Obligations
We do not utilize off-balance sheet arrangements. 
  
F. 
  
We did not enter into material contractual obligations during the year ended May 31, 2014. 
  
G. 
  
This  annual  report  includes  “forward-looking  statements”  within  the  meaning  of  the  Private  Securities  Litigation 
Reform Act of 1995. Such forward-looking statements may include capital and operating costs, prices of silver and 
gold and other known and unknown risks. These and other factors and uncertainties may cause material differences 
from future results as expressed or implied by these forward looking statements. These risks, uncertainties and other 
factors include but are not limited to the risks involved in the exploration and development of a mining and oil and 
gas business. 
  
All statements, other than statements of historical facts, included in this annual report that address activities, events 
or developments which we expect or anticipate will or may occur in the future are forward-looking statements. The 
words  “believe”,  “intend”,  “expect”,  “anticipate”,  “project”,  “estimate”,  “predict”  and  similar  expressions  are  also 
intended to identify forward-looking statements. 
  
Our estimated or anticipated future results or other non-historical facts are forward-looking and reflect our current 
perspective  of  existing  trends  and  information.  These  statements  involve  risks  and  uncertainties  that  cannot  be 
predicted  or  quantified,  and  consequently  actual  results  may  differ  materially  from  those  expressed  or  implied  by 
such forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, among others, the success of our exploration 
and  development  activities,  environmental  and  other  regulatory  requirements,  foreign  exchange  issues,  mineral 
deposit estimates and mineral prices, competition by other mining or oil and gas companies, financing risks, mineral 
title  issues,  insider  conflicts  of  interest,  political  stability  issues,  and  other  risks  and  uncertainties  detailed  in  this 
report and from time to time in our other SEC filings. 
  
Consequently,  all  of  the  forward-looking  statements  made  in  this  annual  report  are  qualified  by  these  cautionary 
statements. We cannot assure you that the actual results or developments anticipated by us will be realized or, even 
if substantially realized, that they will have the expected effect on us or our business or operations. 
  
Forward-looking statements are based on expectations, estimates and projections at the time the statements are made 
that involve a number of risks and uncertainties which could cause actual results or events to differ materially from 
those presently anticipated 
  
Forward-looking statements are subject to a variety of risks and uncertainties in addition to the risks referred to in 
“Risk Factors” above.
Directors and Senior Management
DIRECTORS, SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND EMPLOYEES
ITEM 6. 
  
A. 
  
As of May 31, 2014 and the date of this report, our Board consisted of five directors, of whom two are independent 
non-executive directors. 
  
The following table provides certain information about the members of our Board and our executive officers as of 
October 1, 2014.
Date of First Election or
Name
Position with the Company
Appointment
John G. Robertson
President, CEO, Chairman and
October 25, 1982
Suzan El-Khatib 
Susanne Robertson  
Thomas Robertson 
Thomas Parkhill 
Jane He
Director  
   Director  
   Director  
   Director 
   Director  
   CFO and Corporate Secretary
April 29, 2011 
   September 12, 1990 
   January 4, 2010 
   January 9, 2013 
   February 25, 2011
Senior management serve at the pleasure of the Board. Each director holds office until the next annual meeting of 
shareholders unless his or her office is earlier vacated in accordance with the Articles and/or the BCBCA, or unless 
he or she becomes disqualified to act as a director. 
  
John  Robertson  has  been  President,  CEO,  Chairman  of  the  Board,  Corporate  Secretary  and  a  director  of  Linux 
Gold Corp. (“Linux”) since  March 1979. Linux is a British Columbia  mineral exploration company quoted on the 
OTC  BB.  He  has  been  the  Chairman,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  REGI  U.S.,  Inc.  (“REGI”),  an 
Oregon corporation since July 1992. REGI is an Oregon corporation engaged in the development of a rotary engine/ 
compressor  (“Rand  Cam  Engine”)  and  is  quoted  on  the  OTC  BB.  Since  October  1984,  Mr.  Robertson  has  been 
President and a director of Reg Technologies Inc. (“Reg”), a British Columbia corporation listed on the TSX.V, and 
quoted  on  the  OTC  BC,  that  has  financed  the  research  on  the  Rand  Cam  Engine  since  1986.  He  has  been  the 
President,  CEO  and  a  director  of  IAS  Energy,  Inc.  (“IAS”)  since  its  formation  in  December  1994.  IAS  is  a  U.S. 
public  company  engaged  in  the  acquisition  and  exploration  of  oil  and  gas  interests  in  North  America.  Since  June 
1997,  Mr.  Robertson  has  been  President,  CEO  and  a  director  of  Information  Highway.com,  Inc.,  an  inactive 
reporting  Florida  corporation.  Since  May  1977,  Mr.  Robertson  has  been  President  and  a  director  of  SMR 
Investments  Ltd.  (“SMR”),  a  private  British  Columbia  corporation  engaged  in  management  of  public  companies. 
Mr. Robertson is also the President and a director of the following private companies: JGR Petroleum, Inc. (since 
July  1991),  Access  Information  Services,  Ltd.  (since  September  1993),  394754  B.C.  Ltd.,  dba  SOVO  Computer 
Centre (since October 1990), Pavlik Travel Services Ltd. (since November 2000), International Diamond Syndicate 
Ltd.  (since  May  1993),  KLR  Enterprises  Inc.  (since  1999),  Rainbow  Networks  Inc.  (since  2000),  Rand  Energy 
Group  Inc.  (since  1993),  540330  B.C  Ltd.  (since  April  1997),  Airstream  Communications,  Inc.  (since  June  2000) 
and Minewest Silver and Gold Inc., a reporting issuer in BC (since 2010). Mr. Robertson is a citizen and resident of 
Canada.  
  
Susanne Robertson  has been a principal of SMR Investments,  Ltd.  since 1979. She  has been a director of  Linux 
since 2001, and a director of Reg since 1984. Ms. Robertson is a citizen and resident of Canada. 
  
Thomas Robertson has been a corporate development and investor relations consultant for US and Canadian public 
companies since 2005. 
  
Suzan  El-Khatib  -  Ms.  El-Khatib  has  been  a  director  since  April,  2011.  Ms.  El-Khatib  began  her  career  at  Bull, 
Housser Tupper LLP and moved on to a boutique firm before joining Wiebe Douvelos Wittmann LLP. She advises 
and acts for both individual and corporate clients on a broad variety of matters including corporate governance and 
commercial litigation. Ms. El-Khatib has experience as a corporate solicitor and as a litigator, appearing at all levels 
of court. She is a current  member of the Law Society of British Columbia, the  Canadian Bar Association, and the
Compensation
Trial Lawyers Association of British Columbia. Ms. El-Khatib has been a director of Linux Gold Corp. since April, 
2011 and a director of Reg Technologies Inc. since April, 2011. 
  
Jane He has been the CFO since February 25, 2011. She has more than ten years’ experience in fund accounting in 
the financial industry. Ms. He  has been the CFO of Minewest Silver and Gold Inc. since October, 2010.  She is in 
charge of daily business transactions and accounting for the company. 
  
Thomas Parkhill has been a director of the Company since January 9, 2013. Mr. Parkhill is a licensed professional 
geologist with the State of Minnesota. He has recently participated in field work for copper, precious metals, coal, 
humate,  uranium  and  diamonds  in  Arizona,  New  Mexico,  Nevada,  Colorado,  Utah,  Namibia,  South  Africa  and 
Indonesia.  His  work  included  literature  research,  petrographic  work,  mineral  identification,  mineral  property 
evaluations, prospect generation and detailed geologic field mapping.  
 
There are no family relationships between the directors and senior officers, other than John Robertson and Susanne 
Robertson, who are married, and Thomas Robertson who is the son of John Robertson. 
  
B. 
  
Compensation Discussion & Analysis 
  
Given our current size and stage of development, our Board has  not appointed a  formal  compensation committee, 
however  it  is  board  policy  that  management  directors  are  required  to  abstain  from  voting  in  respect  of  their  own 
compensation  thereby  providing  the  independent  members  of  the  Board  with  considerable  input  as  to  executive 
compensation.  The  Board’s  compensation  philosophy  is  aimed  at  attracting  and  retaining  quality  and  experienced 
people  with  established  records  in  managing  and  maintaining  public  companies  which  is  critical  to  our  success. 
These key persons create the framework for future success and later will share in any success of our company. Such 
a  reward  system  supports  our  commitment  to  delivering  strong  performance  for  our  shareholders.  At  the  present 
time we do not have a compensation program in place for our executive officers or directors, as is evidenced by the 
Summary Compensation Table below. 
  
The Board reviews on an annual basis the corporate goals and objectives relevant to executive compensation, and 
determines if a compensation package should be implemented. The Board also takes into consideration our overall 
performance,  shareholder  returns,  the  value  of  similar  incentive  awards  to  executive  officers  at  comparable 
companies  and  the  awards  given  to  executive  officers  in  past  years.  There  are  currently  no  plans  to  implement  a 
compensation package for fiscal 2015. 
  
Summary Compensation Table  
  
The following table sets out certain information respecting the compensation paid to the CEO and CFO and the three 
most highly compensated executive officers, other than the CEO and CFO, for the year ended May 31, 2014 whose 
total compensation was more than $150,000. These individuals are referred to collectively as the “NEOs”.
Non-equity incentive 
plan compensation
Long-
term
incentive
Pension
All other
Total
compensation
Compensation
($)
Name and 
Principal 
Position
John G. 
Robertson, 
(1)  
Chief 
Executive 
Officer 
Jane He, 
Chief 
Financial 
Officer
Year 
ended 
May
Salary
31
($)
Option 
based
Shared 
awards(2) 
awards
($)
($)
2014 
2013 
2012
33,200 
36,000 
19,000
Nil  
Nil  
Nil
Nil
20,603
Nil
2014 
2013 
2012
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Nil  
2,060
Nil
Annual 
incentive
plan 
($)
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
plan 
($)
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
value
($)
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
($)
30,000 
30,000 
30,000
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
63,200 
86,603 
49,000
Nil
2,060
Nil
(1)  Mr.  Robertson  received  $33,200  as  the  chief  executive  officer  and  a  director  of  the  Company  and  SMR 
Investments Ltd, a private company controlled by Mr. Robertson was paid $30,000 during the year ended 
May 31, 2014 for management services.
(2)  The valuation of the fair value of the options at the time of the grant is based on the Black Scholes model 
and  includes  the  following assumptions;  weighted  average risk  free  rate,  weighted  average  expected  life, 
expected volatility and dividend yield.
Option-based Awards  
  
Our executive officers, as well as directors, employees and consultants, are eligible to participate in our stock option 
plan to receive grants of stock options. Individual stock options are granted by the Board as a whole and the size of 
the options is dependent on, among other things, each officer’s level of responsibility, authority and importance to 
our company and the degree  to  which such officer’s long term contribution to our company  will be crucial to our 
long-term success. 
  
Stock options are normally granted by the Board when an executive officer first joins our company based on his or 
her  level  of  responsibility  within  our  company.  Additional  grants  may  be  made  periodically  to  ensure  that  the 
number  of  options  granted  to  any  particular  officer  is  commensurate  with  the  officer’s  level  of  ongoing 
responsibility within our company. The Board also evaluates the number of options an officer has been granted, the 
exercise price of the options and the term remaining on those options when considering further grants. Options are 
usually priced at the closing trading price of our shares on the business day immediately preceding the date of grant 
and the current policy of the Board is that options expire five years from the date of grant. 
  
We  have  a  formalized  stock  option  plan  for  the  granting  of  incentive  stock  options  to  the  officers,  employees, 
consultants and directors. 
  
Option/SAR Grants during the Most Recently Completed Financial Year 
  
The  following  table  sets  out  all  stock  option-based  awards  granted  to  the  executive  officers  and  outstanding  as  of 
May 31, 2014.
Option-based Awards
Stock-based Awards
Number of 
securities 
underlying 
unexercised
options
Option 
exercise
price
Value of
unexercised 
in-the-money
Option
options
(#)
1,000,000 
1,000,000 
100,000  
100,000
($) 
   0.10 
0.10 
   0.10 
0.10
expiration date     
June 21, 2017  
  
May 28, 2018 
June 21, 2017  
May 28, 2018
($) 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
Number of  
shares or  
units of
Market or
payout value  
of share-based
shares that
awards that
have not 
vested
(#)
750,000 
750,000 
75,000 
75,000
have not
vested
($)*
11,417 
9,186 
1,142 
918
Name
John Robertson
Jane He
* Calculation using Black Scholes model upon grant 
  
Pension Plan Benefits  
  
We do not have any pension, retirement or deferred compensation plans, including defined contribution plans. 
  
Termination and Change of Control Benefits  
  
We have not entered into any compensatory plans, contracts or arrangements  with any of our NEOs whereby such 
officers  are  entitled  to  receive  compensation  as  a  result  of  the  resignation,  retirement  or  any  other  termination  of 
employment of the NEO or from a change in control or a change in the NEO’s responsibilities following a change in 
control. 
  
Employment Contracts  
  
Pursuant  to  a  management  agreement  dated  May  1,  1996,  we  engaged  SMR  Investments  Ltd.  to  provide  general 
management  services  at  a  monthly  compensation  of  $2,500.  SMR  is  a  private  company  which  is  controlled  by 
Susanne Robertson, a director and the spouse of John Robertson, our President. Mr. Robertson is also a director and 
officer of SMR. The agreement may be terminated at any time by the mutual consent of the parties. 
  
Compensation of Directors  
  
The  following  table  sets  forth  all  compensation  provided  to  the  directors  during  the  year  ended  May  31,  2014,  in 
their capacity as directors. 
  
We do not pay our directors a fee for their services as such. Directors are entitled to be reimbursed for reasonable 
expenditures incurred in performing their duties as directors, and we may, from time to time, grant incentive stock 
options to purchase common shares to our directors. 
  
The  following  disclosure  excludes  John  G.  Robertson’s  compensation  in  his  capacity  as  a  director,  as  he  is  an 
executive officer whose compensation is disclosed above under “Summary Compensation Table”.
Fees
Option-
Based 
Awards
Share-
Based 
Awards  
($)(2) 
  
   Nil 
   Nil 
   Nil 
   Nil
Earned  
  
($) 
   Nil 
   Nil 
   Nil 
   Nil
($) 
   Nil 
   Nil 
   Nil 
   Nil
Non-Equity
Pension 
Value
Incentive Plan 
Compensation  
  
($) 
   Nil 
   Nil 
   Nil 
   Nil
($) 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
All Other
Total
Compensation  
  
($) 
   Nil 
   Nil 
   Nil 
   Nil
($) 
Nil (1) 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Name
Susanne Robertson 
Thomas Parkhill 
Suzan El-Khatib 
Thomas Robertson 
  
(1)  Mrs.  Robertson  is  a  shareholder  of  SMR  Investments  Ltd.,  which  is  paid  $2,500  per  month  for  management 
services provided for the Company by Mr. John Robertson, who is also a shareholder of SMR Investment Ltd. 
No fees were paid to Mrs. Robertson.
(2)  The valuation of the fair value of the options at the time of the grant is based on the Black Scholes model and 
includes the following assumptions; weighted average risk free rate, weighted average expected life, expected 
volatility and dividend yield.
Board Practices
Other  than  John  Robertson,  the  directors  are  not  compensated  for  their  services  in  their  capacity  as  directors, 
although directors are reimbursed for their expenses incurred in connection with their services as directors. 
  
Directors are also entitled to  participate in our  stock option plan,  which is designed to  give each option  holder an 
interest in preserving and maximizing shareholder value in the longer term. Individual grants are determined by an 
assessment of each individual Director’s current and expected future performance, level of responsibilities and the 
importance of his/her position and contribution to our company.  
  
C. 
  
Our Board consists of five members, the terms of which expire at the general meeting of shareholders to be held in 
each year. The information regarding the term each director has served in office in “Item 6.A – Directors and Senior 
Management” is hereby incorporated by reference in response to this Item 6.C. Directors are elected by a majority of 
the votes of our common shares present in person or represented by proxy at our annual meeting of shareholders and 
entitled to vote at such election. Each director will hold office until his or her term expires or until he or she resigns. 
Executive  officers  serve  at  the  discretion  of  the  Board.  Officers  are  elected  at  the  annual  meeting  of  the  directors 
held immediately after the annual meeting of shareholders. The directors hold regularly scheduled meetings at which 
members of management are not in attendance. 
  
None of our directors have entered into service contracts with us or any of our subsidiaries that provide for benefits 
upon their termination as a director. 
  
We have granted and intend to continue to grant stock options to employees, directors, officers and consultants on 
terms and conditions established by the Board at the time of the grant and in accordance with our stock option plan 
and prevailing TSX.V policy. Except as disclosed above under “Compensation of Directors”, our  directors do not 
receive any monies for serving in their capacity as Directors and there is currently no arrangement for the payment 
of any compensation in the future. 
  
We have the following committees of the Board: 
  
Audit Committee  
  
The Board of directors has determined that it does not have a member that qualifies as an “audit committee financial 
expert” as defined in Form 20-F of the SEC. 
  
We have been unable to retain the services of a person who qualifies as an “audit committee financial expert”. Until 
we  appoint  such  a  person,  we  believe  that  the  members  of  our  Board  of  Directors  are  collectively  capable  of 
analyzing and evaluating our  financial statements and understanding internal controls and procedures for financial 
reporting.
Employees
D. 
  
We do not presently have any employees. 
  
E. 
  
The  following  table  sets  forth  the  common  share  ownership  of  each  of  our  officers  and  directors  as  at  October  1, 
2014. Each person has sole voting and investment power with respect to the shares of common stock shown, and all 
ownership is of record and beneficial.
Share Ownership
Number of 
Common
Percentage of 
Outstanding
Shares Owned
Positions
Common Shares
6,712,347      President, CEO and Director
Name 
John G. Robertson (2) 
Suzan El-Khatib  
Susanne Robertson (3)  
Thomas Parkhill 
Thomas Robertson 
Jane He 
ALL DIRECTORS AND SENIOR 
OFFICERS AS A GROUP (6 
persons) 
 
(1)  Based on issued and outstanding share capital of 70,118,605 common shares as of October 1, 2014. 
(2)
Nil      Director 
2,937,750      Director  
Nil      Director 
Nil      Director 
Nil      CFO
9,650,097
9.57 % 
0.00 % 
4.19 % 
0.00 % 
0.00 % 
0.00 %
13.76 %
Included  in  John  Robertson’s  shareholdings  are:  (i)  445,450  shares  registered  in  the  name  of  Access 
Information  Services,  a  private  British  Columbia  corporation  controlled  by  the  Robertson  Family  Trust;  (ii) 
50,000  shares  registered  in  the  name  of  KLR  Petroleum  Inc.,  a  private  British  Columbia  corporation 
controlled by John Robertson. Mr. Robertson is one of three trustees of the Robertson Family Trust, which acts 
by the majority vote of the three trustees. Mr. Robertson disclaims beneficial ownership of the shares owned or 
controlled by the Robertson Family Trust; (iii) 1,308,000 shares registered in the name of JGR Petroleum Inc., 
a corporation controlled by the Robertson Family Trust; (iv) 260,000 shares registered in the name of Imaging 
Technology  Inc.;  (v)  1,766,833  shares  registered  in  the  name  of  540330  BC  Ltd.  and  (vi)  2,882,064  shares 
registered in the name of John Robertson.  
Included in Ms. Robertson’s shareholdings are: 2,005,150 shares registered in the name of SMR Investments 
Ltd., a private British Columbia corporation controlled by Ms. Robertson and 932,600 shares registered in the 
name of Susanne Robertson.
(3)
The following table sets forth the stock purchase option ownership of each of our officers and directors as at October 
1, 2014. Each person has sole voting and investment power with respect to the shares of common stock shown, and 
all ownership is of record and beneficial.
Name 
John G. Robertson 
Suzan El-Khatib  
Thomas Parkhill 
Susanne Robertson 
Thomas Robertson 
Jane He 
ALL DIRECTORS AND SENIOR 
OFFICERS AS A GROUP (6 persons)
Number of 
Options  
Owned
Number of 
Options  
Vested
Percentage of 
Outstanding
2,000,000        
300,000        
100,000        
1,000,000        
150,000        
200,000
500,000        
75,000        
25,000        
250,000        
37,500        
50,000
Common Shares   
2.67%  
0.40%  
0.13%  
1.34%  
0.20%  
0.27%
3,750,000
937,500
5.01%
(1)  Based on 70,118,605 common shares and 4,750,000 stock purchase options outstanding on October 1, 2014.
Stock Option Plan 
  
Our Stock Option Plan (the “Plan”) was approved by our shareholders at our annual meeting held on May 20, 2014. 
Pursuant to the Plan we may grant up to 10% of our issued and outstanding shares for issuance to directors, officers, 
employees  and  consultants  at  prices  set  in  accordance  with  the  policies  of  the  TSX.V.  As  of  the  date  of  this 
registration statement, there are 4,750,000 options outstanding, at exercise prices ranging between $0.10 and $0.185 
per share which expire on dates ranging between October 30, 2014 and May 28, 2018. 
  
The purpose of the Plan is to provide incentive  to employees, officers, directors,  management company employee 
and consultants who provide services to us and reduce the cash compensation we would otherwise have to pay. 
  
The Plan is administered by the Board or, if the Board so elects, by a committee appointed by the Board. The Plan 
provides that options  will be  issued pursuant to option agreements (“Option Agreements”). No optionee under the 
Plan  shall  be  granted  an  option  which  exceeds  the  maximum  number  permitted  by  the  TSX.V.  Options  issued 
pursuant to the Plan will have an exercise price determined by the Board provided that it is not less than the price 
permitted by the TSX.V, or, if our shares are no longer listed on the TSX.V, then such other exchange or quotation 
system on which our shares are listed or quoted for trading. 
  
Options  granted  under  the  plan  shall,  unless  sooner  terminated,  expire  on  a  date  to  be  determined  by  the  Board 
which will not be later than 5 years from the day the option is granted or 90 days from the date the optionee ceases 
to  be  a  director,  officer,  consultant,  employee  or  a  management  company  employee,  unless  such  optionee  was 
engaged in investor relations activities in which case, only within 30 days after the cessation of his services to us. 
  
In the event of death of an optionee, options held by such optionee will expire the earlier of 5 years from the date of 
grant or one year from the date of such death. 
  
ITEM 7. 
  
A.
MAJOR SHAREHOLDERS AND RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Major Shareholders
Holdings by Major Shareholders
The  following  table  sets  forth  the  shareholdings  of  those  persons  who  own  of  record  or  are  known  to  us  to  own 
beneficially, directly or indirectly, or exercise control or direction over, more than 5% of our issued and outstanding 
common shares as at the date of this annual report:
Identity of Person or Group
John Robertson
Type of
Ownership
Direct/Indirect
Amount 
Owned
6,712,347
Percent of  
Class (1)
9.57 %
(1)  Based on issued and outstanding share capital of 70,118,605 common shares at October 1, 2014.
Canadian Share Ownership
The following table indicates the approximate number of Canadian record holders of common shares and the portion 
and percentage of common shares held in Canada as at September 27, 2013:
Total Number of
Number of
Number of Common
Common Shares Held
Percentage of
Holders
Canadian Holders
Shares Held in Canada
in Canada
218
(1)  Based on issued and outstanding share capital of 70,251,605 common shares as of October 1, 2014.
58,503,550
72
83.44 %
U.S. share Ownership
The  following  table  indicates  the  approximate  number  of  record  holders  of  common  shares  with  United  States 
addresses and the portion and percentage of common shares held in the United States as at October 1, 2014:
Total Number of
Number of U.S.
Number of Common
Holders
Holders
Shares Held in the U.S.
218
144
Percentage of Common 
Shares Held in the U.S.    
16.55 %
11,604,805
(2)  Based on issued and outstanding share capital of 70,251,605 common shares as of October 1, 2014. 
  
The  computation  of  the  number  and  percentage  of  common  shares  held  in  the  United  States  is  based  upon  the 
number  of  common  shares  held  by  record  holders  with  United  States  addresses  and  by  trusts,  estates  or  accounts 
with United States addresses  as disclosed to us following inquiry to all record holders known to  us to be trustees, 
executors,  guardians,  custodians  or  other  fiduciaries  holding  common  shares  for  one  or  more  trusts,  estates  or 
accounts.  United  States  residents  may  beneficially  own  common  shares  held  of  record  by  non-United  States 
residents.
Control of the Corporation
We are a publicly owned Canadian company, the shares of which are owned by Canadian residents, U.S. residents 
and other foreign residents. To the best of our knowledge, we are not directly or indirectly owned or controlled by 
another corporation, any foreign governments or any other natural or legal person, jointly or severally.
Change in Control Arrangements
Related Party Transactions
We are not aware of any arrangements the operation of which may at a subsequent date result in a change of control 
of our company. 
  
B. 
  
Other  than  as  disclosed  in  Item  6.B  –  “Directors,  Senior  Management  and  Employees  –  Compensation”  and  the 
transactions set forth below, there are no related party transactions or proposed transactions involving any insider, or 
associate or affiliate of an insider, that have occurred during our two most recently completed fiscal. 
  
Related  party  transactions  occurred  in  the  normal  course  of  operations  and  are  measured  at  agreed  to  amounts, 
which is the amount of consideration established and agreed to by the parties. 
 
Related party transactions not disclosed elsewhere in these financial statements are as follows: 
 
SMR  Investments  Ltd.  (“SMR”)  is  a  private  company  controlled  by  an  officer  of  the  Company.  Under  a 
management contract with SMR, the Company agreed to pay up to $2,500 per month for management services. The 
Company was charged management fees by SMR of $30,000 during the year ended May 31, 2014 (2013 - $30,000).  
As of May 31, 2014, $Nil (May 31, 2013 - $357) was payable to SMR by the Company. 
 
During the year ended May 31, 2014, management and director’s fees of $33,200 (2013 - $36,000) were paid to the 
President of the Company.  Fees of $8,804 (2013 - $8,342) were paid to KLR Petroleum Ltd. (which is controlled by 
an officer of the Company) for administration of the Company payroll and benefit plan. 
  
Amounts due to/ from related parties, other than the note receivable from REGI US, Inc. are unsecured, non-interest 
bearing  and  have  no  fixed  terms  of  repayment.    Unless  otherwise  indicated,  the  following  table  represents 
companies controlled by the President and CEO of the Company or companies where he is the President and CEO.
Promissory note receivable from related party:
REGI US, Inc. (a)
Advances from (to) related parties:
May 31, 2014
May 31, 2013
$ 
25,224 
25,224
$ 
26,704 
26,704
May 31, 2014
May 31, 2013
Minewest Silver and Gold Corp. 
Linux Gold Corp. (b)  
Reg Technologies, Inc. 
KLR Petroleum Ltd.
$
(2,095) 
(6,433) 
(60) 
- 
(8,588)
$ 
3,717 
2,642 
- 
357 
6,716
Interests of Experts and Counsel
During  the  year  ended  May  31,  2012  REGI  US, Inc.  repaid  $3,916  to  the  Company  and  converted  the  balance  of 
$24,684  into  a  promissory  note  owed  to  the  Company  at  annual  interest  rate  of  $6%,  for  which  the  Company 
recorded interest income of $1,480 (2013 - $1,480) on the promissory note during the year ended May 31, 2014. The 
note initially matured on April 18, 2012 and was extended to the expiry date of June 30, 2013 and further to June 30, 
2014. 
 
C. 
  
Not applicable. 
  
ITEM 8. 
  
A. 
  
Included are our audited financial statements, consisting of consolidated statements of financial position as at May 
31, 2014 and 2013, consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss), consolidated statements 
of cash flows and consolidated statements of changes in equity for each of the years ended May 31, 2014 and 2013 
along with related notes and Auditor’s Report. See Item 17 – “Financial Statements”.
Consolidated Statements and Other Financial Information
FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Legal Proceedings
There are no material legal or arbitration proceedings to which we were a party or in respect of which our property is 
subject.  Our  management  has  no  knowledge  of  any  legal  proceedings  in  which  we  may  be  involved  or  that  are 
contemplated by governmental authorities or otherwise.
Dividend Policy
Significant Changes
No  dividends  have  been  paid  on  any  class  of  our  shares  since  the  date  of  our  incorporation  and  we  are  not 
contemplating that any dividends will be paid in the immediate or foreseeable future. 
  
B. 
  
No material events occurred subsequent to May 31, 2014. 
   
ITEM 9. 
  
A.
THE OFFER AND LISTING
Offer and Listing Details
We  currently  trade  on  the  TSX.V  under  the  trading  symbol  “TRC-V”.  There  are  currently  no  restrictions  on  the 
transferability of these shares under Canadian securities laws. In addition, our shares trade on the OTC BB under the 
symbol TRYLF.OB. There is also a U.S. market in our shares on the Pink Sheets. We are not specifically aware of 
prices and other trading details for any shares which have or may have traded on the Pink Sheets. The ranges of the 
low and high sales prices for our shares traded on the TSX.V and OTC BB for the periods indicated are as follows. 
  
The following summarizes the reported high and low prices  for our shares on the TSX.V and the OTC BB for the 
periods indicated:
Monthly Stock Prices
August 2014 
July 2014 
June 2014 
May 2014 
April 2014 
March 2014 
  
 (1) 
 (2)
TSX.V (1)
High 
Cdn$
Low 
Cdn$
OTC BB (2)
High 
US$
Low 
US$
0.03        
0.04        
0.03        
0.02        
0.02        
0.02
0.03        
0.02        
0.02        
0.02        
0.02        
0.02
0.03        
0.04        
0.02        
0.02        
0.02        
0.02
0.03   
0.02   
0.01   
0.01   
0.01   
0.01
Stock price information provided by TSX.V. 
Stock price information provided by OTC BB. The quotations reflect inter-dealer prices, without retail mark-
up, markdown or commission and may not represent actual transactions.
Quarterly Stock Prices
Fiscal 2014
Fourth Quarter 
Third Quarter 
Second Quarter 
First Quarter
Fiscal 2013
Fourth Quarter 
Third Quarter (1) 
Second Quarter 
First Quarter
TSX.V (1)
High 
Cdn$
0.02        
0.02        
0.04        
0.04        
         
0.07        
0.07        
0.09        
0.08
Low 
Cdn$
0.02        
0.02        
0.02        
0.02        
         
0.04        
0.05        
0.05        
0.04
OTC BB (2)
High 
US$
0.02        
0.02        
0.04        
0.05        
         
0.07        
0.07        
0.09        
0.08
Low 
US$
0.01   
0.01   
0.01   
0.02   
    
0.03   
0.04   
0.05   
0.04
(1) 
 (2)
Stock price information provided by TSX.V. 
Stock price information provided by OTC BB. The quotations reflect inter-dealer prices, without retail mark-
up, markdown or commission and may not represent actual transactions.
Annual Stock Prices
TSX.V (1)
High 
Cdn$
Low 
Cdn$
OTC BB (2)
High 
US$
Low 
US$
0.04        
0.09        
0.13        
0.20        
0.39
0.02        
0.04        
0.05        
0.10        
0.12
0.04        
0.09        
0.13        
0.20        
0.35
0.01   
0.03   
0.04   
0.09   
0.04
Stock price information provided by TSX.V. 
Stock price information provided by OTC BB. The quotations reflect inter-dealer prices, without retail mark-
up, markdown or commission and may not represent actual transactions.
Fiscal 2014 
Fiscal 2013 
Fiscal 2012 
Fiscal 2011 
Fiscal 2010 
  
 (1) 
 (2)
Plan of Distribution
Markets
Selling Shareholders
The closing price of our common shares on the TSX.V on May 31, 2014 was Cdn$0.02 and on the OTC BB it was 
US$0.02. 
  
B. 
  
Not applicable. 
  
C. 
  
Our  common  shares  trade  on  the  TSX.V  under  the  symbol  TRC-V.  There  are  currently  no  restrictions  on  the 
transferability of these shares under Canadian securities laws. In addition our common shares trade on the OTCBB 
under the symbol TRYLF.OB. Additionally, there has been a U.S. market in our shares on the Pink Sheets. 
  
D. 
  
Not applicable. 
  
E. 
  
Not applicable. 
  
F. 
  
Not applicable. 
  
ITEM 10. 
  
A. 
  
Not applicable. 
  
B. 
  
Securities Register 
  
We maintain at Computer share Investor Services Inc. (“transfer agent”) a securities register in which we record the 
securities issued by us in registered form, showing with respect to each class or series of securities:
(a)  the  names,  alphabetically  arranged  and  the  latest  known  address  of  each  person  who  is  or  has  been  a
Memorandum and Articles of Association
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Expenses of the Issue
Dilution
Share Capital
security holder;
(b)  the number of securities held by each security holder; and 
  
(c)  the date and particulars of the issue and transfer of each security.
The transfer agent keeps information relating to a security holder that is entered in the securities register for at least 
seven years after the security holder ceases to be a security holder. 
  
Registration 
  
We  were  incorporated  pursuant  to  the  British  Columbia  Company  Act (the  predecessor statute  to  the  BCBCA)  by 
memorandum and articles filed with the British Columbia Registrar of Companies on May 23, 1980. There are no 
restrictions  on  the  type  of  business  which  may  be  carried  out  by  us  in  our  memorandum  and  articles  and  our 
objectives and purposes are not set out in our memorandum and articles.
Powers of Directors
Approval and Voting
A  director  or  senior  officer  who  holds  a  disclosable  interest  (as  that  term  is  used  in  the  BCBCA)  in  a  contract  or 
transaction into which we have entered or propose to enter is:
liable to account to us for any profit that accrues to the director or senior officer under or as a result of the 
contract or transaction only if and to the extent provided in the BCBCA.
●
●  not  entitled  to  vote  on  any  directors’  resolution  to  approve  that  contract  or  transaction,  unless  all  the 
directors  have  a  disclosable  interest  in  that  contract  or  transaction,  in  which  case  any  or  all  of  those 
directors may vote on such resolution.
●
and  who  is  present  at  the  meeting  of  directors  at  which  the  contract  or  transaction  is  considered  for 
approval may be counted in the quorum at the meeting whether or not the director votes on any or all of the 
resolutions considered at the meeting.
A  director  or  senior  officer  who  holds  any  office  or  possesses  any  property,  right  or  interest  that  could  result, 
directly  or  indirectly,  in  the  creation  of  a  duty  or  interest  that  materially  conflicts  with  that  individual’s  duty  or 
interest as a director or senior officer, must disclose the nature and extent of the conflict as required by the BCBCA.
Remuneration and Expenses
The directors are entitled to the remuneration for acting as directors, if any, as the directors may from time to time 
determine. If the directors so decide, the remuneration of the directors, if any, will be determined by the Board. That 
remuneration may be in addition to any salary or other remuneration paid to any officer or employee as such, who is 
also a director.
Borrowing
If authorized by the Board, we may: 
  
(1)
borrow money in the manner and amount, on the security, from the sources and on the terms and conditions 
that we consider appropriate;
(2)
(3)
(4)
issue  bonds,  debentures  and  other  debt  obligations  either  outright  or  as  security  for  any  liability  or 
obligation or any other person and at such discounts or premiums and on such other terms as we consider 
appropriate;
guarantee the repayment of money by any other person or the performance of any obligation of any other 
person; and
mortgage, charge, whether by way of specific or floating charge, grant a security interest in, or give other 
security on, the whole or any part of our present and future assets and undertaking.
Any bonds, debentures or other debt obligations may be issued at a discount, premium or otherwise, and with any 
special privileges as to redemption, surrender, drawings, allotment of or conversion into or exchange for shares or 
other  securities,  attending  and  voting  at  our  general  meetings,  appointment  of  directors  or  otherwise  and  may  by 
their  terms  be  assignable  free  from  any  equities  between  us  and  the  person  to  whom  they  were  issued  or  any 
subsequent holder thereof, all as the Board may determine.
Qualification
A director is not required to hold a share in our capital as qualification for his or her office but must be qualified as 
required by the BCBCA to become, act or continue to act as a director.
The BCBCA states that 
  
(1)  A person must not become or act as a director of a company unless that person is an individual who is qualified
to do so.
(a)  under the age of 18 years,
(2)  An individual is not qualified to become or act as a director of a company if that individual is
(c)  an undischarged bankrupt, or
(b)  found by a court, in Canada or elsewhere, to be incapable of managing the individual’s own affairs,
(d)  convicted  in  or  out  of  British  Columbia  of  an  offence  in  connection  with  the  promotion,  formation  or
management of a corporation or unincorporated business, or of an offence involving fraud, unless
(i)
the court orders otherwise,
(ii)  5 years have elapsed since the last to occur of
(A)  the expiration of the period set for suspension of the passing of sentence without a sentence having
been passed,
(B)  the imposition of a fine,
(C)  the conclusion of the term of any imprisonment, and
(D)  the conclusion of the term of any probation imposed, or
(iii) a pardon was granted or issued under the Criminal Records Act (Canada).
(3)  A director who ceases to be qualified to act as a director of a company must promptly resign. 
  
Description of Securities 
  
Common Shares 
  
We are authorized to issue unlimited common shares without par value of which, as at October 1, 2014, 70,118,605 
common  shares  are  issued  and  outstanding  as  fully  paid  and  non-assessable.  As  at  October  1,  2014,  we  have 
4,750,000  common  shares  reserved  under  our  stock  option  plan.  These  options  are  exercisable  at  prices  ranging 
between $0.10 and $0.185 per share, expiring on dates ranging from October 20, 2014 to May 28, 2018. 
  
The holders of the common share are entitled to vote at all meetings of shareholders, except meetings at which only 
holders of a specified class of shares are entitled to vote, and on every poll taken at every such meeting, or adjourned 
meeting, every holder of common shares shall be entitled to one vote in respect of each common share held. 
  
Preferred Shares 
  
We are authorized to issue unlimited preferred shares with no par value, which, as at  October 1, 2014, no preferred 
shares  are  issued  and  outstanding.  The  Preferred  Shares  have  attached  thereto  a  right  to  receive  dividends  as 
determined by the Board. Pursuant to the special rights and restrictions attached to the shares, we may, by directors’ 
resolution or ordinary resolution, in each case as determined by the Board: (a) determine the  maximum number of 
shares  of  any  of  those  series  of  preferred  shares  that  we  are  authorized  to  issue,  determine  that  there  is  no  such 
maximum  number or alter any determination  made  in relation to a  maximum  number  of  those  shares;  (b)  create  an 
identifying  name  by  which  the  shares  of  any  of  those  series  of  preferred  shares  may  be  identified  or  alter  any 
identifying name created for those shares; and (c) attach special rights or restrictions to the shares of any of those
series  of  preferred  shares  or  alter  any  special  rights  or  restrictions  attached  to  those  shares,  subject  to  the  special 
rights  and  restrictions  attached  to  the  series  of  preferred  shares  by  our  Articles.  Where  these  alterations, 
determinations  or  authorizations  are  to  be  made  in  relation  to  a  series  of  preferred  shares  of  which  there  are  issued 
shares, such alteration must be made by special resolution of our shareholders and a separate special resolution of the 
holders of that series. 
  
Annual and Extraordinary General Meetings 
  
Unless  an  annual  general  meeting  is  deferred  or  waived  in  accordance  with  the  BCBCA,  we  must  hold  an  annual 
general meeting at least once in each calendar year and not more than 15 months after the last annual meeting date at 
such time and place as may be determined by the Directors. The Board may call an extraordinary general meeting at 
any time. Notice of such meetings must be accompanied by an information circular describing the proposed business 
to  be  dealt  with  and  making  disclosures  as  prescribed  by  statute.  A  shareholder  or  shareholders  having  in  the 
aggregate 5% of our issued shares may requisition a meeting and the Board is required to hold such meeting within 
four  months  of  such  requisition.  Admission  to  such  meetings  is  open  to  registered  shareholders  and  their  duly 
appointed proxies. Others may be admitted subject to the consent of the Chairman of the meeting. 
  
Notice of Meetings 
  
We must send notice of the date, time and location of any meeting of shareholders, in the manner provided in our 
Articles, or in such other manner, if any, as may be prescribed by directors’ resolution (whether previous notice of 
the resolution has been given or not), to each shareholder entitled to attend the meeting, to each Director and to our 
auditor, unless our Articles otherwise provide, at least the following number of days before the meeting: 
  
(1)   if and for so long as we are a public company, 21 days; 
  
(2)   otherwise, 10 days. 
  
Dividend Rights 
  
The  dividend  entitlement  of  a  common  shareholder  of  record  is  fixed  at  the  time  of  declaration  by  the  Board.  A 
vested dividend entitlement does not lapse, but unclaimed dividends are subject to a statutory six year contract debts 
limitation.  Each  common  share  is  entitled  to  one  vote  on  the  election  of  each  director.  There  are  no  cumulative 
voting rights, in consequence of which a simple majority of votes at the annual meeting can elect all of our directors. 
Each common share carries with it the right to share equally with every other common share in dividends declared 
and in any distribution of our surplus assets after payment to creditors on any winding up, liquidation or dissolution. 
There are no sinking fund provisions. All common shares must be fully paid prior to issue and are thereafter subject 
to no further capital calls by us. There exists no discriminatory provision affecting any existing or prospective holder 
of common shares as a result of such shareholder owning a substantial number of shares. 
  
Rights of Shareholders 
  
Under the BCBCA, the rights of shareholders may be changed only by the shareholders passing a special resolution 
approved by 2/3 of  the votes  cast at a general  meeting of shareholders, the  notice of  which is accompanied by an 
information  circular  describing  the  proposed  action  and  its  effect  on  the  shareholders.  Shareholders  representing 
10% of our common shares who vote against such a resolution may apply to the Court to set aside the resolution and 
the  Court  may  set  aside,  affirm  or  affirm  and  order  us  to  purchase  the  shares  of  any  shareholder  at  a  price 
determined by the Court. 
  
Limitations 
  
Our memorandum and articles contain no limitations on the rights of non-resident or foreign shareholders to hold or 
exercise  rights  on  our  shares.  There  is  no  limitation  at  law  upon  the  right  of  a  non-resident  to  hold  shares  in  a 
Canadian company. There are no provisions in our memorandum and articles that would have an effect of delaying, 
deferring  or  preventing  a  change  in  control  and  that  would  operate  only  with  respect  to  a  merger,  acquisition  or 
corporate restructuring involving us or any of our subsidiaries.
Exchange Controls
Taxation
Material Contracts
There  is  no  provision  in  our  articles  setting  a  threshold  or  requiring  or  governing  disclosure  of  shareholder 
ownership  above  any  level.  Securities  Acts,  regulations  and  the  policies  and  rules  thereunder  in  the  Provinces  of 
Alberta and British Columbia, where we are a reporting company, require any person holding or having control of 
more than 10% of our issued shares to file insider returns disclosing such share holdings. 
  
C. 
  
During the year ended May 31, 2014 and subsequent to that date we did not enter into material contracts. 
  
D. 
  
There are no governmental laws, decrees or regulations in Canada relating to restrictions on the export  or import of 
capital, or affecting the remittance of interest, dividends or other payments to non-resident holders of our common 
stock. See “Taxation” below. 
  
The Investment Canada Act requires a non-Canadian making an investment which would result in the acquisition of 
control of a Canadian business, the gross value of the assets of which exceed certain threshold levels or the business 
activity of which is related to Canada’s cultural heritage or national identity, to either notify, or file an application 
for review with, Investment Canada, the federal agency created by the Investment Canada Act. 
  
The  notification  procedure  involves  a  brief  statement  of  information  about  the  investment  on  a  prescribed  form, 
which  is  required  to  be  filed  with  Investment  Canada  by  the  investor  at  any  time  up  to  30  days  following 
implementation  of  the  investment.  It  is  intended  that  investments  requiring  only  notification  will  proceed  without 
government intervention unless the investment is in a specific type of business activity related to Canada’s cultural 
heritage and national identity. 
  
If an investment is reviewable under the Act, an application for review in the form prescribed is normally required to 
be filed  with Investment Canada prior to the investment taking place  and the investment  may  not be implemented 
until  the  review  has  been  completed  and  the  Minister  responsible  for  Investment  Canada  is  satisfied  that  the 
investment is likely to be of net benefit to Canada. If the Minister is not satisfied that the investment is likely to be 
of  net  benefit  to  Canada,  the  non-Canadian  must  not  implement  the  investment  or,  if  the  investment  has  been 
implemented, must divest himself of control of the business that is the subject of the investment. 
  
E. 
  
Canadian Federal Income Tax Consequences  
  
The following is a general discussion of all material Canadian federal income tax consequences, under current law, 
generally applicable to a holder of one or more Common Shares (a “Holder”) who for the purposes of the  Income 
Tax  Act  (Canada)  (the  “Canadian  Tax  Act”)  is  a  non-resident  of  Canada,  holds  his  Common  Shares  as  capital 
property and deals at arm’s length with our company and is restricted to such circumstances. 
  
The following summary describes the principal Canadian federal income tax considerations generally applicable to a 
holder of the Common Shares who, for purposes of the Canadian Tax Act and the Convention between Canada and 
the United States of America with Respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital (the “Convention”) and at all relevant 
times,  is  resident  in  the  United  States  and  was  not  and  is  not  resident  in  Canada,  deals  at  arm’s  length  and  is  not 
affiliated with our company, holds the Common Shares as capital property, does not use or hold and is not deemed 
to use or hold the Common Shares in or in the course of carrying on business in Canada and is not a non-resident 
insurer and who otherwise qualifies for the full benefit of the Convention (a “United States Holder”). 
  
This  summary  is  based  on  the  current  provisions  of  the  Convention,  the  Canadian  Tax  Act  and  the  regulations 
thereunder, and specific proposals to amend the Canadian Tax Act and the regulations announced by the Minister of 
Finance (Canada) prior to the date hereof and our understanding of the administrative practices published in writing 
by the Canada Revenue Agency prior to the date hereof. On September 21, 2007, the Minister of Finance (Canada) 
and the United States Secretary of the Treasury signed the fifth protocol to the Convention (the “Protocol”) which 
includes  amendments  to  many  of  the  provisions  of  the  Convention,  including  significant  amendments  to  the
limitation  on  benefits  provision  and  treatment  of  fiscally  transparent  entities  such  as  some  United  States  limited 
liability companies. The Protocol was ratified by the United States government in December 2008 (it was ratified by 
the  Canadian  government  in  2007)  and  came  into  force  in  2010.  United  States  Holders  are  urged  to  consult  their 
own tax advisors to determine the impact of the Protocol and their entitlement to relief under the Convention based 
on their particular circumstances. 
  
This summary does not take into account or anticipate any other changes in the governing law, whether by judicial, 
governmental or legislative decision or action, nor does it take into account the tax legislation or considerations of 
any province, territory or non-Canadian (including U.S.) jurisdiction, which legislation or considerations may differ 
significantly from those described herein. 
  
For the purposes of the Canadian Tax Act, the Canadian tax results of a United States Holder are to be determined 
using Canadian currency based on the relevant exchange rate applicable thereto. 
  
Prospective purchasers and holders of Common  Shares  should consult their  own tax advisors  with respect to their 
individual circumstances. 
  
Dividends  
  
Generally, dividends paid by Canadian corporations to non-resident shareholders are subject to a withholding tax of 
25%  of  the  gross  amount  of  such  dividends.  Pursuant  to  the  Convention,  the  withholding  tax  rate  on  the  gross 
amount of dividends paid to United States Holders may be reduced to 15% or, in the case of a United States Holder 
that  is  a  U.S.  corporation  which  beneficially  owns  at  least  10%  of  the  voting  stock  of  the  Canadian  corporation 
paying the dividends, to 5% of the gross amount of such dividends. 
  
Under  the  Convention,  dividends  paid  to  certain  religious,  scientific,  charitable  and  other  similar  tax-exempt 
organizations  and  certain  organizations  that  are  resident  in,  and  exempt  from  tax  in,  the  United  States  are  exempt 
from Canadian non-resident withholding tax, including any withholding tax levied in respect of dividends received 
on the shares. 
  
Disposition of Common Shares  
  
In  general,  a  United  States  Holder  will  not  be  subject  to  Canadian  income  tax  on  capital  gains  arising  on  the 
disposition of the  Common Shares,  unless such shares are  “taxable  Canadian property”  within  the  meaning of the 
Canadian Tax Act and no relief is afforded under the Convention. Generally, the Common Shares would be taxable 
Canadian property of a United States Holder if at any time during the sixty month period immediately preceding a 
disposition by the United States Holder of such shares, not less than 25% of the issued shares of any  class or series 
of a class of shares of our company belonged to the United States Holder, to persons with whom the United States 
Holder did not deal at arm’s length (within the  meaning of  the Canadian Tax Act), or to the United States Holder 
and persons with whom the non-resident did not deal at arm’s length (within the meaning of the Canadian Tax Act). 
Even  if the Common  Shares  are “taxable Canadian property”  under the  Canada Tax  Act, under the  Convention, a 
capital gain realized by a United States Holder will not be subject to Canadian tax unless the value of the Common 
Shares  is  derived  principally  from  real  property  (as  defined  in  the  Convention)  situated  in  Canada.  We  do  not 
believe the value of our Common Shares is derived principally from real property situated in Canada. 
  
U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences  
  
The following is a summary of the anticipated material U.S. federal income tax consequences to a U.S. Holder (as 
defined below) arising from and relating to the acquisition, ownership, and disposition of Common Shares. 
  
Each U.S. Holder is encouraged to consult his own financial advisor, legal counsel, or accountant regarding the U.S. 
federal,  U.S.  state  and  local,  and  foreign  tax  consequences  of  the  acquisition,  ownership,  and  disposition  of 
Common Shares.
Scope of this Disclosure  
  
Authorities  
  
This  summary  is  based  on  the  Internal  Revenue  Code  of  1986,  as  amended  (the  “Code”),  Treasury  Regulations 
(whether  final,  temporary.  or  proposed),  published  rulings  of  the  Internal  Revenue  Service  (“IRS”),  published 
administrative positions of the IRS, and U.S. court decisions that are applicable and, in each case, as in effect and 
available, as of the date of this Registration Statement. Any of the authorities on which this summary is based could 
be  changed  in  a  material  and  adverse  manner  at  any  time,  and  any  such  change  could  be  applied  on  a  retroactive 
basis. This summary does not discuss the potential effects, whether adverse or beneficial, of any proposed legislation 
that, if enacted, could be applied on a retroactive basis. 
  
U.S. Holders  
  
For  purposes  of  this  summary,  a  “U.S.  Holder”  is  a  beneficial  owner  of  Common  Shares  that,  for  U.S.  federal 
income  tax  purposes,  is  (a)  an  individual  who  is  a  citizen  or  resident  of  the  U.S.,  (b)  a  corporation,  or  any  other 
entity classified as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes, that is created or organized in or under the 
laws of the U.S. or any state in the U.S., including the District of Columbia, (c) an estate if the income of such estate 
is subject to U.S. federal income tax regardless of the source of such income, or (d) a trust  subject to the primary 
supervision of a court within the U.S. and control of a U.S. fiduciary as described Section 7701(a)(30) of the Code. 
If  a  partnership  or  other  “pass-through”  entity  treated  as  a  partnership  for  U.S.  federal  income  tax  purposes  holds 
Common Shares, the U.S. federal income tax treatment of the partners or owners of such partnership or other pass-
through entity generally will depend on the status of such partners or owners and the activities of such partnership or 
pass-through entity. 
  
Persons Not Covered 
  
This  summary  does  not  address  the  U.S.  federal  income  tax  consequences  to  persons  (including  persons  who  are 
U.S. Holders) subject to special provisions of U.S. federal income tax law, including (i) persons who are tax-exempt 
organizations,  qualified  retirement  plans,  individual  retirement  accounts  and  other  tax-deferred  accounts,  financial 
institutions, insurance companies, real estate investment trusts, regulated investment companies, or brokers, dealers 
or traders in securities, (ii) persons who have a “functional currency” other than the U.S. dollar, (iii) persons subject 
to  the  alternative  minimum  tax,  (xi)  persons  who  own  their  Common  Shares  as  part  of  a  straddle,  hedging, 
conversion transaction, constructive sale or other arrangement involving  more than one  position, (iv) persons  who 
acquired  their  Common  Shares  through  the  exercise  of  employee  stock  options  or  otherwise  as  compensation  for 
services, (v) persons that own an interest in an entity that owns Common Shares, (vi) persons who own, exercise or 
dispose of any options, warrants or other rights to acquire Common Shares, (vii) persons who are partners or owners 
of partnerships or other pass-through entities or (viii) persons who own their Common Shares other than as a capital 
asset within the meaning of Section 1221 of the Code. 
  
Distributions Made by the Corporation to U.S. Holders 
  
General Rules. U.S. Holders receiving distributions (including constructive distributions) with respect to Common 
Shares issued by us are required to include in gross income as a dividend for U.S. federal income tax purposes the 
gross  amount  of  such  distributions  (without  reduction  for  any  Canadian  income  tax  withheld  from  such 
distributions), equal to the U.S. dollar value of such distributions on the date of receipt (based on the exchange rate 
on such date), to the extent that we have current or accumulated earnings and profits. To the extent that distributions 
from us exceed our current and accumulated earnings and profits, such distributions will be treated first as a return 
of  capital,  to  the  extent  of  the  U.S.  Holder’s  adjusted  basis  in  the  shares,  and  thereafter  as  gain  from  the  sale  or 
exchange of the shares. (See more detailed discussion at “Disposition of Shares” below). Any Canadian tax withheld 
from  a  distribution  by  us  may  be  credited,  subject  to  certain  limitations,  against  the  U.S.  Holder’s  U.S.  federal 
income tax liability or, alternatively, may be deducted in computing the U.S. Holder’s U.S. federal taxable income 
by those who itemize deductions. (See more detailed discussion at “Foreign Tax Credit” below). 
  
Currency  Gain  or  Loss.  In  the  case  of  foreign  currency  received  as  a  distribution  that  is  not  converted  by  the 
recipient into U.S. dollars on the date of receipt, a U.S. Holder will have a tax basis in the foreign currency equal to
its U.S. dollar value on the date of receipt. Generally any  gain or loss recognized upon  a subsequent sale or other 
disposition  of  the  foreign  currency,  including  the  exchange  for  U.S.  dollars,  will  be  ordinary  income  or  loss. 
However,  an  individual  whose  realized  gain  does  not  exceed  $200  will  not  recognize  that  gain,  to  the  extent  that 
there  are  no  expenses  associated  with  the  transaction  that  meet  the  requirements  for  deductibility  as  a  trade  or 
business expense (other than travel expenses in connection with a business trip) or as an expense for the production 
of income. 
  
Dividend may be Eligible for Reduced Tax Rate. For taxable years beginning after September 30, 2002 and before 
January  1,  2009,  dividends  received  by  U.S.  Holders  that  are  individuals,  estates  or  trusts  from  “qualified  foreign 
corporations,”  as  defined  in  Section  1(h)(11)  of  the  Code,  generally  are  taxed  at  the  same  preferential  tax  rates 
applicable to long-term capital gains. Although not free from doubt, it appears that we would be a “qualified foreign 
corporation,” as defined in Section 1(h)(11) of the Code pursuant to the U.S. Canada income tax treaty if we are not 
a  Passive  Foreign  Investment  Company  (“PFIC”).  A  corporation  that  is  properly  described  as  a  PFIC,  Foreign 
Personal Holding Company (defined below), or a Foreign Investment Company (defined below) for its taxable year 
during which it pays a dividend, or for its immediately preceding taxable year, will not be treated as a “qualifying 
foreign corporation” and dividends received by U.S. Holders that are individuals, estates or trusts generally will be 
subject  to  U.S.  federal  income  tax  at  ordinary  income  tax  rates  (and  not  at  the  preferential  tax  rates  applicable  to 
long-term capital gains). 
  
Dividends not Eligible for Dividends Received Deduction. Dividends paid by us generally will not be eligible for the 
“dividends  received  deduction”  allowed  to  corporate  shareholders  receiving  dividends  from  certain  U.S. 
corporations. Under certain circumstances, a U.S. Holder that is a corporation and that owns shares representing at 
least 10% of the total voting power and the total value of shares issued by us may be entitled to a 70% deduction of 
the  “U.S.  source”  portion  of  dividends  received  from  us  (unless  we  qualify  as  a  “Foreign  Personal  Holding 
Company” or a “PFIC” as defined below). The availability of the dividends received deduction is subject to several 
complex  limitations  that  are  beyond  the  scope  of  this  discussion,  and  U.S.  Holders  of  shares  issued  by  us  should 
consult their own financial advisor, legal counsel or accountant regarding the dividends received deduction. 
  
Dividend Paid to Shareholder who Made QEF Election may be Exempt from Tax. Generally, shareholders are not 
subject to additional income taxation on distributions made by a PFIC to the extent of the shareholder’s basis in the 
corporation’s  shares  if  a  Qualified  Electing  Fund  (“QEF”)  election  is  in  effect.  (Please  see  the  QEF  election 
discussion below.) A shareholder’s basis in this situation is usually equal to the cost of purchasing the shares plus 
the amount of the corporation’s income that was reported on the shareholder’s return pursuant to the QEF election 
less  any  prior  distributions  made  by  the  corporation  to  the  shareholder.  Again,  these  rules  are  subject  to  several 
exceptions that are beyond the scope of this discussion. U.S. Holders of shares issued by us should consult their 
own  financial  advisor,  legal  counsel  or  accountant  regarding  whether  dividends  paid  by  us  to  them  will  be 
exempt from federal income tax if a QEF election is made. 
  
Disposition of Shares 
  
General Rule. A U.S. Holder will recognize gain or loss upon the sale or other taxable disposition of shares issued 
by  us  equal  to  the  difference,  if  any,  between  (i) the  amount  of  cash  plus  the  fair  market  value  of  any  property 
received,  and  (ii) the  shareholder’s  tax  basis  in  the  shares.  This  gain  or  loss  will  be  capital  gain  or  loss  if  the 
Common Shares are a capital asset in the hands of the U.S. Holder, which will be long-term capital gain or loss if 
the shares are held for more than one year. 
  
Reduced Tax Rate. Preferential tax rates apply to long-term capital gains of U.S. Holders that are individuals, estates 
or  trusts.  There  are  currently  no  preferential  tax  rates  for  long-term  capital  gains  for  a  U.S.  Holder  that  is  a 
corporation  (other  than  a  corporation  subject  to  Subchapter  S  of  the  Code).  Deductions  for  net  capital  losses  are 
subject to significant limitations. For U.S. Holders that are not corporations, any unused portion of such net capital 
loss  may  be  carried  over  to  be  used  in  later  tax  years  until  such  net  capital  loss  is  thereby  exhausted.  For  U.S. 
Holders that are corporations  (other than corporations subject to Subchapter S of the  Code), an unused net capital 
loss  may be carried back three  years and carried  forward  five  years  from the loss  year to be offset against capital 
gains until such net capital loss is thereby exhausted. Sales of PFIC stock are not eligible for the reduced long-term 
capital gains rates that are usually applicable to sales of stock unless the shareholder made a QEF election regarding 
such shares.
Our Corporation may be a Passive Foreign Investment Company 
  
General Discussion. It is highly likely that we will be classified as a passive foreign investment company (“PFIC”) 
from time to time for U.S. federal income tax purposes. A non-U.S. corporation is classified as a PFIC whenever it 
satisfies either the asset test or the income test. This determination is  not binding on U.S. Holders or the IRS and 
there  can  be  no  assurance  that  the  IRS  will  not  challenge  this  determination.  A  U.S.  Holder  who  holds  stock  in  a 
foreign  corporation  during  any  year  in  which  such  corporation  qualifies  as  a  PFIC  is  subject  to  numerous  special 
U.S. federal income taxation rules and may elect to be taxed under two alternative tax regimes. The following is a 
discussion  of  these  three  sets  of  special  rules  applied  to  U.S.  Holders  of  shares  issued  by  us.  In  addition,  special 
rules  apply  if  a  foreign  corporation  qualifies  as  both  a  PFIC  and  a  “controlled  foreign  corporation”  (as  defined 
below) and a U.S. Holder owns, actually or constructively, 10% or more of the total combined voting power of all 
classes  of  stock  entitled  to  vote  of  such  foreign  corporation  (See more  detailed  discussion  at  “Controlled  Foreign 
Corporation” below). 
  
Definition of PFIC. Section 1297 of the Code defines a PFIC as a corporation that is not formed in the U.S. and, for 
any taxable year, either (a) 75% or more of its gross income is “passive income” or (b) the average percentage, by 
fair market value (or, if the corporation is not publicly traded and either is a controlled foreign corporation or makes 
an election, by adjusted tax basis), of its assets that produce or are held for the production of  “passive income” is 
50% or more. “Passive income” includes, for example, dividends, interest, certain rents and royalties, certain gains 
from  the  sale  of  stock  and  securities,  and  certain  gains  from  commodities  transactions.  However,  gains  resulting 
from commodities transactions are generally excluded from the definition of passive income if “substantially all” of 
a merchant’s, producer’s or handler’s business is as an active merchant, producer or handler of such commodities. 
For purposes of the PFIC income test and the assets test, if a foreign corporation owns (directly or indirectly) at least 
25%  by  value  of  the  stock  of  another  corporation,  such  foreign  corporation  shall  be  treated  as  if  it  (a)  held  a 
proportionate share of  the assets of such other corporation, and (b) received directly its  proportionate share of  the 
income  of  such  other  corporation.  Also,  for  purposes  of  such  PFIC  tests,  passive  income  does  not  include  any 
interest, dividends, rents or royalties that are received or accrued from a “related” person to the extent such amount 
is properly allocable to the income of such related person which is not passive income. For these purposes, a person 
is related with respect to a foreign corporation if such person “controls” the foreign corporation or is controlled by 
the  foreign  corporation  or  by  the  same  persons  that  control  the  foreign  corporation.  For  these  purposes,  “control” 
means ownership, directly or indirectly, of stock possessing more than 50% of the total voting power of all classes 
of stock entitled to vote or of the total value of stock of a corporation 
  
Generally Applicable PFIC Rules. If a U.S. Holder does not make a timely election to be taxed in conformity with 
the Mark-to-Market rules or the QEF rules during a year in which it holds (or is deemed to have held) shares issued 
by  us  while  we  are  a  PFIC  (a  “Non-Electing  U.S.  Holder”),  then  special  taxation  rules  under  Section  1291  of  the 
Code  will  apply  to  (i) gains  realized  on  the  disposition  (or  deemed  to  be  realized  by  reasons  of  a  pledge)  of  his 
Common Shares and (ii) certain “excess distributions” (generally, distributions received in the current taxable year 
that are in excess of 125% of the average distributions received during the three preceding years or, if shorter, the 
U.S. Holder’s holding period) by us. 
  
A  Non-Electing  U.S.  Holder  generally  would  be  required  to  pro  rate  all  gains  realized  on  the  disposition  of  his 
Common Shares and all excess distributions on his Common Shares over the entire holding period for the Common 
Shares. All gains or excess distributions allocated to prior years of the U.S. Holder would be taxed at the highest tax 
rate for each such prior year applicable to ordinary income. The Non-Electing U.S. Holder also would be liable for 
interest on the foregoing tax liability for each such prior year calculated as if such liability had been due with respect 
to  each  such  prior  year.  A  Non-Electing  U.S.  Holder  that  is  not  a  corporation  must  treat  this  interest  charge  as 
“personal  interest”  which,  as  discussed  above,  is  wholly  non-deductible.  The  balance  of  the  gain  or  the  excess 
distribution will be treated as ordinary income in the year of the disposition or distribution, and no interest charge 
will be incurred with respect to such balance. 
  
If we are a PFIC for any taxable year during which a Non-Electing U.S. Holder holds shares issued by us, then we 
will continue to be treated as a PFIC with respect to such Common Shares, even if we cease meeting the definition 
of a PFIC. A Non-Electing U.S. Holder may terminate this deemed PFIC status by electing to recognize gain (which 
will be taxed under the rules discussed above for Non-Electing U.S. Holders) as if such Common Shares had been 
sold on the last day of the last taxable year for which it was a PFIC.
Market-to-Market  Election.  U.S.  Holders  who  hold,  actually  or  constructively,  marketable  stock  (as  specifically 
defined  in the Treasury Regulations) of a  foreign corporation that qualifies as a PFIC  may annually  elect to  mark 
such  stock  to  the  market  (a  “market-to-market  election”).  If  such  an  election  is  made,  such  U.S.  Holder  will 
generally  not  be  subject  to  the  special  taxation  rules  of  Section  1291  discussed  above.  However,  if  the  mark-to-
market election is made by a Non-Electing U.S. Holder after the beginning of the holding period for the PFIC stock, 
then  the  Section  1291  rules  will  apply  to  certain  dispositions  of,  distributions  on  and  other  amounts  taxable  with 
respect to our Common Shares. A U.S. Holder who  makes  the  mark-to  market election  will include in income for 
the taxable year for which the election was made an amount equal to the excess, if any, of the fair market value of 
our Common Shares as of the close of such tax year over such U.S. Holder’s adjusted basis in such Common Shares. 
In  addition,  the  U.S.  Holder  is  allowed  a  deduction  for  the  lesser  of  (i) the  excess,  if  any,  of  such  U.S.  Holder’s 
adjusted tax basis in the Common Shares over the fair market value of such shares as of the close of the tax year, or 
(ii) the  excess,  if  any,  of  (A) the  mark-to-market  gains  for  our  shares  included  by  such  U.S.  Holder  for  prior  tax 
years, including any amount which would have been included for any prior tax year but for the Section 1291 interest 
on tax deferral rules discussed above with respect to Non-Electing U.S. Holders, over (B) the mark-to-market losses 
for shares that were allowed as deductions for prior tax years. A U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in his shares will 
be adjusted to reflect the amount included in or deducted from income as a result of a mark-to-market election. A 
mark-to-market  election  applies  to  the  taxable  year  in  which  the  election  is  made  and  to  each  subsequent  taxable 
year,  unless  the  shares  cease  to  be  marketable,  as  specifically  defined,  or  the  IRS  consents  to  revocation  of  the 
election. 
  
QEF Election. A U.S.  Holder  who  makes a timely QEF election (an  “Electing U.S. Holder”) regarding  his  shares 
issued by us will be subject, under Section 1293 of the Code, to current U.S. federal income tax for any taxable year 
in which we qualify as a PFIC on his pro rata share of our (i) “net capital gain” (the excess of net long-term capital 
gain over net short-term capital loss), which will be taxed as long-term capital gain to the Electing U.S. Holder and 
(ii) “ordinary earnings” (the excess of earnings and profits over net capital gain),  which  will be taxed as ordinary 
income to the Electing  U.S.  Holder, in each  case, for the  shareholder’s  taxable  year in  which (or  with  which) our 
taxable year ends, regardless of whether such amounts are actually distributed. 
  
The  effective  QEF  election  also  allows  the  Electing  U.S.  Holder  to  (i) generally  treat  any  gain  realized  on  the 
disposition of his Common Shares (or deemed to be realized on the pledge of his shares) as capital gain; (ii) treat his 
share  of  our  net  capital  gain,  if  any,  as  long-term  capital  gain  instead  of  ordinary  income;  and  (iii) either  avoid 
interest charges resulting from PFIC status altogether, or make an annual election, subject to certain limitations, to 
defer  payment  of  current  taxes  on  his  share  of  our  annual  realized  net  capital  gain  and  ordinary  earnings  subject, 
however,  to  an  interest  charge.  If  the  Electing  U.S.  Holder  is  not  a  corporation,  such  an  interest  charge  would  be 
treated as “personal interest” that is not deductible. 
  
The procedure a U.S. Holder must comply with in making an effective QEF election, and the U.S. federal income 
tax consequences of the QEF election,  will depend on whether the year of the election is the first year in the U.S. 
Holder’s holding period in which we are a PFIC. If the U.S. Holder makes a QEF election in such first year,  i.e., a 
timely QEF election, then the U.S. Holder may make the QEF election by simply filing the appropriate QEF election 
documents at the time the U.S. Holder files his tax return for such first year. However, if we qualified as a PFIC in a 
prior year, then in addition to filing the QEF election documents, the U.S. Holder must elect to recognize (i) under 
the  rules  of  Section  1291  of  the  Code  (discussed  herein),  any  gain  that  he  would  otherwise  recognize  if  the  U.S. 
Holder sold his stock on the qualification date or (ii) if we are a controlled foreign corporation, the U.S. Holder’s pro 
rata share of our earnings and profits as of the qualification date. The qualification date is the first day of our first tax 
year  in  which  we  qualified  as  a  QEF  with  respect  to  such  U.S.  Holder.  The  elections  to  recognize  such  gain  or 
earnings and profits can only be made if such U.S. Holder’s holding period for the shares includes the qualification 
date.  By  electing  to  recognize  such  gain  or  earnings  and  profits,  the  U.S.  Holder  will  be  deemed  to  have  made  a 
timely  QEF  election.  U.S.  Holders  are  urged  to  consult  a  tax  advisor  regarding  the  availability  of  and 
procedure for electing to recognize gain or earnings and profits under the foregoing rules. In addition to the 
above  rules,  under  very  limited  circumstances,  a  U.S.  Holder  may  make  a  retroactive  QEF  election  if  such  U.S. 
Holder failed to file the QEF election documents in a timely manner. 
  
A QEF election, once made with respect to our company, applies to the tax year for which it was made and to all 
subsequent  tax  years,  unless  the  election  is  invalidated  or  terminated,  or  the  IRS  consents  to  revocation  of  the
election. If a QEF election is made by a U.S. Holder and we cease to qualify as a PFIC in a subsequent tax year, the 
QEF election will remain in effect, although not applicable, during those tax years in which we do not qualify as a 
PFIC. Therefore, if we again qualify as a PFIC in a subsequent tax year, the QEF election will be effective and the 
U.S.  Holder  will  be  subject  to  the  rules  described  above  for  Electing  U.S.  Holders  in  such  tax  year  and  any 
subsequent tax  years in  which  we qualify as a PFIC. In addition, the QEF election remains in effect, although not 
applicable, with respect to an Electing U.S. Holder even after such U.S. Holder disposes of all of his or its direct and 
indirect interest in our shares. Therefore, if such U.S. Holder reacquires an interest in our company, that U.S. Holder 
will  be  subject  to  the  rules  described  above  for  Electing  U.S.  Holders  for  each  tax  year  in  which  we  qualify  as  a 
PFIC. 
  
Generally,  shareholders  do  not  make  a  QEF  election  unless  they  have  sufficient  information  to  determine  their 
proportionate shares of a corporation’s net capital gain and ordinary earnings. We have not calculated these amounts 
for  any  shareholder  and  do  not  anticipate  making  these  calculations  in  the  foreseeable  future.  Therefore,  U.S. 
Holders  of  our  Common  Shares  should  consult  their  own  financial  advisor,  legal  counsel  or  accountant 
regarding the QEF election before making this election. 
  
Other  PFIC  Rules.  Under  Section  1291(f)  of  the  Code,  the  IRS  has  issued  Proposed  Treasury  Regulations  that, 
subject to certain exceptions,  would treat as taxable certain transfers of PFIC stock by Non-Electing U.S. Holders 
that are generally not otherwise taxed, such as gifts, exchanges pursuant to corporate reorganizations, and transfers 
at  death.  Generally,  in  such  cases  the  basis  of  shares  in  the  hands  of  the  transferee  and  the  basis  of  any  property 
received  in  the  exchange  for  those  shares  would  be  increased  by  the  amount  of  gain  recognized.  However,  the 
specific U.S. federal income tax consequences to the U.S. Holder and the transferee may vary based on the manner 
in which the Common Shares are transferred. 
  
Certain special, generally adverse, rules will apply with respect to shares issued by us while we are a PFIC whether 
or not it is treated as a QEF. For example under Section 1298(b)(6) of the Code, a U.S. Holder who uses PFIC stock 
as security for a loan (including a margin loan) will, except as may be provided in regulations, be treated as having 
made a taxable disposition of such shares. 
  
The  PFIC  rules  are  very  complicated,  and  U.S.  Holders  should  consult  their  own  financial  advisor,  legal 
counsel  or  accountant  regarding  the  PFIC  rules,  including  the  advisability  of  and  procedure  for  making  a 
QEF  election  or  a  mark-to-mark  election,  and  how  these  rules  may  impact  their  U.S.  federal  income  tax 
situation. 
  
Foreign Tax Credit 
  
A U.S. Holder who pays (or has withheld from distributions) Canadian or other foreign income tax with respect to 
the ownership of shares issued by us may be entitled, at the option of the U.S. Holder, to either receive a deduction 
or a tax credit for U.S. federal income tax purposes with respect to such foreign tax paid or withheld. Generally, it 
will be more advantageous to claim a credit because a credit reduces U.S. federal income taxes on a dollar-for-dollar 
basis, while a deduction merely reduces the taxpayer’s income subject to U.S. federal income tax. This election is 
made  on  a  year-by-year  basis  and  applies  to  all  foreign  taxes  paid  by  (or  withheld  from  distributions  to)  the  U.S. 
Holder during that year. 
  
There  are  significant  and  complex  limitations  that  apply  to  the  foreign  tax  credit,  among  which  is  the  general 
limitation that the credit cannot exceed the proportionate share of the U.S. Holder’s U.S. income tax liability that the 
U.S. Holder’s “foreign source” income bears to his or its worldwide taxable income. In applying this limitation, the 
various items of income and deduction must be classified as either “foreign source” or “U.S. source.” Complex rules 
govern this classification process. In addition, this limitation is calculated separately with respect to specific classes 
of  income  such  as  “passive  income,”  “high  withholding  tax  interest,”  “financial  services  income,”  “shipping 
income,” and certain other classifications of income. Dividends distributed by us will generally constitute “foreign 
source” income, and will be classified as “passive income” or, in the case of certain U.S. Holders, “financial services 
income” for these purposes. 
  
In addition, U.S. Holders that are corporations and that own 10% or more of our voting stock may be entitled to an 
“indirect”  foreign  tax  credit  under  Section  902  of  the  Code  with  respect  to  the  payment  of  dividends  by  us  under
certain circumstances and subject to complex rules and limitations. The availability of the foreign tax credit and 
the application of the limitations with respect to the foreign tax credit are fact specific, and each U.S. Holder 
of  Common  Shares  issued  by  us  should  consult  their  own  financial  advisor,  legal  counsel  or  accountant 
regarding the foreign tax credit rules. 
  
Information Reporting; Backup Withholding 
  
Certain information reporting and backup  withholding rules  may apply  with respect to certain payments related to 
shares issued by us. In particular, a payor or middleman within the U.S., or in certain cases outside the U.S., will be 
required  to  withhold  28%  (which  rate  is  scheduled  for  periodic  adjustment)  of  any  payments  to  a  U.S.  Holder 
regarding dividends paid by us, or proceeds from the sale of, such Common Shares within the U.S., if a U.S. Holder 
fails to furnish its correct taxpayer identification number (generally on Form W-9) or otherwise fails to comply with, 
or  establish  an  exemption  from,  the  backup  withholding  tax  requirements.  Any  amounts  withheld  under  the  U.S. 
backup withholding tax rules will be allowed as a refund or a credit against the U.S. Holder’s U.S. federal income 
tax  liability,  provided  the  required  information  is  furnished  to  the  IRS.  U.S.  Holders  should  consult  their  own 
financial  advisor,  legal  counsel  or  accountant  regarding  the  information  reporting  and  backup  withholding 
rules applicable to our shares. 
  
Other Considerations for U.S. Holders 
  
In the following circumstances, the above sections of this discussion may not describe the U.S. federal income tax 
consequences  to  U.S.  Holders  resulting  from  the  ownership  and  disposition  of  shares  issued  by  a  foreign 
corporation. 
  
Foreign  Personal  Holding  Company.  If  at  any  time  during  a  taxable  year  (a)  more  than  50%  of  the  total  voting 
power  or  the  total  value  of  outstanding  shares  issued  by  us  is  owned,  directly  or  indirectly,  by  five  or  fewer 
individuals  who  are  citizens  or  residents  of  the  U.S.  and  (b)  60%  (or  50%  in  certain  cases)  or  more  of  our  gross 
income  for  such  year  is  “foreign  personal  holding  company  income”  as  defined  in  Section  553  of  the  Code  (e.g., 
dividends, interest, royalties, certain gains from the sale of stock and securities, and certain gains from commodities 
transactions), we may be treated as a “Foreign Personal Holding Company” (“FPHC”) In that event, U.S. Holders of 
our  Common  Shares  would  be  required  to  include  in  gross  income  for  such  year  their  allocable  portions  of  such 
“foreign personal holding company income” to the extent we do not actually distribute such income. 
  
We  do  not  believe  that  we  currently  qualify  as  a  FPHC.  However,  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  we  will  not  be 
considered a FPHC for the current or any future taxable year. 
  
Foreign  Investment  Company.  If  (a)  50%  or  more  of  the  total  voting  power  or  the  total  value  of  our  outstanding 
shares is owned, directly or indirectly, by citizens or residents of the U.S., U.S. partnerships or corporations, or U.S. 
estates or trusts (as defined by the Code Section 7701(a)(30)), and (b) we are found to be engaged primarily in the 
business of investing, reinvesting, or trading in securities, commodities, or any interest therein, we may be treated as 
a “Foreign Investment  Company” (“FIC”) as defined in Section 1246 of the Code, causing all or part of any gain 
realized by a  U.S. Holder selling or exchanging our  Common Shares  to be treated as ordinary  income rather than 
capital gain. 
  
We  do  not  believe  that  we  currently  qualify  as  a  FIC.  However,  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  we  will  not  be 
considered a FIC for the current or any future taxable year. 
  
Controlled Foreign Corporation. If more than 50% of the total voting power or the total value of our outstanding 
shares is owned, directly or indirectly, by citizens or residents of the U.S., U.S. partnerships or corporations, or U.S. 
estates  or  trusts  (as  defined  by  the  Code  Section  7701(a)(30)),  each  of  which  own,  directly  or  indirectly,  10%  or 
more  of  the  total  voting  power  of  our  outstanding  shares  (each  a  “10%  Shareholder”),  we  could  be  treated  as  a 
“Controlled Foreign Corporation” (“CFC”) under Section 957 of the Code. 
  
The classification of our company as a CFC  would affect  many complex results, including that 10% Shareholders 
would  generally  (i)  be  treated  as  having  received  a  current  distribution  of  our  “Subpart F  income”  and  (ii)  would 
also  be  subject  to  current  U.S.  federal  income  tax  on  their  pro  rata  shares  of  our  earnings  invested  in  “U.S.
Statements by Experts
Documents on Display
Dividends and Paying Agents
property.”  The  foreign  tax  credit  may  reduce  the  U.S.  federal  income  tax  on  these  amounts  for  such  10% 
Shareholders (See more detailed discussion at “Foreign Tax Credit” above). In addition, under Section 1248 of the 
Code, gain from the sale or other taxable disposition of our Common Shares by a U.S. Holder that is or was a 10% 
Shareholder at any time during the five-year period ending with the sale is treated as a dividend to the extent of our 
earnings and profits attributable to the Common Shares sold or exchanged. 
  
If  we  are  classified  as  both  a  PFIC  and  a  CFC,  we  generally  will  not  be  treated  as  a  PFIC  with  respect  to  10% 
Shareholders. This rule generally will be effective for taxable years of 10% Shareholders beginning after 1997 and 
for its taxable years ending with or within such taxable years of 10% Shareholders. 
  
We  do  not  believe  that  we  currently  qualify  as  a  CFC.  However,  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  we  will  not  be 
considered a CFC for the current or any future taxable year. 
  
The  FPHC,  FIC  and  CFC  rules  are  very  complicated,  and  U.S.  Holders  should  consult  their  own  financial 
advisor,  legal  counsel  or  accountant  regarding  the  FPHC,  FIC  and  CFC  rules  and  how  these  rules  may 
impact their U.S. federal income tax situation. 
  
F. 
  
Not applicable. 
  
G. 
  
Not applicable. 
  
H. 
  
We  have  filed  with  the  SEC  this  Annual  Report  on  Form  20-F,  including  exhibits,  under  the  Exchange  Act  with 
respect to our common shares. 
  
Our registration statement may be inspected and copied, including exhibits and schedules, and the reports and other 
information as filed with the SEC in accordance with the Exchange Act at the public reference facilities maintained 
by  the  SEC  at  Judiciary  Plaza,  100  F  Street  NE,  Washington,  D.C.  20549.  Copies  of  such  material  may  also  be 
obtained from the Public Reference Section of the SEC at 100 F Street NE, Washington, D.C. 20549, at prescribed 
rates. Information may be obtained regarding the Washington D.C. Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-
800-SEC-0330 or by contacting the SEC over the Internet at its website at http://www.sec.gov. 
  
I. 
  
Not applicable. 
  
ITEM 11. 
  
Not applicable. 
  
ITEM 12. 
  
Not applicable.
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES OTHER THAN EQUITY SECURITIES
Subsidiary Information
PART II
DEFAULTS, DIVIDEND ARREARAGES AND DELINQUENCIES
ITEM 13. 
  
There have been no defaults, dividends arrearages or delinquencies. 
  
ITEM 14.
MATERIAL MODIFICATION TO THE RIGHTS OF SECURITY HOLDERS AND USE OF
PROCEEDS
CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
Disclosure Controls and Procedures
There have been no material modifications to our common shares. 
  
ITEM 15. 
  
A. 
  
As at the end of the period covered by this Form 20-F Annual Report, our management, with the participation of our 
Chief  Executive  officer  and  our  Chief  Financial  Officer,  performed  an  evaluation  of  the  effectiveness  of  our 
disclosure  controls  and  procedures  that  are  designed  to  ensure  that  the  material  financial  and  non-financial 
information  required  to  be  disclosed  by  Rules  13a-15  and  15d-15  of  the  Exchange  Act  and  filed  with  the  SEC  is 
recorded,  processed,  summarized  and  timely  reported.  Disclosure  controls  and  procedures  include,  without 
limitation, controls and procedures designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed by us in our reports 
that  we  file  or  submit  under  the  Exchange  Act  is  accumulated  and  communicated  to  management,  including  our 
Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding our required 
disclosure. 
  
Management, including our CEO and CFO, does not expect that our disclosure controls and procedures or internal 
controls  and  procedures  will  prevent  all  error  and  all  fraud.  A  control  system,  no  matter  how  well  conceived  and 
operated,  can  provide  only  reasonable,  not  absolute,  assurance  that  the  objectives  of  the  control  system  are  met. 
Further, the design of a control system  must reflect the fact that there are  resource constraints, and the benefits of 
controls  must  be  considered  relative  to  their  costs.  Because  of  the  inherent  limitations  in  all  control  systems,  no 
evaluation of controls can provide absolute assurance that all control issues and instances of fraud, if any, within our 
company have been detected. These inherent limitations include the realities that judgments in decision-making can 
be  faulty,  and  that  breakdowns  can  occur  because  of  simple  error  or  mistake.  Additionally,  controls  can  be 
circumvented  by  the  individual  acts  of  some  persons,  by  collusion  of  two  or  more  people,  or  by  management 
override of control. The design of any  system of controls also is based in part upon certain assumptions about the 
likelihood of future events, and there can be  no assurance that any design will succeed in achieving its stated goals 
under all potential future conditions; over time, control may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or 
the degree of compliance  with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. Because of the inherent limitations in  a 
cost-effective control system, misstatements due to error or fraud may occur and not be detected. 
  
Management, including the CEO and CFO, directly supervises the preparation of all of the financial reports prepared 
by  us  and  is  directly  involved  in  our  financial  record  keeping  and  reporting.  All  accounting  records  and  financial 
reports prepared by us are reviewed for accuracy by the CEO and CFO. 
  
After  evaluation  of  our  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  as  of  the  year  end  covered  by  this  report,  our  Chief 
Executive  Officer  and  Chief  Financial  Officer  concluded  that  our  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  were  not 
effective as a result of weaknesses in the design of internal control over financial reporting. 
  
B. 
  
Our  management  is  responsible  for  establishing  and  maintaining  adequate  internal  control  over  the  financial 
reporting of our company. Internal control over  financial reporting  as defined in  Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) of 
the  Exchange  Act  is  a  process  designed  by,  or  under  the  supervision  of,  our  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  Chief 
Financial Officer, and affected by our Board, to provide reasonable assurance regarding  the reliability of financial 
reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with GAAP, and includes 
those policies and procedures that: (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
fairly  reflect  transactions  and  dispositions  of  our  assets;  (ii)  provide  reasonable  assurance  that  transactions  are 
recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP, and that receipts and 
expenditures  are  being  made  only  in  accordance  with  the  authorizations  of  management  and  our  Board;  and  (iii) 
provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  prevention  or  timely  detection  of  unauthorized  acquisition,  use  or 
disposition of our assets that could have a material effect on our financial statements. 
  
Management has concluded, based on their evaluation, that as of May 31, 2014, weaknesses existed in the design of 
internal  control  over  financial  reporting  caused  by  a  lack  of  adequate  segregation  of  duties  and  ineffective  risk 
management.  These  weaknesses  have  the  potential  to  result  in  material  misstatements  in  our  financial  statements, 
and should also be considered a weakness in our disclosure controls and procedures. As a result of limited staffing 
due to the size of our business certain staff members carry out multiple responsibilities independently. To remediate 
such  weakness,  we  plan  to  appoint  additional  qualified  personnel  to  address  inadequate  segregation  of  duties  and 
ineffective  risk  management,  and  adopt  sufficient  written  policies  and  procedures  for  accounting  and  financial 
reporting. These remediation efforts are largely dependent upon securing additional financing to cover the costs of 
implementing  the  changes  required.  Because  of  the  material  weakness  described,  management  believes  that,  as  of 
May 31, 2014, our company’s internal control over financial report was not effective as of the Evaluation Date. 
  
The Audit Committee has been provided information on the deficiency. Together, the Audit Committee, the Board 
and  management  continue  to  work  to  mitigate  the  risk  of  a  material  misstatement  in  our  financial  statements. 
Management will continue to identify certain areas where it can improve process controls and will incorporate these 
changes into the control over the financial reporting going forward. 
  
C. 
  
This annual report does not include an attestation report of our registered public accounting firm regarding internal 
control  over  financial  reporting.  Management’s  report  was  not  subject  to  attestation  by  our  registered  public 
accounting firm pursuant to temporary rules of the SEC that permit us to provide only management’s report in this 
annual report. 
  
D. 
  
During the period covered by this report, there has been no change in our internal control over financial reporting 
that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
Attestation Report of the Registered Public Accounting Firm
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
ITEM 16A.   AUDIT COMMITTEE FINANCIAL EXPERT 
  
We  do  not  currently  have  a  financial  expert  on  our  audit  committee.  We  rely  upon  the  services  of  a  chartered 
accountant in Vancouver, BC, Canada, to prepare our consolidated financial statements. 
  
Our audit committee is comprised of seasoned business professionals, whereby the members have over 25 years of 
experience  in  the  investment  business  and  are  board  members  of  several  corporations.  We  believe  that  the  audit 
committee has adequate resources available to it when financial expertise and advice are necessary. 
  
ITEM 16B.   CODE OF ETHICS 
  
We have not yet adopted a written “code of ethics” that meets the new United States’ Sarbanes-Oxley standards. The 
Board  believes  that  its  existing  standards  and  procedures  are  adequate  for  its  purposes.  We  believe  that  our 
management structure and corporate culture effectively deter wrongdoing and promote honest and ethical conduct, 
full, fair and accurate, timely, and understandable disclosure in reports and documents, compliance with applicable 
governmental  laws,  rules  and  regulations,  prompt  internal  reporting  of  unethical  conduct  and  accountability  for 
adherence to the conduct standards. We have no employees and our officers are also directors, thus eliminating any 
split between our management and the directors who are responsible to safeguard shareholder interests. As a result, 
we believe that the activities of our officers, employees and other agents can be easily monitored by our directors, 
thus eliminating the need for a formal written code of ethics.
ITEM 16C.   PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES 
  
A Chan and Company LLP, Chartered Accountants (“ACAL”) audited our financial statements for the years ended 
May 31, 2014 and May 31, 2013. 
  
ACAL  were  paid  or  accrued  the  corresponding  fees  for  the  fiscal  years  ended  May  31,  2014  and  May  31,  2013, 
respectively. 
  
Audit Fees 
  
Fees  billed  by  ACAL  for  professional  services  for  the  year  ended  May  31,  2014  were  $15,000  and  for  the  year 
ended May 31, 2013 were $17,000. Such fees were for the audit of our annual financial statements and for services 
in connection with statutory and regulatory filings for such fiscal years. 
  
Audit Related Fees 
  
Fees  billed  for  audit  related  fees  by  ACAL  for  assurance  and  related  services  that  are  reasonably  related  to  the 
performance  of  the  audit  or  review  of  our  financial  statements  and  not  reported  under  audit  fees  totaled  $Nil  for 
ACAL for the years ended May 31, 2014 and 2013. 
  
Tax Fees 
  
Fees for tax services, including tax compliance, tax advice and tax planning work billed by ACAL were $1,000 for 
each of the years ended May 31, 2014 and 2013. 
  
All Other Fees 
  
All  other  fees  billed  by  ACAL  during  the  fiscal  years  ended  May  31,  2014  and  2013  were  $Nil  for  compilation 
reports on the pro forma financial statements. 
  
Audit Committee Policies and Procedures 
  
The  audit  services  provided  to  us  by  ACAL  in  the  fiscal  years  ended  May  31,  2014  and  May  31,  2013  were  pre-
approved  by  our  audit  committee.  Prior  to  engaging  ACAL,  as  the  case  may  be,  to  perform  audit  and  review 
services, our audit committee reviewed the services to be provided and the fee to be paid by us for such service and 
assessed the impact of the service on each of the auditor’s independence. 
  
It is our policy for our Audit Committee to pre-approve all audit and audit-related fees prior to commencement of 
the  services.  The  percentage  of  audit  related  fees  pre-approved  by  our  Audit  Committee  during  fiscal  2014  was 
100%. 
  
There were no hours expended on ACAL’s engagement to audit our financial statements for the most recent fiscal 
year that were attributed to work performed by persons other than ACAL’s full-time, permanent employees. 
  
ITEM 16D.   EXEMPTIONS FROM THE LISTING STANDARDS FOR AUDIT COMMITTEES 
  
Not applicable. 
  
ITEM 16E.   PURCHASES  OF  EQUITY  SECURITIES  BY  THE  ISSUER  AND  AFFILIATED
PURCHASERS
No purchases of shares or any other units of any class of our equity securities have been made by or on our behalf, 
or any affiliated purchaser.
ITEM 16F.   CHANGE IN REGISTRANT’S CERTIFYING ACCOUNTANT 
  
Not applicable. 
  
ITEM 16G.   CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 
  
Not applicable.
PART III
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
ITEM 17. 
  
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with Canadian GAAP and are presented in 
Canadian  dollars.  There  are  material  measurement  differences  between  United  States  and  Canadian  GAAP.  A 
reconciliation of the financial statements to United States GAAP is set forth in Note 16 to the consolidated financial 
statements. 
  
Consolidated Financial Statements for the Years Ended May 31, 2014 and 2013 
  
Auditors’ Report dated September 29, 2014. 
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position 
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
  
ITEM 18. 
  
Not applicable. 
  
ITEM 19.
F-1 
 F-2 
 F-3 
 F-4 
 F-5 
 F-6
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
EXHIBITS
Exhibit     Description 
1.1 (1) 
1.2 (1)
Certificate of Incorporation in the name of Candy Mountain Gold Corporation dated May 23, 1980 
   Certificate of Name Change, Special Resolution and Altered Memorandum dated January 20, 1984 to
1.3 (1)
1.4 (1)
1.5 (1)
1.6 (1)
1.7 (1)
1.8 (1)
1.9 (1) 
1.10 (1)
2.1 (1) 
4.1 (1)
4.2 (1)
change name to Teryl Resources Corp.
Special Resolution and Altered Memorandum dated October 25, 1985 increasing authorized capital to 
15,000,000 by creating 5,000,000 Preferred Shares with a par value of $1.00, and amending Articles 
by adding Special Rights and Restrictions attached to Preferred Shares
Special  Resolution  and  Altered  Memorandum  dated  November  30,  1988  increasing  number  of
authorized common shares to 30,000,000 common shares
Special  Resolution  and  Altered  Memorandum  dated  November  30,  1988  canceling  existing  Articles
and replacing with new Articles
Special Resolution and Altered Memorandum dated November 20, 2000 increasing authorized capital
to 100,000,000 common shares
Special  Resolution  and  Altered  Memorandum,  Certificate  of  Name  Change  dated  February  4,  2003
changing the name Teryl Gold Corp.
Transition Application and Notice of Articles dated September 15, 2004 transitioning from  Company
Act (British Columbia) to the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia)
Notice of Alteration effective November 25, 2004 changing name to Teryl Resources Corp. 
   Notice of Articles dated November 25, 2004 reflecting Altered Memorandum and Special Resolution
dated November 15, 2004 canceling existing Articles and replacing with new Articles
Specimen copy of common share certificate 
   Commitment to provide financing to Teryl Resources Corp. as required for ongoing operations dated
February 14, 2000 from John Robertson
Mining Joint Venture Agreement dated September 23, 2009 between Fairbanks Gold Mining, Inc. and
4.3 (1)
Teryl, Inc.  
Joint  Venture  Agreement  dated  March  5,  2002  with  Linux  Gold  Corp.  (formerly  LinuxWizardry 
Systems, Inc.)
4.4 (1)
4.5 (1) 
4.6 (1) 
4.6 (2) 
4.7 (2) 
4.8 (3) 
4.9 (3) 
4.10 (4) 
4.11 (4)
4.12 (5) 
4.13 (6) 
4.14 (6)
8.1 (6) 
12.1 (7) 
12.2 (7) 
13.1 (7) 
13.2 (7) 
15.1 (7)
Amendment to Joint Venture Agreement dated November  4, 2002 with Linux Gold Corp. (formerly
LinuxWizardry Systems, Inc.)
Extension to Joint Venture Agreement dated March 5, 2005 with Linux Gold Corp. 
   Management Agreement dated December 1, 1994 with SMR Investments Ltd. 
   Purchase Agreement dated August 18, 2003 with Michael D. Roberts 
   West Ridge Property Lease Agreement dated July 2003 
   Extension to Joint Venture Agreement dated March 5, 2005 with Linux Gold Corp.  
   Upper Fox Creek Development Agreement dated June 23, 2004 with Jean Turner and Ron Way 
   Natural Gas Well Interest Agreement dated May 18, 2006 with IAS Energy, Inc.  
   Mineral  Property  Agreement  dated  June  10,  2006  with  Frederic  and  John  Rothermel  -  Gold  Hill
Property
Natural Gas Well Interest Agreement dated April 2, 2008 with IAS Energy, Inc.  
  
   Letter  of  Agreement  dated  August  17,  2010  with  Mark  C.  Farrar,  Christina  J.  Karnes,  Robert  W.
Investor Relations Consulting Agreement dated August 18, 2010 with Torrey Hills Capital Inc.
Karnes and Donald Plancich – Fortitude Project
List of Subsidiaries  
   Section 302 Certification - CEO 
   Section 302 Certification - CFO 
   Section 906 Certification - CEO 
   Section 906 Certification - CFO 
   Auditors’ Consent Letter
(1) 
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
incorporated by reference to Registration Statement on Form 20-F filed January 19, 2007 
incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 20-F for the fiscal year-ended May 31, 2004 filed August 
3, 2007 
incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 20-F for the fiscal year-ended May 31, 2005 filed August 
7, 2007 
incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 20-F for the fiscal year-ended May 31, 2007 filed 
October 19, 2007 
incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 20-F for the fiscal year-ended May 31, 2008 filed 
November 28, 2008 
incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 20-F for the fiscal year-ended May 31, 2010 filed 
November 30, 2010 
filed herewith in this annual report on Form 20-F
SIGNATURE
The  registrant  hereby  certifies  that  it  meets  all  of  the  requirements  for  filing  on  Form  20-F  and  that  it  has  duly 
caused and authorized the undersigned to sign this annual report on its behalf. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
DATED: October 1, 2014
TERYL RESOURCES CORP. 
  
By:  /s/ “John G. Robertson”
John G. Robinson 
President and Direct
CERTIFICATION OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER PURSUANT TO RULE 13A-14 OR 15D-14 OF THE
SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934, AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF THE
SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
Exhibit 12.1
I, John G. Robertson, certify that: 
  
1. 
  
2.
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 20-F of Teryl Resources Corp.;
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state 
a  material  fact  necessary  to  make  the  statements  made,  in  light  of  the  circumstances  under  which  such 
statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.
4.
5.
Based on my  knowledge, the  financial statements, and other  financial information included in this report, 
fairly  present  in  all  material  respects  the  financial  condition,  results  of  operations  and  cash  flows  of  the 
company as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
The company’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure 
controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15 (e) and 15d-15 (e)) and internal control 
over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the company and have:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Designed  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures,  or  caused  such  disclosure  controls  and 
procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the 
company,  including  its  consolidated  subsidiaries,  is  made  known  to  us  by  others  within  those 
entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
Designed  such  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  or  caused  such  internal  control  over 
financial  reporting  to  be  designed  under  our  supervision,  to  provide  reasonable  assurance 
regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for 
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
Evaluated the effectiveness of the company’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in 
this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of 
the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
Disclosed in this report any change in the company’s internal control over financial reporting that 
occurred  during  the  period  covered  by  the  annual  report  that  has  materially  affected,  or  is 
reasonably likely to materially affect, the company’s internal control over financial reporting; and
The  company’s  other  certifying  officer(s)  and  I  have  disclosed,  based  on  our  most  recent  evaluation  of 
internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  to  the  company’s  auditors  and  the  audit  committee  of  the 
company’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a)
(b)
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control 
over  financial  reporting  which  are  reasonably  likely  to  adversely  affect  the  company’s  ability  to 
record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
Any  fraud,  whether  or  not  material,  that  involves  management  or  other  employees  who  have  a 
significant role in the company’s internal control over financial reporting.
Date: October 1, 2014
/s/ John Robertson 
John Robertson, 
Chief Executive Officer
CERTIFICATION OF THE CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER PURSUANT TO RULE 13A-14 OR 15D-14 OF THE
SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934, AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF THE
SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
Exhibit 12.2
I, Jane He, certify that: 
  
1. 
  
2.
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 20-F of Teryl Resources Corp.;
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state 
a  material  fact  necessary  to  make  the  statements  made,  in  light  of  the  circumstances  under  which  such 
statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.
4.
5.
Based on my  knowledge, the  financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, 
fairly  present  in  all  material  respects  the  financial  condition,  results  of  operations  and  cash  flows  of  the 
company as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
The company’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure 
controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15 (e) and 15d-15 (e)) and internal control 
over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the company and have:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Designed  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures,  or  caused  such  disclosure  controls  and 
procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the 
company,  including  its  consolidated  subsidiaries,  is  made  known  to  us  by  others  within  those 
entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
Designed  such  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  or  caused  such  internal  control  over 
financial  reporting  to  be  designed  under  our  supervision,  to  provide  reasonable  assurance 
regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for 
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
Evaluated the effectiveness of the company’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in 
this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of 
the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
Disclosed in this report any change in the company’s internal control over financial reporting that 
occurred  during  the  period  covered  by  the  annual  report  that  has  materially  affected,  or  is 
reasonably likely to materially affect, the company’s internal control over financial reporting; and
The  company’s  other  certifying  officer(s)  and  I  have  disclosed,  based  on  our  most  recent  evaluation  of 
internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  to  the  company’s  auditors  and  the  audit  committee  of  the 
company’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a)
(b)
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation  of internal control 
over  financial  reporting  which  are  reasonably  likely  to  adversely  affect  the  company’s  ability  to 
record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
Any  fraud,  whether  or  not  material,  that  involves  management  or  other  employees  who  have  a 
significant role in the company’s internal control over financial reporting.
Date: October 1, 2014
/s/ Jane He 
Jane He, 
Chief Financial Officer
Exhibit 13.1
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to
Title 18, United States Code, Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
I,  John  Robertson,  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  Teryl  Resources  Corp.,  certify,  pursuant  to  Section  906  of  the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, that, to the best of my knowledge: 
  
1.
The  Annual  Report  on  Form  20-F  of  Teryl  Resources  Corp.  for  the  year  ended  May  31,  2014  (the 
“Report”) fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 
1934 (15 U.S.C. 78m(a) or 78o(d)); and
2.
The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and
results of operations of Teryl Resources Corp.
Date: October 1, 2014 
  
  
  
A signed original of this written statement required by Section 906 has been provided to Teryl Resources Corp. and 
will be retained by Teryl Resources Corp. and furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission or its staff 
upon request.
/s/ John Robertson 
John Robertson, 
Chief Executive Officer
Exhibit 13.2
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to
Title 18, United States Code, Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
I,  Jane  He,  Chief  Financial  Officer  of  Teryl  Resources  Corp.,  certify,  pursuant  to  Section  906  of  the  Sarbanes-
Oxley Act of 2002, 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, that, to the best of my knowledge: 
  
1.
The  Annual  Report  on  Form  20-F  of  Teryl  Resources  Corp.  for  the  year  ended  May  31,  2014  (the 
“Report”) fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 
1934 (15 U.S.C. 78m(a) or 78o(d)); and
2.
The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and
results of operations of Teryl Resources Corp.
Date: October 1, 2014
/s/ Jane He 
Jane He, 
Chief Financial Officer
SUITE 1850                                        
 
1066 WEST HASTINGS STREET                     
VANCOUVER, BC V6E 3X2 
 
 
T: 604.683.3850 
F: 604.688.8479
A CHAN AND COMPANY LLP 
CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
AUDITORS’ CONSENT
We consent to the incorporation of our report dated September 29, 2014, with respect to the 
consolidated statements of financial position as at May 31, 2014 and May 31, 2013, and the 
consolidated  statements  of  operations  and  comprehensive  loss,  consolidated  statements  of 
cash  flows  and  consolidated  statements  of  changes  in  equity  for  the  years  ended  May  31, 
2014 and May 31, 2013 on the Company's Annual Report Form 20-F dated October 1, 2014. 
 
 
“A Chan and Company LLP” 
Chartered Accountants 
Vancouver, British Columbia 
October 1, 2014